COUNTY CODE
of
BONNER COUNTY, IDAHO
Code current through:
Ord. 728, passed 9-10-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the County of Bonner County, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 728, passed 9-10-2025. Ordinances of
the County adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
County office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
 
 
   Ordinance No. ___730_____
 
Title 12, Land Use Regulations
Bonner County Revised Code
 
An Ordinance of Bonner County, Idaho, setting forth its authority; amending
Bonner County Revised Code Title 12 (Land Use Regulations), to make the
following changes to Chapters 1 and 2. The changes are detailed in this
ordinance.
 
Whereas, Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65, provides for the adoption of land
use standards for the purposes of protecting property rights and enhancing
property values, together with the purposes of promoting the health, safety,
and general welfare of the people; and
Whereas, Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65, Section 6518 authorizes governing
boards to adopt standards for public and private development; and
Whereas, Bonner County Commissioners have adopted a comprehensive plan to guide
development within the unincorporated areas of Bonner County; and
Whereas, the Bonner County Board of County Commissioners did hold a public
hearing on November 10, 2025, and did find the proposed amendment to the land
use codes in accord with the Bonner County Comprehensive Plan and Idaho Code.
Now, therefore be it ordained by the Board of County Commissioners of Bonner
County, Idaho that the following be and is hereby adopted as an ordinance of
Bonner County:
SECTION 1: Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted at Chapter 65,
Title 67, Idaho Code, and pursuant to the procedural requirements contained at
Section 67-6509, Idaho Code.
 
SECTION 2: Amending Bonner County Revised Code, Title 12, Chapters 1 and 2.
 
12-122: PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Establishment: The Bonner County Planning Commission is hereby
established as provided for by Idaho Code section 67-6504. This commission
shall be composed of seven (7) members assigned to positions A through G.
   B.   Organization: The Planning Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice
Chair. This commission shall abide by the provisions of this title, the Local
Land Use Planning Act, and shall also adopt bylaws as required.
   C.   Terms of Office: Positions A, B, and C shall first expire September 30,
2025, and then every three (3) years thereafter. Positions D and E shall expire
September 30, 2024, and every three (3) years thereafter. Positions F and G
shall expire September 30, 2023, and every three (3) years thereafter.
Appointment to complete the term of a vacated position or appointment to a new
term shall be done by motion and order of the Board of Bonner County
Commissioners.
   D.   Jurisdiction: The Planning Commission shall be responsible for
recommending legislative amendments of the Bonner County Comprehensive Plan,
Comprehensive Plan map, land use ordinances, and zoning map to the Board of
Bonner County Commissioners. The Planning Commission shall also hold hearings
for applicant-initiated Comprehensive Plan map amendments. It shall not
consider other site-specific land use applications that are deemed quasi-
judicial proceedings.
12-123: ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Establishment: The Bonner County Zoning Commission is hereby
established as provided for by Idaho Code section 67-6504. This commission
shall be composed of five (5) members assigned to positions A through E.
   B.   Organization: The Zoning Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair.
This commission shall abide by the provisions of this title, the Local Land Use
Planning Act, and shall also adopt bylaws as required.
   C.   Terms of Office: Position A shall first expire September 30, 2023, and
then every three (3) years thereafter. Positions B and C shall expire September
30, 2024, and every three (3) years thereafter. Positions D and E shall expire
September 30, 2025, and every three (3) years thereafter. Appointment to
complete the term of a vacated position or appointment to a new term shall be
done by motion and order of the Board of Bonner County Commissioners.
   D.   Jurisdiction: The Zoning Commission shall be responsible for holding
quasi-judicial hearings required by this title and Idaho Code for applicant
initiated land use requests.
 
12-131: COMPLAINTS OF VIOLATION
When a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint on a form provided by the department. The
form may be submitted electronically or in person to the Planning Department.
The complaint shall state fully the causes and basis for the complaint and
shall be filed with the planning director. The planning director has the
authority to investigate and take actions on the complaint as provided in this
title. The planning director may also dismiss the complaint based upon a
finding that there is insufficient evidence that a violation exists.
 
 
12-214: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDMENTS TO THIS TITLE:
 
A.   The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this title may
from time to time be amended, supplemented or repealed in accordance with Idaho
Code. Amendments to the comprehensive plan shall be made in accordance with the
notice and hearing procedures prescribed in Idaho Code section 67-6509 and
shall require a noticed hearing before the Planning Commission. Amendments to
an ordinance establishing a zoning district shall be made in accordance with
the notice and hearing procedures prescribed in Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and
67-6511 and shall require a noticed hearing before the Planning Commission. All
other amendments to this title shall require a hearing before the Planning
Commission.
 
B. Notices and public hearings shall be provided in accordance with section 12-
268 of this chapter.
 
C.   When a hearing is required before the Planning Commission as prescribed in
this section, the Planning Commission shall produce written findings and
recommendations and transmit them to the Board of County Commissioners. within
thirty (30) working days of the date of the hearing. This time limit may be
extended or modified by written consent of the Board of County Commissioners.
Failure of the Planning Commission to issue a decision within the time period
prescribed in this section shall be deemed a denial or a recommendation of
denial. The Board of County Commissioners, prior to taking action on the
amendment, may conduct a public hearing using the same notice and hearing
procedures as the Planning Commission. The Board of County Commissioners shall
not hold a public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing nor take action on
the proposed amendment until recommendations have been received from the
Planning Commission. or thirty (30) working days have passed and the Planning
Commission has failed to transmit its findings and recommendations to the
Board. If the Board fails to act within twenty (20) working days of the first
day it could take action, such inaction shall be deemed an approval of the
Planning Commission’s recommendation.
 
  D.   If the Board of County Commissioners approves an amendment, the
amendment shall then be made a part of this title by passage of an appropriate
ordinance.
 
  E.   When a hearing is required before the Zoning Commission as prescribed in
this section, the Zoning Commission shall produce written findings and
recommendations and transmit them to the Board of County Commissioners within
thirty (30) working days of the date of the hearing. This time limit may be
extended or modified by written consent of the Board of County Commissioners.
Failure of the Commission to issue a decision within the time period prescribed
in this section shall be deemed a denial or a recommendation of denial. The
Board of County Commissioners, prior to taking action on the amendment, may
conduct a public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the
Zoning Commission. The Board of County Commissioners shall not hold a public
hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing nor take action on the proposed
amendment until recommendations have been received from the Zoning Commission
or thirty (30) working days have passed and the Planning Commission has failed
to transmit its findings and recommendations to the Board. If the Board fails
to act within twenty (20) working days of the first day it could take action,
such inaction shall be deemed an approval of the Zoning Commission’s
recommendation.
 
12-217: PUBLIC HEARINGS, NOTICE OF:
Notices and public hearings shall be provided in accordance with section 12-268
of this chapter.
 
12-224: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND NOTICES:
Notices and public hearings shall be provided in accordance with section 12-268
of this chapter.
 
12-232: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A variance is a modification of the bulk and placement requirements of this
title as to lot or parcel size, lot coverage, width, depth, setbacks, parking
space size, or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of a
structure or the placement of a structure upon a lot or parcel, or the size of
the lot or parcel.
12-235: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICES:
Notices and public hearings shall be provided in accordance with section 12-268
of this chapter.
12-238: ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES:
   A.   The Director may grant a variance, as an administrative decision, of up
to twenty percent (20%) of a modification of the bulk and placement
requirements of this title as to lot or parcel size, lot coverage, width,
depth, setbacks, parking space size, or other provisions of this title
affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of a structure upon
a lot or parcel, or the size of the lot or parcel.
   B.   The applicant shall submit an application for administrative variance
along with the appropriate fee.
   C.   The application shall be processed as follows:
      1.   Application And Administrative Requirements: A site plan and
application shall be submitted for review together with all appropriate fees as
established by the adopted fee schedule. The burden of proof lies upon the
applicant to show whether characteristics of the site conform to the standards
in section 
      2.   Area Of Impact: If the property is located in an area of impact, the
County shall notify the affected city and allow the required amount of time for
a response.
      3.   Notifications: Upon acceptance of an application, and while in an
Area of Impact ACI review, if appropriate, the Director shall provide
notification in accordance with section 12-268 of this chapter.
      4.   Action On Application: Based on the comments from staff, agency, and
those from affected property owners, the Planning Director shall review the
proposed request and shall either approve, approve subject to conditions, or
deny the application per section 12-234 of this subchapter within ten (10)
working days from the end of the comment period. Alternatively, the Planning
Director may, at any time during this review, forward the application to the
Zoning Commission for a public hearing and decision in accordance with the
public hearing process in section 12-267 of this chapter. In considering
comments, the Planning Director shall evaluate whether granting the variance
will be consistent with the standards listed in section 12-234 of this
subchapter.
12-247: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   On receipt of a completed application for a special use permit, the
planning director shall schedule a public hearing before the Hearing Examiner
or Zoning Commission board for the next available meeting, allowing time for
the requirement for notice and staff and agency review.
   B.   Notices and public hearings shall be provided in accordance with
section 12-268 of this chapter.
12-261: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   A.   Any determination made by the Planning Director in the administration
of the provisions of this title may be appealed to the Board by paying the
required fee and notifying the Planning Director in writing of the intent to
appeal within ten (10) working days from the date of the determination. Within
ten (10) working days of receipt of an appeal, the Planning Director shall
schedule a meeting with the Board to hear the appeal and shall provide written
notice to the appellant of the time and place of the meeting. The meeting shall
be held no sooner than fifteen (15) and no later than forty five (45) calendar
days of receipt of the appeal. The Planning Director and appellant shall be
provided an opportunity to present the relevant issues to the Board at that
meeting. The appellant bears the burden of proof and may be responsible for
costs incurred for producing such proof, including engineering or surveying
documents or other evidence. The Board's decision shall be final, and further
recourse of the appellant shall be as provided by Idaho Code. If no appeal to
the Board is filed, the Planning Director's decision shall be deemed final. 
12-262: APPEALS FROM FINAL DECISION OF ZONING COMMISSION/HEARING EXAMINER:
   A. Presentation Of Appeal: Any “affected person”, as defined by Idaho Code
title 67, chapter 65, may appeal to the Board any final decision by the Zoning
Commission/hearing examiner.
   B. Filing Time Limit; Fee: Any affected person may file an appeal of the
final decision of the Zoning Commission/hearing examiner with the Planning
Director within twenty eight (28) days after the final written decision of the
Zoning Commission/hearing examiner has been issued. The appellant shall pay the
fee required by this title upon filing the appeal. An appeal shall not be
considered to be filed until such fee has been paid. Failure to file the appeal
within the time limits shall cause automatic dismissal of the appeal.
   C. Notice of Appeal Contents: The notice of appeal shall be detailed in
writing and shall provide the grounds for the appeal. The grounds for appeal
shall be that the decision of the commission or hearing examiner was at a
minimum one of the following:
      1.   In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
      2.   In excess of the statutory authority of the commission or hearing
examiner;
      3.   Made upon unlawful procedure;
      4.   Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion; or
      5.   Not supported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole.
   D.   Procedures For Consideration Of Appeal:
      1.   Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the appeal, the Board shall
conduct a public hearing. The Board shall be conducted in the same manner using
the same standards, as if the Board had original jurisdiction to hear the
application.  
2. Upon consideration, the Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of
the Zoning Commission/hearing examiner, after compliance with applicable
procedural standards.
      3.   The decision of the Board shall be final, and any further recourse
shall be as provided by law.
   E.   Applicability: The appeal process shall be coordinated with
administration of land use ordinances. The procedures for appeal set forth
herein shall be applied in a manner which is consistent with the zoning,
subdivision and related land use ordinances of Bonner County.
F. Decision: In the event of a tie vote, due to a conflict of interest or
abstention, the failure to gain an affirmative action by the Board is
considered a final decision of denial of the appeal and the underlying decision
shall be deemed the final decision of the Board.
12-263: RECONSIDERATION:
   A.   Reconsideration: Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial
review of the Board's final decision must first file with the Board a motion
for reconsideration of the Board's decision, specifying deficiencies in the
decision within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, along with the
applicable fee. A failure to seek reconsideration is also a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
   B.   Initial Decision: The Board may consider the reconsideration motion as
scheduled on an open business meeting agenda and determine whether to grant or
deny the request. If the Board grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a
hearing before the Board will be scheduled to address the specific deficiencies
identified by the applicant or affected person and to allow interested persons
to have an opportunity to be heard. If the Board denies the request for
reconsideration, it shall promptly notify the parties in writing.
   C.   Public Notice On Hearing: Notice of the public hearing on the
reconsideration, identifying the specific deficiencies alleged in the
reconsideration request, will be provided as follows, including:
      1.   Notice To Agencies And Political Subdivisions: At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing, the Director shall send notice to all
political subdivisions providing services with the planning jurisdiction,
including school districts and the manager or person in charge of the local
public airport.
      2.   Legal Notice: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, the Director shall publish a notice of the time and place in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation in the County.
      3.   Radius Notice: Will be provided in the same manner as originally
provided on the application.
   D.   Decision: Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the Board may
affirm, reverse or modify its prior decision and shall provide a written
decision to the applicant and the affected person(s) within sixty (60) days of
receipt of the request for reconsideration. If the Board fails to timely
decide, the original decision of the Board will stand. In the event of a tie
vote, due to a conflict of interest or abstention, the failure to gain an
affirmative action by the Board is considered a final decision of denial of the
reconsideration and the underlying decision shall be deemed the final decision
of the Board.
12-266: MODIFICATION OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT APPROVAL:
   A.   The terms and conditions of the approval of any permit authorized or
required in this title may be modified only by the Planning Director, Zoning
Commission and/or Board as established in this section. This section applies to
modifications of approved permits, including, but not limited to, conditional
use permits, special use permits, variances, preliminary plats, final plats,
lot line adjustments and planned unit developments.
   B.   Application for a modification of terms and conditions of approval
shall be made to the Planning Department, on forms provided by the department,
and accompanied by the fee specified in section  12-265  of this subchapter.
   C.   If applicable, a public hearing shall be scheduled and notice provided
in accordance with the requirements for in section 12-268 of this subchapter.
   D.   The Planning Director, Zoning Commission and/or Board shall consider
the proposed modification in accordance with the requirements for the original
permit application and shall confine the review to the proposed modification.
   E.   The Planning Director, Zoning Commission and/or Board shall render a
decision in writing on the proposed modification in accordance with section 12-
268 of this subchapter after consideration of the proposal, and the decision
shall conform to the procedures, standards and requirements pertaining to the
original permit.
 
12-268: APPLICATION PROCESS, GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Applications submitted for action under the provisions of this title shall be
processed as follows:
   A.   All applications shall be submitted with their required fees to the
Planning Department.
   B.   The Planning Department shall have thirty (30) days to examine the
application to determine its completeness, based on the requirements provided
in this title for each type of application. The Board, by resolution, may
extend the thirty (30) day time period when extenuating circumstances merit an
extension.
   C.   The Planning Director shall inform the applicant in writing if the
application is incomplete and specify the items or information necessary to
complete the application.
D. Applications which involve broadband infrastructure shall be processed in
accordance with Idaho Code 67-6540.
E. When the Planning Director has determined the application is complete and in
compliance with this title, the Planning Director shall provide public hearing
notice in accordance with the requirements of Idaho Code 67-6509 and 67-6512.
Notice shall include publication, posting, and mailed notice to property owners
or purchasers of record within the land being considered, within the distance
specified in Table E-1 below, based on the zoning designation of the subject
property. In addition to the minimum noticing requirements of Idaho Code, the
County shall provide an additional fifteen (15) calendar days of notice prior
to the public hearing.
Table E-1: Mailed Notice Distance Requirements Based on Subject Property Zoning
Zoning Districts      Mailed Notice Distance
Forestry              2800 feet
Agricultural/Forestry 2800 feet
Rural                 1400 feet
Suburban              300 feet
Commercial            300 feet
Industrial            300 feet
Rural Service Center  300 feet
Recreation            300 feet
Alpine Village        300 feet
 
   F.  Applications for permits within an Area of Impact shall be noticed in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and according to the
   G.   Any permit application which relates to a public school facility or
public emergency facility shall receive priority consideration and shall be
reviewed at the earliest reasonable time, regardless of the timing of its
submission, relative to other applications.
   H.   The Governing Body may consider related permits concurrently at a
single public hearing for the convenience of the applicants and the public.
I. When the Governing Body has made a final decision on an application, the
Planning Director shall provide notice to applicants of the final decision in
writing within forty-five (45) days of the date of the decision, unless
otherwise specified by other provisions of this Title.
 
SECTION 3: Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be individually
severable. Should any provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of the remaining provisions.
SECTION 4: Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and
publication of the ordinance or ordinance summary in one (1) issue of the
Bonner County Daily Bee Newspaper.
Regularly considered, passed and approved as an ordinance of Bonner County,
Idaho, done this 10th day of November 2025, upon the following roll call vote:
 
Commissioner Domke   YEA
Commissioner Williams   YEA
Commissioner Korn      NAY
 
Adopted this 10th day of November 2025.
 
BONNER COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
 
 
________________________________
Brian Domke, Chair
 
 
________________________________
Asia Williams, Commissioner
 
 
________________________________
Ron Korn, Commissioner
 
 
ATTEST: Michael W. Rosedale, Clerk
 
 
____________________________      __________________
By Deputy Clerk:                Date
 
 
 
Legal: _________________________
 
STATEMENT OF COUNTY CLERK UNDER SEAL OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
 
Bonner County Revised Code Title 12, Chapters 1 & 2 Ordinance
 
The Bonner County Clerk has approved the following summary of an ordinance
under I.C. $ 31-
715A and believes it to contain a true and complete summary of the adopted
ordinance and further
provides adequate notice to the public of the adopted ordinance:
 
SUMMARY OF ADOPTED ORDINANCE
 
Bonner County, a political subdivision of the State of Idaho, pursuant to I.C.
§ 31-715A, hereby
provides the following summary of an adopted ordinance:
 
Ordinance #____ Amendment of Bonner County Revised Code, Title 12. Chapters 1
and 2.
An Ordinance of Bonner County, Idaho, amending the Bonner County Revised Code,
Title 12 as
follows:
 
12-122 (Planning Commission): Expands and clarifies the Planning Commission’s
jurisdiction to include holding quasi-judicial hearings for applicant-initiated
Comprehensive Plan map amendments. Previously, the Commission's authority was
limited to legislative actions such as recommending amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan, zoning map, and land use ordinances.
12-123 (Zoning Commission): The proposed change removes language allowing the
Zoning Commission to appoint a Hearing Examiner, clarifying that appointments
to that role are made by the Board of County Commissioners. The Zoning
Commission retains responsibility for quasi-judicial hearings for applicant-
driven land use requests.
12-131 (Complaints of Violation): Establishes that all zoning complaints must
be submitted on a standard form provided by the Planning Department. This helps
formalize the complaint intake process, ensures consistency in documentation,
and provides clear guidance on how to initiate enforcement actions.
12-214, 12-217, 12-224, 12-235, 12-247 (Noticing Procedures): Revises public
notice language across these sections to reference Section 12-268 ensuring
consistent application of notice standards.
12-232 (Variance Definitions): Clarifies the definition and scope of a
variance, aligning it with bulk, placement, and parcel standards only.
12-238 (Administrative Variances): Revises the threshold for administrative
variances from 30% to 20%, narrowing the scope of what can be approved without
a public hearing. It also updates noticing procedures to follow Section 12-268.
12-247 (Special Use Permits): Aligns public hearing notice procedures with
Section 12-268 and clarifies that the review of special use permits is
conducted by the appropriate decision-making body, such as the Zoning
Commission or Hearing Examiner. This provides consistency in how such
applications are processed and reviewed.
12-261 (Administrative Appeals): Adds clarity to the process and timeframes for
appealing administrative decisions made by the Planning Director. It formalizes
the procedure for scheduling appeal hearings before the Board of County
Commissioners.
12-262 (Appeals from Final Decisions): Expands the procedural framework for
appealing final decisions from the Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner. New
language addresses how to handle tie votes or lack of quorum, specifying that
failure to take affirmative action results in denial of the appeal and affirms
the underlying decision.
12-263 (Reconsideration): New language addresses how to handle tie votes or
lack of quorum, specifying that failure to take affirmative action results in
denial of the appeal and affirms the underlying decision.
12-266 (Modification of Terms): Clarifies noticing standards and decision
timelines to ensure consistent decision making and notice standards.
12-268 (Application Process): Centralizes all public notice and application
processing standards into one section. It incorporates Idaho Code 67-6509 and
67-6511 by reference, requires an additional 15 days of notice beyond state
minimums, and introduces a zone-specific mailing radius table to ensure
proportional outreach. The section also adds a 45-calendar day timeline for the
County to issue written decisions after final action.
 
A copy of the full text of this adopted ordinance may be obtained at the Bonner
County
Commissioners Office at 1500 Highway 2, Suite 308, Sandpoint, ID 83861 (9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). A true and correct copy of this notice shall be published
in accordance with I.C. § 31-715. Dated this 10 th day of November 2025,
 
_________________________________
Bonner County Deputy Clerk
 
The Bonner County Commissioners hereby place their seal this 10 th day of
November 2025 as required by I.C. § 31-715(3)
 
 
_______________________
Brain Domke, Chair
Bonner County Commissioners
 
   Ordinance No. ___731_____
 
Title 12, Land Use Regulations
Bonner County Revised Code
 
An Ordinance of Bonner County, Idaho, setting forth its authority; amending
Bonner County Revised Code Title 12 (Land Use Regulations), to make the
following changes to Chapters 4. 6, and 8, The changes are detailed in this
ordinance.
 
Whereas, Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65, provides for the adoption of land
use standards for the purposes of protecting property rights and enhancing
property values, together with the purposes of promoting the health, safety,
and general welfare of the people; and
Whereas, Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65, Section 6518 authorizes governing
boards to adopt standards for public and private development; and
Whereas, Bonner County Commissioners have adopted a comprehensive plan to guide
development within the unincorporated areas of Bonner County; and
Whereas, the Bonner County Board of County Commissioners did hold a public
hearing on November 10, 2025, and did find the proposed amendment to the land
use codes in accord with the Bonner County Comprehensive Plan and Idaho Code.
Now, therefore be it ordained by the Board of County Commissioners of Bonner
County, Idaho that the following be and is hereby adopted as an ordinance of
Bonner County:
SECTION 1: Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted at Chapter 65,
Title 67, Idaho Code, and pursuant to the procedural requirements contained at
Section 67-6509, Idaho Code.
 
SECTION 2: Amending Bonner County Revised Code, Title 12, Chapters 4, 6 and 8.
 
12-412: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS; SUBURBAN, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
RURAL SERVICE CENTER, RECREATION AND ALPINE VILLAGE ZONES:
   TABLE 4-2
   DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
 
Standard                 Zoning District
                         S          C      I      RSC    REC        AV
Urban water only         1 acre (4) 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre (4) 1 acre (4)
Community LSAS and urban 1 acre (4) 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre (4) 1 acre (4)
water (20)
Community drainfield and 1 acre (4) 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre (4) 1 acre (4)
individual well (20)
 
Requirements Or Exceptions:
   (19) Reserved
 
CHAPTER 6
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
12-600: Purpose
Subchapter 6.1 - General Provisions
12-610: Applicability, Qualifications
12-611: (Reserved)
12-612: Additional Requirements
12-613: Other Land Division & Adjustment Processes
12-614: Prohibitions
12-615: Remedies
12-616: Certificate Of Compliance, Conditional Certificate Of Compliance
Subchapter 6.2 - Design Standards
12-620: General
12-621: Lot And Parcel Design
12-622: Submerged Lands
12-623: Services And Utilities
12-624: Roads And Access
12-625: Trails And Parks
12-626: Environmental Features
12-627: Subdivisions In The Commercial And Rural Service Center Districts
Subchapter 6.3 - Conservation Subdivisions
12-630: Purpose
12-631: Description And Definitions
12-632: Applicability, Procedures And Preapplication Review
12-633: Standards And Guidelines For All Conservation Subdivisions
12-634: Standards For Conservation Subdivisions In Agricultural/Forestry-20
District
12-635: Standards For Conservation Subdivisions In Agricultural/Forestry-10 And
Rural Districts
12-636: Standards For Conservation Subdivisions In Suburban, Recreation And
Alpine Village Districts
12-637: Density Bonuses For Conservation Subdivisions
Subchapter 6.4 – Long Subdivision
12-640: Processing Of Long Subdivision Applications, General
12-641: Long Subdivisions, Preapplication Review
12-642: Contents Of Application
12-643: Long Subdivisions, Procedure For Processing Preliminary Plat
12-644: Improvement Plan Required, Contents
12-645: Standards For Review
12-646 Long Subdivision, Contents Of Final Plat, Procedure For Approval Of
Final Plat
Subchapter 6.5 - Short Subdivisions
12-650: Contents Of Application
12-651: Short Plat Subdivision, Procedure For Processing Preliminary Plat
12-652: Short Subdivision, Contents Of Final Plat, Procedure For Approval Of
Final Plat
Subchapter 6.6 – Final Plat
12-660: Final Plat, Contents
12-661: Endorsements To Be Shown On Final Plat
12-662: Procedure For Final Plat Review And Approval
Subchapter 6.7 - Lot Line Adjustments
12-670: Readjustment Of Lot Lines Within Platted Subdivision
12-671: Applications For Adjustment Of Lot Lines, Minor Notational Changes
12-672: Procedure For Administrative Review And Approval Of Adjustments Of Lot
Lines, Minor Notational Changes
12-673: Final Plat For Lot Line Adjustments/Notational Changes To Be Drawn,
Time For Filing, Signing
 
12-600: PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide standards and procedures for subdivisions and other land
division and adjustment procedures.
   B.   To establish subdivision and land division standards consistent with
the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.
   C.   It is unlawful for a person or group of persons acting in concert to
attempt to avoid this article by acting in concert to divide, create, or
transfer divided lands by using a series of owners or conveyances or by any
other method that ultimately results in the division of the lands into a long
subdivision.(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 634, 8-4-2021)
 
SUBCHAPTER 6.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
12-610: APPLICABILITY, QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to “long subdivisions” and
“short subdivisions,” as defined in section 12-819 of this title, lot line
adjustments as set forth at section 12-670 of this chapter, and all other
applications and processes authorized by this chapter.
 
   B.   Parcels or lots created in conformance with the provisions of this
title which are uniquely described on any recorded plat or other legal
instrument of conveyance as of the effective date hereof shall retain
individual status and eligibility for sale, lease, financing, gift, building,
construction or other transfer of ownership, as so described. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008; amd. Ord. 634, 8-4-2021)
 
12-611: RESERVED
(Reserved)
12-612: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Replatting Required:
      1.   Any division of land that has been platted shall not be divided
again without replatting.
   B.   Recorded Survey Required:
      1.   Any division of land created pursuant to 12-613.A must be surveyed
and the survey recorded with the County Recorder if any one parcel in the
division is less than five (5) acres, or a 1/128 aliquot division of a section.
12-613: OTHER LAND DIVISION & ADJUSTMENT PROCESSES:
   A.   Family Division: The following division of land is exempt from
platting: A division of unplatted land which is made for the purpose of a
single gift or sale to the landowner’s spouse, parent, child, sibling,
grandparent or grandchild; provided, that the division complies with all of the
following:
1. A division of unplatted land made for the purpose of a single gift or sale
from the landowner to their spouse, parent, step-parent, child, step-child,
sibling, step-sibling, grandparent, step-grandparent, grandchild or step-
grandchild;
       2. The landowner has not previously been exempt from platting
requirements by a gift or sale of another single parcel to the same person;
      3. An individual may only receive one parcel by gift or sale created
pursuant to this exemption after November 18, 2008. For Example: An individual
may receive by gift or sale a single parcel from his father through the
exemption process, but may not again receive from any other family member
another parcel through the exemption process;
      4.   The parcel to be created and any remaining parcel meets the minimum
zoning district requirements for the district in which the parcel is located;
      5.   The parcels to be created conform with the design criteria set forth
in section  12-621 , subsections  12-623  A and B, sections  12-624  A, D, and
E,  12-625 , and subsections  12-626  A and C of this chapter;
a.    An acknowledgment from Panhandle Health District indicating that a
location (on the subject property, or on a nearby property by easement) has
been identified that can meet the wastewater disposal requirements for the
proposed parcel(s).
b.    In lieu of an acknowledgment, a deed restriction shall be placed on the
created parcel(s) to require Panhandle Health District approval prior to
submittal of a Building Location Permit application.
      6. The applicant shall file an application for exemption from platting
with the Planning Department, along with the supporting documents for those
divisions of land set forth at subsection 12-613.A of this subchapter. The
application shall contain the legal descriptions of the parcels created and any
other information deemed necessary for consideration of the application;
a. The Planning Director shall examine the application and supporting documents
for compliance with the applicable provisions of sections 12-612 and 12-613.A
of this subchapter. Upon a determination that the application is in compliance,
the Planning Director is authorized to sign the notice of land division or
affix the notice of land division to deeds prepared for recording. A copy of
the recorded notice or deed shall be retained by the Planning Department.
   b. A “Notice of Family Division” is recorded in accordance with the
provisions set forth for all parcels and remainder parcel created.
   c. Limited to the creation of four (4) parcels total, to include the
property retained by the grantor.
   B.   Financing of a Lot or Parcel: The following is exempt from platting:
The financing of any portion of a single lot or parcel; provided, that:
      1.   The portion separated for financing purposes and any remaining
portion meet the minimum zoning district lot size requirements for the district
in which the single lot or parcel is located; and
      2.   The single lot or parcel remains in one ownership.
   C.   Reservation of a Life Estate: The following is exempt from platting:
The reservation of a life estate; provided, that the single lot or parcel
remains in one ownership.
   D.   Waiver Of Land Division Requirements: The Director may waive short
subdivision and long subdivision requirements on parcels to be created that
have legal access, meets the requirements of 12-621 and 12-622, and the
resulting parcel size is not less than twenty (20) acres or can be described as
a one thirty-second (1/32) aliquot description or larger. Exception: resulting
parcels within the Forest 40 Zoning District must be at least forty (40) acres
or can be described as a one sixteenth (1/16) aliquoted description or larger.
This waiver may be granted upon review of the proposed legal descriptions and a
map of the proposed division prior to recording.
   E.   Boundary Line Adjustment: A change in location of the property line
between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from
one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel. Further defined as a combining of
one or more parcels to create fewer parcels and where no greater number of
parcels than originally existed is thereby created. No boundary adjusted parcel
may be reduced below the minimum parcel size for the zoning district in which
the parcel is located, except that if a parcel is already below the minimum
parcel size, the boundary line adjustment shall not create any parcels that are
smaller than the smallest original parcel in the subject configuration.
      1.   The applicant shall file an application for Boundary Line Adjustment
with the Planning Department, along with the supporting documents. The
application shall contain the legal descriptions of the parcels created and any
other information deemed necessary for consideration of the application.
      2.   The Planning Director or designee shall examine application and the
supporting documents for compliance with the applicable provisions of section
12-621, 12-622, 12-623, 12-624 A, D, and E of this subchapter. Upon a
determination that the application is in compliance, the Planning Director is
authorized to sign the notice of land division or affix the notice of land
division to deeds prepared for recording. A copy of the recorded notice or deed
shall be retained by the Planning Department.
      3.   No application submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed
complete nor any deed recorded, until all fees set forth at section 12-265 of
this title have been paid, unless waived by the board.
      4.   Those existing, non-conforming features shall not be made more non-
conforming. (Ord. 577, 5-23-2018;amd. Ord. 634, 8-4-2021; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022;
Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
F.   Notice of Land Division, Procedure:
      1.   The applicant shall file an application for exemption from platting
with the Planning Department, along with the supporting documents for those
divisions of land set forth at subsection 12-613.A of this subchapter. The
application shall contain the legal descriptions of the parcels created and any
other information deemed necessary for consideration of the application.
     2.   The Planning Director or designee shall examine application and the
supporting documents for compliance with the applicable provisions of sections
12-612 and 12-613 of this subchapter. Upon a determination that the application
is in compliance, the Planning Director is authorized to sign the notice of
land division or affix the notice of land division to deeds prepared for
recording. A copy of the recorded notice or deed shall be retained by the
Planning Department. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008).
 
12-614: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Except where exempt from the definition of "long subdivision" or “short
subdivision,” as provided for in 12-819, or until a final plat or notice of
land division in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and Idaho
Code, where applicable, has been recorded with the Bonner County Recorder, no
person shall:
      1.   Sell, lease, finance or gift any lot or parcel of real property or
portion thereof;
      2.   Commence the construction of any building for sale, lease, financing
or gift;
      3.   Allow occupancy of any lot or parcel of real property, or portion
thereof, for which a final plat or notice of land division is required pursuant
to this chapter.
   B.   The conveyance of any part of a division of land for which a final plat
or notice of land division is required pursuant to this chapter shall not be
made by lot or parcel number, letter or other designation until a final plat or
notice of land division has been recorded with the Bonner County Recorder.
   C.   This section shall not apply to any lot or parcel created in
conformance with the provisions of this title which is uniquely described on
any recorded plat or legal instrument of conveyance as of the effective date
hereof. Said lot or parcel shall retain individual status and eligibility for
sale, lease, financing, gift, building construction or other transfer of
ownership, as so described. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
 
12-615: REMEDIES:
   A.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any
lot or parcel of real property:
      1.   Exempt from the definition of " long subdivision" or “short
subdivision,” as provided for in BCRC 12-819;
      2.   Described in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to section
12-616 of this subchapter;
      3.   Identified in a recorded final plat or notice of land division
pursuant to this chapter, from and after the date of recording.
   B.   This section shall not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to
which the County or other public agency or any person may otherwise be
entitled. The County or other public agency or any person may file suit to
restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease,
financing or gift of any lot or parcel, or portion thereof, contrary to the
provisions of this title. The provisions of this section shall not limit or
affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any
other provision of law.
   C.   The County shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to
develop or use any lot or parcel which has been divided, or which has resulted
from a division, contrary to the provisions of this title. The authority to
deny a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of
the lot or parcel at the time of the division, or whether the applicant is the
current owner of the lot or parcel with, or without, actual or constructive
knowledge of the division at the time of the acquisition of interest in the lot
or parcel. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
 
(No proposed changes to sections 12-616)
(No proposed changes to sections 12-620, 12-621, 12-622)
12-623: SERVICES AND UTILITIES:
   A.   Where proposed lots are smaller than one acre in area, exclusive of any
ingress or egress easements, all "urban services", as defined in section 12-821
of this title, shall be provided. Lots in conservation subdivisions shall be
exempt from this requirement, provided all other requirements of this title are
met.
   B.   A water supply shall be provided per at least one of the following:
      1.   Lots to be served by an individual well on each lot: Applicants
shall demonstrate how the aquifer proposed for water supply has sufficient
production capability to provide drinking water to all applicable lots and that
a location is available within each lot for installation of a well without
conflicting with proposed sewage systems on or adjacent to the proposed lot.
      2.   Lots to be served by a new water system serving from two (2) to nine
(9) lots: Documentation by an Idaho licensed professional engineer or
professional geologist that the sources proposed for water supply have
sufficient production capability to provide drinking water to the lots in the
proposed subdivision.
      3.   Lots to be served by a new public drinking water system: Division of
environmental quality written approval of an engineering report prepared by an
Idaho licensed professional engineer demonstrating that an adequate water
supply is available to meet the estimated demand for water from the lots in the
proposed subdivision.
      4.   Lots to be served by connection to an existing public or private
water system: A letter from the owner of the system indicating it has
sufficient reserve production capacity to supply water to the lots in the
proposed subdivision.
   C.   New lots created through any land division process shall include a
sanitary restriction, unless such restriction is satisfied or lifted in
accordance with Idaho Code 50-1326 through 50-1329.
   D.   All proposed lots shall be designed by the applicant to provide a fire
protection plan for the proposed lots to provide, at a minimum, an assessment
of fire risk and plans to reduce the risk, and provisions for defensible space,
where material capable of allowing a fire to spread unchecked will be treated,
cleared or modified to slow the rate and intensity of an advancing wildfire and
to create an area for fire suppression operations to occur, and for at least
one of the following:
            1.   Prior to final plat, an approved water and fire hydrant system
capable of providing one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for a minimum of
two (2) hours where a community water system exists or is proposed as part of
the development and is capable of delivering the pressurized water supply
necessary for delivering fire flows as prescribed by the international fire
code, as adopted by the state fire marshal, and such later editions as may be
so published and adopted by the state fire marshal, or as amended, modified or
superseded, and incorporated herein by reference with a copy on file with the
office of the clerk of the board of county commissioners, and hereinafter
referred to as IFC.
      2.   A note on the final subdivision plat stating: "The installation of
an approved IFC residential fire suppression sprinkler system is required in
all newly constructed residences".
      3.   Prior to final plat, a manmade or natural water source with a dry
hydrant capable of delivering adequate water supply as prescribed by IFC.
      4.   A note on the final subdivision plat stating: "At the time of
building permit or building location permit, the lot owner shall install an
approved fire suppression method to the satisfaction of Bonner County". (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
(No proposed changes to Section 12-624)
12-625: TRAILS AND PARKS:
      A.  Public Access, Parks and Facilities:
Public access easements or the conveyance of land for public access, parks or
facilities may be required for subdivisions that are contiguous to: 1) public
lands; 2) public streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands or similar areas; or 3) for
areas designated in a county facilities acquisition plan. If so required, the
property owner shall be paid fair market value for the easement or land, or may
qualify for a density bonus as part of a conservation subdivision set forth in
section 12-637 of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
 
(No proposed changes to Sections 12-626 and 12-627)
(No proposed changes to Subchapter 12-6.3)
 
SUBCHAPTER 6.4 - LONG SUBDIVISION
 
12-640: PROCESSING OF LONG SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS, GENERAL:
The requirements and procedures set forth in this subchapter shall apply to the
processing of all applications for long subdivisions to which this chapter is
applicable, except for applications which are eligible for processing as short
subdivisions (as set forth in section 12-6.5 of this chapter), or for
processing as lot line adjustments (as set forth in subchapter 6.7 of this
chapter) (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
 
12-641: LONG SUBDIVISIONS, PREAPPLICATION REVIEW:
   A.   Any person contemplating a long subdivision is encouraged to contact
the planning department prior to the submission of the application for
discussion of the procedures, standards and criteria which are applicable to
the proposed subdivision.`
   B.   The preapplication review shall include a general description of the
proposed subdivision, and a sketch map of sufficient scale to convey the scope
and layout of the proposed subdivision.
   C.   Discussions may include the concept, the applicable regulations and
standards, and specific problems with the proposed subdivision, such as impacts
on roads, schools or potential conflicts with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
 
12-642: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
 A. Application form, available in the planning department to be completely
filled out, including legal owner’s signature (or a letter from the holder of
legal title authorizing the application to file for the subdivision), and a
copy of purchasing agreement.
B. If the proposed land division is located within an Area of Impact (AOI), the
applicant must provide proof that an attempt to annex into the applicable city
was made and rejected by the city.
   C.   .   One print of a preliminary plat prepared by an Idaho licensed
surveyor showing the parcel or parcels to be divided clearly and legibly drawn
at a scale suitable to ensure the clarity of all lines, bearings and
dimensions. This application shall include the following:
      1.   Subdivision name, geographic grid (township, range and tier section
number and location within the section), north arrow, and vicinity map showing
location and boundary of the proposed tract and existing road pattern in the
vicinity.
      2.   Boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided drawn to scale,
together with intersecting property lines, abutting public and private roads,
and the status of adjoining property (name of subdivision or unplatted area).
      3.   The location, dimensions and area (in acres) of proposed lots. All
proposed lots shall be numbered or in a systematic order.
      4.   The location, dimensions and tentative names of proposed streets and
roads.
      5.   Sufficient contours to show the shape of the land and extending at
least one hundred feet (100') beyond the subdivision limits (use of USGS map
acceptable).
      6.   Location of all watercourses, floodplains as delineated on flood
insurance rate maps or base flood elevations, the elevations derived from flood
insurance rate maps, and approximate areas subject to inundation of stormwater
overflow.
      7.   Existing wells, springs, wetland boundaries as depicted on national
wetlands inventory maps or as delineated by a professional authorized by the
U.S. army corps of engineers to perform wetland delineations, drainage
channels, overhead and underground utility lines, structures, sanitary sewers
and culverts within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto.
      8.   Proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and solid waste
disposal.
      9.   All easements of record, including sufficient recording data to
identify the conveyance.
      10.   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or
reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
      11.   A statement setting forth the intended land use of the parcels,
i.e., residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial or other appropriate
land use classifications.
   D.   The application shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   Application fee as set forth at section 12-265 of this title.
      2.   Preliminary subdivision road design plan and profile, prepared,
stamped and signed by an Idaho licensed engineer demonstrating ability to
comply with the minimum applicable road standards for all new or reconstructed
roads proposed to serve the subdivision.
      3.   Any other information required by this title or necessary for
consideration of the application. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 681, 10-12-
2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
E. All proposed long subdivisions must meet the design standards found in
subchapter 12-6.2 of this chapter.
 
12-643: LONG SUBDIVISIONS, PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   The applicant shall file an application for a preliminary plat with the
planning department, pursuant to the procedures of section 12-268 of this
title.
   B.   The hearing body shall hold the public hearing on the application for
preliminary plat, in accord with the procedures set forth in subchapter 2.6 of
this title. The hearing body shall consider the application for the preliminary
plat, any comments received, the facts on the record and may:
      1.   Approve the application for preliminary plat, as presented;
      2.   Approve the application for preliminary plat, as modified in any
particular;
      3.   Continue the public hearing; or
      4.   Deny the application for preliminary plat.
   C.   The hearing body shall make its decision, at the close of the public
hearing, in accordance with Idaho Code 67-6535
   D.   As a part of its decision approving an application for a preliminary
plat, the hearing body may require the completion of improvements (such as
roads, utilities or stormwater management controls) prior to final plat
approval. Improvements not completed prior to final plat approval are subject
to surety agreements pursuant to section 12-644 of this subchapter. In addition
to the standards set forth in this chapter, the hearing body may stipulate
conditions to be placed on the final plat, provided evidence of record is
sufficient to so warrant, which may include:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent properties;
      2.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      3.   Requiring the provision of on or off site public facilities or
services;
      4.   Assuring the development is maintained properly;
      5.   Provisions for setbacks that are greater than the minimum standards
set forth in this title to mitigate effects of the development on wildlife,
fisheries, wetlands, adjoining properties, or to reduce hazards due to
floodplain, floodways, steep slopes or other physical constraints of the land,
provided evidence is deemed sufficient to warrant greater setbacks;
      6.   Safeguards to protect adjoining properties.
   E. The preliminary plat shall be valid for a period not to exceed three (3)
years from the date of approval. At any time prior to the expiration date of
the preliminary plat, an applicant may make a written request to the planning
director for a single extension of the preliminary plat for a period up to
three (3) years. The extension request shall be processed in accordance with
12-266.1 of this title. The extension request must be approved or denied prior
to the expiration date of the preliminary plat. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd.
Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
 
12-644: IMPROVEMENT PLAN REQUIRED, CONTENTS:
   A.   After the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall have an
improvement plan for the subdivision prepared by a registered civil engineer.
Two (2) copies of the improvement plan shall be filed with the county engineer.
This plan shall include the following:
      1.   The subdivision name and number, geographic grid (township, range
and tier, section number and location within the section), north arrow, date
and scale no smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100').
      2.   The plan and profile of all proposed roads showing final grades and
cross sections of roads in accord with the requirements contained in title 2 of
this code.
      3.   The plan and profile of proposed sanitary and stormwater systems
with grades and sizes indicated. Drain calculations may be required.
      4.   A grading plan, showing stormwater drainage for each lot.
      5.   Any other improvements such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bridges,
lift stations, fire hydrants, streetlighting, etc., as required, and in accord
with the requirements contained in title 2 of this code.
   B.   The county engineer, or his representative, shall check inspection
reports of the applicant's engineer and shall perform a final inspection and
additional inspections (if called for). Construction and inspection of road
improvements shall be completed in accord with the requirements contained in
title 2 of this code or  appendix A  of this title.
   C.   In lieu of completing all improvements as required before final plat
recording, the subdivider shall enter into a surety agreement with the board
agreeing to complete the improvements in accordance with surety agreement
conditions and preliminary and final plat approvals. A cash deposit,
certificate of deposit, corporate surety bond written by an insurance company
licensed in Idaho having a rating from AM Best & Company of "A" or better,
letter of credit issued and backed by a federal or state chartered bank, is
required equivalent to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the project
engineer's estimated cost of construction of the improvements for the purpose
of guaranteeing completion of the work and repair of any defects in
improvements which occur within one year of the first acceptance of the
completed work by the board. Sureties guaranteeing the work and repair of any
defects in improvements which occur within one year after first acceptance of
the completed work by the board may be reduced by the board by one-half ( 1 / 2
) for that one year. The surety agreement shall be valid for a period not to
exceed three (3) calendar years from the date of approval. At any time prior to
the expiration date of the surety agreement, the subdivider may make a written
request to the planning director for a single extension of the surety agreement
for a period up to three (3) years. The board may consider such request for
extension at any regular business meeting. The extension request must be
approved or denied by the board prior to the expiration date of the surety
agreement. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
 
12-645: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
The hearing body shall apply the following standards in making its decision on
all applications for preliminary plat:
   A.   The proposed subdivision is in accord with the purposes of this title
and of the zone district in which it is located.
   B.   The site is physically suitable for the proposed development.
   C.   The design of the proposed subdivision will not adversely impact Bonner
County’s natural resources, as identified in the comprehensive plan. Any
adverse impacts or potential for impacts shall be mitigated as a condition of
approval.
   D.   The public and private services, including, but not limited to, water,
sewer services, solid waste, fire protection, emergency services, and school
facilities and transportation, which will serve the proposed subdivision are
adequate for the needs of future residents or users.
   E.   The proposed subdivision will not cause circumstances to exist that
will cause future residents or the public at large to be exposed to hazards to
health or safety.
   F.   The design of the proposed subdivision or related improvements will
provide for coordinated access with the county system of roads and with
adjacent properties, and will not impede the use of public easements for access
to, or through the proposed subdivision. The proposed transportation system is
designed to adequately and safely serve the future residents or users without
adversely impacting the existing transportation system by reducing the quality
or level of service or creating hazards or congestion.
   G.   The proposed subdivision is designed to comply with the design criteria
for subdivisions set forth in subchapter 6.2 of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
 
12-646: LONG SUBDIVISION, CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT, PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF
FINAL PLAT:
A.    The contents and procedure for processing the final plat for long
subdivisions are set forth in subchapter 12-6.6 of this chapter.
 
SUBCHAPTER 6.5 - SHORT SUBDIVISION
 
12-650: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Purpose: To define the procedures for which an administrative approval
may be granted for the development of land into ten (10) or fewer lots or
parcels; to encourage small scale development which conforms to the intent and
scope of the Bonner County comprehensive plan by providing a means for land
development other than the regular subdivision process; and to expedite the
subdivision approval of developments that conform with this chapter. The
procedures of a regular subdivision apply to the short subdivision with the
exceptions as outlined in this section.
   B.   Applications for short subdivisions which contain ten (10) or fewer
contiguous lots or parcels under common ownership may be processed as "short
subdivisions" as set forth in sections 12-651 through 12-652 of this
subchapter.
   C.   Lands divided using a short subdivision are not eligible for further
division by the short subdivision process. This restriction shall be noted on
the plat. Future divisions of any lot created by short subdivision must proceed
through the Subdivision process.
      D. The contents of the preliminary short subdivision shall include all of
the items set forth in subchapter 12-642 of this chapter. (Ord. 557, 11-10-
2016; amd. Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
E. All proposed short subdivisions must meet the design standards found in
subchapter 12-6.2 of this chapter.
 
12-651: SHORT SUBDIVISION, PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING PRELIMINARY PLAT
   A.   The applicant shall file an application for a preliminary short
subdivision with the planning department, pursuant to the procedures of section
12-268 of this title.
   B.   Upon the determination of the planning director that an application is
complete, the planning department shall:
      1.   Send public agencies and entities, pursuant to section 12-268 of
this title, a notice that a short subdivision application has been made, and a
means for the agency to review it.
      2.   Provide notice of the proposed short subdivision by first class mail
to all property owners of record, following the standards of 12-268 of this
title. The notice shall, at a minimum, include the applicant's name, a
description of the proposed short subdivision and the general location of the
property. The notice shall advise of a thirty (30) day written comment period
beginning the day after notice is mailed.
      3.   Provide notice to the official county newspaper of record. The
notice shall provide a summary of the proposal and advise of the thirty (30)
day comment period.
      4.   When a short subdivision is in an area of impact (AOI) the notice
requirement shall be in accordance with the applicable area of impact
agreement.
   C.   At the close of the comment and review period and upon a determination
by the planning director that the agency review comments have been addressed by
the applicant, the planning department shall issue a staff report containing,
at a minimum, proposed findings, conclusions and conditions of approval and a
recommendation for action. Any response to the staff report by the applicant or
interested parties shall be received by the planning department not later than
ten (10) days after the issuance of the report.
D.   Following the ten (10) day response period, the planning director shall
consider the application for the preliminary short subdivision, any comments
received, the facts on the record and the standards for considering the short
subdivision at application and may:
      1.   Approve the preliminary short subdivision, as presented;
      2.   Approve the preliminary short subdivision, as modified in any
particular;
      3.   Continue action on the short subdivision to a date certain, pending
changes to be made in the application, the short subdivision design or the
receipt of additional information;
      4.   Deny the application for preliminary short subdivision;
      5.   Recommend a hearing body conduct a public hearing pursuant to the
public hearing noticing requirements and procedures set forth in subchapter 2.6
of this title, based upon the extent of public comment or other contested
factors in the case which warrant a full hearing. This option may be selected
at any time following the initiation of the review and comment period when
evidence of the record supports it, to ensure prompt processing of the
application for hearing.
   E.   The planning director shall render a decision in accordance with Idaho
Code 67-6535. If the planning director denies the preliminary short
subdivision, the planning director shall specify in the decision the actions,
if any, which the applicant could take to obtain approval.
   F.   As a part of its decision approving an application for a preliminary
plat, the planning director may require the completion of improvements (such as
roads, utilities or stormwater management controls) prior to final plat
approval. Improvements not completed prior to final plat approval are subject
to surety agreements pursuant to section 12-644 of this chapter. In addition to
the standards set forth in this chapter, the planning director may stipulate
conditions to be placed on the final plat provided evidence of record is
sufficient, which may include:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
      2.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
      3.   Requiring the provision of on or off site public facilities or
services.
      4.   Assuring the development is maintained properly.
      5.   Provisions for setbacks that are greater than the minimum standards
set forth in this title to mitigate effects of the development on wildlife,
fisheries, wetlands, adjoining properties, or to reduce hazards due to
floodplain, floodways, steep slopes or other physical constraints of the land,
provided evidence is deemed sufficient to warrant greater setbacks.
      6.   Safeguards to protect adjoining properties.
   G.   The preliminary short subdivision shall be valid for a period not to
exceed three (3) calendar years from the date of approval. At any time prior to
the expiration date of the preliminary short subdivision, an applicant may make
a written request to the planning director for an extension of the preliminary
short subdivision for a period up to three (3) years, finding that conditions
or applicable regulations have not changed so substantially as to warrant
reconsideration of the proposed subdivision with respect to the public health,
safety, and general welfare. The extension request shall be processed in
accordance with 12-266.1 of this Title. The extension request must be approved
or denied prior to the expiration date of the preliminary short plat.
   H.   Any determination made by the planning director in the administration
of this section may be appealed in accordance with 12-261 of this Title.
(Ord. 557, 11-10-2016)
12-652: SHORT SUBDIVISION, CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT, PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF
FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The contents and procedure for processing the final plat for short
subdivisions are set forth in subchapter 12-6.6 of this chapter.
 
SUBCHAPTER 6.6 – FINAL PLAT
12-660: FINAL PLAT, CONTENTS:
The final plat shall conform with the following items:
   A.   A distinct subdivision name, consistent with the provisions of Idaho
Code section 50-1307. For the purposes of this section, the subdivision name
shall be considered distinct if the exact name, either pronounced the same or
similarly spelled, has not been used previously.
   B.   Names of the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor.
   C.   The "initial point" or “point of beginning” and description thereof,
shall be indicated on the drawing and the location and description in
conformance with Idaho Code.
   D.   Street lines of all existing or recorded streets, principal property
lines, patent lines, Township lines or section lines, intersecting, crossing or
contiguous to the subdivision (which should be mathematically tied to the lines
of the subdivision by distances and bearings) and the status of adjoining
property shall be indicated (name of subdivision or unplatted area).
   E.   The accurate location and description and filing of all monuments shall
be in accordance with the Corner Perpetuation and Filing Act, Idaho Code title
55, chapter 16.
   F.   The length and bearings of the lines of all lots, streets, alleys and
easements as laid out, length of arc, points of curvature, radii and tangent
bearings in the case of curved lines (the system of lengths and bearings of the
boundary lines).
   G.   All lots shall be numbered consecutively in each block, and each block
lettered or numbered as set forth at Idaho Code section 50-1304. Unique block
numbers shall be assigned for lots separated by streets, public land, railroad
rights- of-way, waterways or any other barriers to the continuity of the
development. All streets shall bear the street or road name as it appears on
the official road name list.
   H.   The accurate outline of all property that is offered for dedication for
public use, with the purpose indicated thereon and all property owners in the
subdivision and conform with Idaho Code.
   I.   Private restrictions, if any.
   J.   North point, graphic scale and date.
   K.   A certificate of a licensed engineer or surveyor of the State to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him that all of the monuments,
shown thereon, actually exist and that their positions are as shown.
   L.   Location of all watercourses, base flood elevations, the elevations
derived from flood insurance rate maps, and approximate areas subject to
inundation of stormwater overflow.
   M.   Wetland boundaries and any proposed easements or easements of record
for drainage, channels, overhead and underground utility lines, sanitary sewers
and water systems within the tract. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 590, 6-12-
2019)
 
12-661: ENDORSEMENTS TO BE SHOWN ON FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall also contain the following information:
   A.   Owner's certificate. A notarized description of the property
encompassed by the plat, dedications and restrictions.
   B.   A place for the Planning Director's approval.
   C.   A place for the County Surveyor's approval.
   D.   A place for Panhandle Health District approval, if applicable.
   E.   A place for Board approval.
   F.   A place for the County Treasurer's approval.
   G.   A place for the Recorder's signature.
   H.   A place for city acknowledgement, if within an Area of Impact (AOI), if
applicable.
   I.   A place for the lienholder's approval, if applicable. The lienholder's
approval may be excluded from any plat that does not contain dedications of
land to the public, provided the landowner proves the lienholder has received
notice by certified mail of the pending subdivision.
 
12-662: PROCEDURE FOR FINAL PLAT REVIEW:
   A.   Upon the payment of final plat check fees, as set forth at section  12-
265  of this title, and receipt of a copy of a current preliminary title
report, and one blueprint copy of the proposed final plat, the Planning
Director shall cause a review of the proposed final plat to verify conformance
with the provisions of this title and the conditions of preliminary plat
approval.
   B.   The applicant shall prepare a final plat which conforms to the
requirements for final plats set forth at Idaho Code section 50-1304, bearing
the endorsement certificates as required at section  12-647  of this subchapter
and Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13.
   C.   Upon receipt of such plat, and the payment of the plat checking fee as
set forth at section  12-265  of this title, the Planning Director shall cause
an examination of such plat by endorsing agencies and a licensed surveyor,
registered in the State of Idaho for checking in accordance with the
requirements of Idaho Code section 50-1305. When such agencies have signed the
plat and all plat certificates, except those of the Board, Recorder and
Planning Director have been endorsed, the Planning Director shall place the
request for final plat approval on the agenda for the next available meeting of
the Board of County Commissioners.
   D.   The Board shall approve the final plat when:
      1.   The final plat conforms to the requirements of Idaho Code and this
Code; and
      2.   The final plat conforms with the approved preliminary plat; and
      3.   The conditions of preliminary and final plat approval have been
completed or financially guaranteed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   The Board may continue consideration of the final plat approval to a
date and time certain to allow receipt of additional information regarding any
aspect of the final plat or its conditions of approval. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
 
SUBCHAPTER 6.7 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
(No proposed changes to Section 12-670)
 
12-671: APPLICATIONS FOR ADJUSTMENT OF LOT LINES, MINOR NOTATIONAL CHANGES:
   A.   All applications made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to
the Bonner County planning department. Any person contemplating a lot line
adjustment/minor notational change is encouraged to contact the planning
director prior to submission of the application for discussion of procedures,
standards and criteria which are applicable to the proposed application.
   B.   All applications for readjustments of lot lines and minor notational
changes shall include:
1.   Paper copies of the final plat prepared by an Idaho licensed professional
land surveyor containing the minimum information required at subsection  12-642
C 3 and subchapter 6.6 of this chapter, the requirements for plats set forth in
Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, and depicting the location of existing
structures and wells.
      2.   Additional information reasonably required for a thorough review of
the application as may be requested by the planning director.
      3.   A copy of the current preliminary title report.
   C.   Applications shall additionally include one copy of the plat currently
recorded marked to clearly indicate the proposed changes to the plat.
   D.   No application submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed
complete nor any plat recorded, until all fees set forth at section  12-265  of
this title have been paid, unless waived by the board.
   E.   Applications for lot line adjustments shall conform to the design
criteria for subdivisions as set forth in sections  12-620  and  12-621 , 12-
622, 12-623 and subsections  12-624  A, D, and E of this chapter. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 591, 10-23-2019; Ord. 607, 7-22-2020; Ord. 681, 10-12-
2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
(No proposed changes to Section 12-672)
 
12-673: FINAL PLAT FOR LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS/NOTATIONAL CHANGES TO BE DRAWN,
TIME FOR FILING, SIGNING:
   A.   The contents and procedure for processing the final plat for a lot line
adjustment or notational change are set forth in subchapter 12-6.6 of this
chapter.
12-818: DEFINITIONS - R:
REMAINDER: 
The portion of a property that remains after a land division has been approved
and recorded. A remainder may only be created pursuant to BCRC 12-613 and must
meet the waiver of land division requirements as set forth in that subchapter.
 
12-819: DEFINITIONS - S:
SUBDIVISION:
Any division of land into one or more platted lot(s) or tracts.
The term “subdivision” shall not include:
A. The lease of agricultural lands for agriculture or agricultural purposes.
B. The lease or conveyance of land to a governmental agency, quasi-public or
public entity, political subdivision, or private or public utility at the
request or acceptance of such agency, entity, political subdivision, or
utility. The portion conveyed to the previously mentioned entities need not
meet minimum acreage standards, however, any other portion or remainder that
remains in private ownership shall meet minimum acreage standards.
C. Mineral, oil or gas leases.
D. A lot line adjustment or minor notational change.
E. Land within a recognized cemetery which has been divided into lots or plats
for the purpose of burial only.
F. The financing or leasing of any commercial or industrial lot or parcel, or
portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or
industrial buildings on a single lot or parcel.
G. The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial
buildings on a single lot or parcel.
H. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space
with apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings or mobile
home parks, so long as each unit or space is not separately owned.
I. Land divisions which are exempt under 12-613 of this title.
 
SUBDIVISION, LONG:
Any division of land into eleven (11) or more platted lots or tracts or
divisions of those parcels that do not qualify for a Short Subdivision.
 
SUBDIVISION, SHORT:
Any division of land into ten (10) or fewer platted lots or tracts.
 
SECTION 3: Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be individually
severable. Should any provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of the remaining provisions.
SECTION 4: Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and
publication of the ordinance or ordinance summary in one (1) issue of the
Bonner County Daily Bee Newspaper.
Regularly considered, passed and approved as an ordinance of Bonner County,
Idaho, done this 10th day of November 2025, upon the following roll call vote:
 
Commissioner Domke   YEA
Commissioner Williams   YEA
Commissioner Korn      NAY
 
Adopted this 10th day of November 2025.
 
BONNER COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
 
 
________________________________
Brian Domke, Chair
 
 
________________________________
Asia Williams, Commissioner
 
 
________________________________
Ron Korn, Commissioner
 
 
ATTEST: Michael W. Rosedale, Clerk
 
 
____________________________      __________________
By Deputy Clerk:                Date
 
 
 
Legal: _________________________
 
STATEMENT OF COUNTY CLERK UNDER SEAL OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
 
Bonner County Revised Code Title 12, Chapters 4, 6, & 8 Ordinance
 
The Bonner County Clerk has approved the following summary of an ordinance
under I.C. $ 31-
715A and believes it to contain a true and complete summary of the adopted
ordinance and further
provides adequate notice to the public of the adopted ordinance:
 
SUMMARY OF ADOPTED ORDINANCE
 
Bonner County, a political subdivision of the State of Idaho, pursuant to I.C.
§ 31-715A, hereby
provides the following summary of an adopted ordinance:
 
Ordinance #____ Amendment of Bonner County Revised Code, Title 12. Chapters 4,
6 and 8.
An Ordinance of Bonner County, Idaho, amending the Bonner County Revised Code,
Title 12 as
follows:
 
Chapter 4
12-412 - Removes the Requirements or Exceptions 19 from Table 4-2.
 
Chapter 6
Complete rewrite of most subchapters of Chapter 6 with major revisions to
include: moves land division definitions to chapter 8, removes the Minor Land
Division type, establishes a Final Plat subchapter,
12-610 – Updates to the naming conventions.
12-611 – Removes the definitions and added them to Chapter 8.
12-612, 12-613 – Updated code reference, moves unplatted land divisions and
adjustments to 12-613 which is renamed to “Other Land Divisions & Adjustment
Processes.” Expands the potential receivers of a Family Divisions property to
additional familiar types, adds a PHD review requirement.
12-614 – Updates to the naming conventions and code references.
12-615 – Updates to the naming conventions and code references.
12-623 – Adds a requirement for all new lots created through any land division
to contain a sanitary restriction lift. Also, modifies the fire protection
requirements.
12-625 – Removes requirements for Trails and retains only requirements for
Public Access, Parks and Facilities.
12-6.4 – Updates to the naming conventions to “Long Subdivision.”
12-640 – Updates to the naming conventions to “Long Subdivision” and code
references.
12-641 – Updates to the naming conventions to “Long Subdivision.”
12-642 – Updates to the naming convention and adds an application requirement
for proposed subdivisions that fall within an Area of Impact to request
annexation to the applicable city. Adds a reference to 12-6.2 to ensure
compliance with that subchapter.
12-643 – Updates to the naming conventions to “Long Subdivision.” Replaces
“Zoning Commission” with “hearing body” throughout the section. Removes the
requirement for a preliminary plat to receive BOCC approval. Extends the
timeline for how long a preliminary plat approval shall be valid for, from two
years to three years.
12-644 – Extends the timeline for how long a surety agreement approval shall be
valid for, from two years to three years.
12-645 – Updates to the naming convention and replaces “Zoning Commission” with
“hearing body.”
12-646 – Removes the “Final Plat, Contents” section in its entirety and moves
the section to 12-6.6. Adds a reference to the new Final Plat, Contents
section.
12-647 – Removes the section in its entirety and moves the section to 12-6.6.
12-648 – Removes the section in its entirety and moves the section to 12-6.6.
12-649 – Removes this section in its entirety.
12-6.5 – Updates to the naming conventions to “Short Subdivision” throughout
the entire section.
12-650 – Updates the number of properties to conform to proposed definitions.
Adds a provision to restrict contiguous short subdivisions. Adds a reference to
12-6.2 to ensure compliance with that subchapter.
12-651 – Updates the noticing standards. Extends the timeline for how long a
preliminary plat approval shall be valid for, from two years to three years.
Updates the extension request process to reference 12-266.1. Updates the appeal
process to reference 12-261.
12-652 – Removes the “Final Plat, Contents” section in its entirety and moves
the section to 12-6.6. Adds a reference to the new Final Plat, Contents
section.
12-6.6 – Removes the Minor Land Divion as a land division application type.
Establishes a Final Plat subchapter.
12-671 – Updates code references.
12-673 – Removes the “Final Plat, Contents” section in its entirety and moves
the section to 12-6.6. Adds a reference to the new Final Plat, Contents
section.
 
Chapter 8
12-818 – Establishes a definition for “Remainder” as it pertains to plats.
12-819 – Modifies the definition for “Subdivision.” Adds a definition for
“Subdivision, Long” and “Subdivision, Short.”
 
A copy of the full text of this adopted ordinance may be obtained at the Bonner
County
Commissioners Office at 1500 Highway 2, Suite 308, Sandpoint, ID 83864 (9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). A true and correct copy of this notice shall be published
in accordance with I.C. § 31-715.
 
Dated this 10 th day of November 2025,
 
_________________________________
Bonner County Deputy Clerk
 
The Bonner County Commissioners hereby place their seal this 10 th day of
November 2025 as required by I.C. § 31-715(3)
 
_______________________
Brain Domke, Chair
Bonner County Commissioners
 
 
TITLE 1
COUNTY OPERATIONS
CHAPTER 1
COUNTY OPERATIONS
SECTION:
1-100: Hours Of Operation
1-120: Smoking Areas Designated
1-130: Accessibility For Disabled Persons
1-100: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   The Bonner County Courthouse and county offices shall be open for the
transaction of public business between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on weekdays, excepting holidays. Upon approval of
the board, any department may establish differing hours; provided, that the
business hours for such department be posted on the door.
   B.   Notwithstanding the above provision, the board may order or authorize
the closure of the courthouse or any county office to accommodate emergency or
other unusual situations. Should the emergency relocation of any county office
become necessary, public notification of such relocation shall occur consistent
with the provisions of title 4 of this code. (Ord. 277, 3-29-1995)
1-120: SMOKING AREAS DESIGNATED:
   A.   The practice of smoking or use of tobacco products, including
cigarettes, cigars, e-cigarettes, vapor devices and pipes is hereby prohibited
within Bonner County public administration buildings. (Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
   B.   Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as set
forth in Idaho Code sections 18-5906 and 39-5507. (Ord. 277, 3-29-1995)
1-130: ACCESSIBILITY FOR DISABLED PERSONS:
   A.   The board of county commissioners adopts a policy of nondiscrimination
on the basis of disability.
   B.   It is the policy of the county that with reasonable accommodation, all
programs and activities shall be accessible to, and usable by, qualified
persons with disabilities. (Ord. 208, 7-26-1991; amd. Ord. 277, 3-29-1995)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-200: Purpose
1-201: Conduct Of Meetings
1-202: Regular Meetings
1-203: Special Meetings (Rep. by Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-204: Emergency Meetings (Rep. by Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-205: Meeting Place
1-206: Office Hours
1-200: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of establishing a regular meeting
schedule for the Bonner County board of commissioners in order that board
activities can be carried out with greater public participation and awareness.
(Ord. 192, 4-9-1990)
   A.   Regular Meeting: The purpose of the regular business meeting is for the
board of county commissioners to conduct the business of Bonner County
publicly. Regular business meetings do not constitute public hearings wherein
the public has the right to be heard on every agendized item. However, at the
discretion of the chair, everyone may be afforded an opportunity to speak on a
particular issue, if recognized by the chair. Any unrecognized comments or
disruptive behavior will be grounds for removal from the board meeting by the
chair and may subject the person being removed to criminal prosecution
according to law.
   B.   Public Comment Segment: The purpose for the public comment segment of
the board of county commissioners business meeting is to enable citizens with
issues or concerns which they wish to bring to the board's attention and afford
an opportunity for consideration on a future agenda for possible board action.
The board will not engage in dialogue with the presenter during this session,
but rather may choose to schedule the presenter's topic for board consideration
at a future business meeting. Questions may be directed to individual board
members for the purpose of clarifying issues or to obtain additional
information for the purpose of scheduling the matter for a future business
meeting. However, no action will be taken on any issue or concern brought to
the board's attention during this session. The chair will not entertain under
any circumstance comments derogatory in nature toward any board member, staff
member, elected official or member of the public. (Ord. 408, 5-31-2001)
   C.   Procedure For Calendaring Item For Consideration By The Board: The
procedure for calendaring shall be determined annually and set forth in the
annual regular meeting notice. Further, the procedure shall be posted at the
board of county commissioners' office. (Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-201: CONDUCT OF MEETINGS:
   A.   The chair shall call the meeting to order, stating the time, date and
place of the meeting, and stating the county commissioners present and absent.
   B.   The chair shall read the next item to be addressed from the noticed
agenda.
   C.   The chair, or another member of the board, may explain the agendized
item and may present documents, or the chair may call on staff, other personnel
or a member of the public to present the information.
   D.   The board may deliberate on the agendized item, and in doing so may ask
questions of anyone present.
   E.   Upon concluding deliberations, the chair shall call for a motion on the
agendized item.
   F.   Upon entertaining a motion, the chair shall note the motion made and
shall call for a second to said motion. If the motion receives a second from
the other board member, or the chair upon vacating the chair, the chair may
ascertain if there are members of the public who wish to speak to the issue and
the chair may recognize one member of the public at a time. In the event that
any motion does not receive a second, the chair shall declare the motion "dead"
and, absent another motion, the chair shall continue to the next agenda item.
   G.   After having been recognized by the chair, each member of the public
shall state for the record their name and place of residence prior to making
their statement. Questions or comments made by the recognized member of the
public shall be directed to the chair. Statements shall be relevant to the
issue being considered. The chair shall not entertain irrelevant statements,
and shall not entertain statements that are inflammatory, personally attacking
or derogatory toward any board member, staff member, elected official or member
of the public. Members of the public may be permitted to speak for three (3)
minutes and will not be afforded another opportunity until all members of the
public have had an opportunity to speak. A three (3) minute rebuttal or offer
of further testimony may then be permitted at the discretion of the chair.
   H.   After all persons recognized by the chair on the item being considered
have had an opportunity to speak, the chair shall ask if there is any
additional deliberation or questions from the board. The chair, having
entertained such additional comment, if any, shall call for a vote at the
conclusion of the deliberation. (Ord. 408, 5-31-2001)
   I.   Upon calling for and receiving the vote, the chair shall declare the
motion either "passed", "failed" or "continued date and time certain". (Ord.
545, 4-14-2015)
   J.   Upon concluding the meeting, having addressed all agendized items, the
chair shall adjourn the meeting. (Ord. 408, 5-31-2001)
1-202: REGULAR MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular business meetings of the board shall be held weekly on Tuesday,
commencing at nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until the conclusion of business or
until continued to a later time and date by a majority vote of the board,
excepting when such days occur on regular holidays. This weekly meeting is
designated for general external business of the board, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Consideration of claims;
      2.   Consideration and approval of minute records;
      3.   Consideration and approval of proposed ordinances;
      4.   Review of license applications;
      5.   Adoption of necessary resolutions;
      6.   Conduct public hearings;
      7.   Conduct such other business as it may schedule;
      8.   Conduct such business as may be required by Idaho Code.
   B.   The agenda for regular meetings shall be posted at least forty eight
(48) hours in advance on the board of county commissioners' bulletin board, the
county courthouse door, and one other conspicuous location in accordance with
the requirements of 31-710(4) and 67-2343, Idaho Code. Such notice and agenda
shall be in accordance with the requirements of 67-2345, Idaho Code. (Ord. 531,
2-26-2013)
   C.   All other meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Idaho Code.
(Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-203: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-204: EMERGENCY MEETINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-205: MEETING PLACE:
All meetings shall take place at the Bonner County Administration Building,
1500 Highway 2, suite 308, Sandpoint, Idaho, unless notice is otherwise
provided. (Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
1-206: OFFICE HOURS:
The office of the board of county commissioners shall be open for the conduct
of business from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until five o'clock (5:00) P.M.,
excepting holidays. (Ord. 545, 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC CORPORATION
SECTION:
1-300: Definitions
1-301: Created
1-302: Title
1-303: Authority
1-304: Charter
1-305: Board Of Directors
1-306: Financial Interest
1-307: Powers
1-308: Indemnification
1-309: Earnings
1-300: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ACT: Chapter 27, title 50, Idaho Code.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS: The board of directors of the public corporation.
CORPORATION: The Industrial Development Corporation of Bonner County, Idaho.
COUNTY: The county of Bonner, Idaho.
FACILITIES: Land, rights in land, buildings, structures, docks, wharves,
machinery, transmission equipment, landscaping, utilities, approaches, roadways
and parking, handling and storage areas, and similar ancillary facilities.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT FACILITY OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES:
Manufacturing, processing, production, assembly, warehousing, solid waste
disposal, recreation and energy facilities, excluding facilities to transmit,
distribute or produce electrical energy. Recreation facilities shall be limited
to ski areas, and funds raised pursuant to the act shall be limited in
application to the acquisition and preparation of land, acquisition and
construction of ski lifts, lighting of ski slopes, construction of access and
interior roadways, parking lots, maintenance facilities and maintenance
equipment, administrative facilities, and utilities. (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-301: CREATED:
The county of Bonner does hereby create a public corporation to carry out the
purposes of chapter 27, title 50, Idaho Code (the "act"), as that law may from
time to time hereinafter be amended. (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-302: TITLE:
The name of the public corporation shall be the "Industrial Development
Corporation Of Bonner County, Idaho" (the "corporation"). (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-303: AUTHORITY:
The corporation shall have all the powers and be subject to all of the
limitations and provisions contained in the act, as that law may hereinafter
from time to time be amended. (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-304: CHARTER:
A charter shall be issued to the corporation by this board of commissioners,
which shall grant to the corporation authority to act pursuant to the act. A
copy of the initial charter to be issued is attached to the ordinance codified
herein marked exhibit A. Said charter may be amended from time to time by the
county board of commissioners and shall contain the limitations set forth in
the act. (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-305: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
   A.   The board of directors of the corporation shall be composed of the
members of the board of county commissioners of Bonner County, as constituted
from time to time. A majority of the members of the board of directors shall
constitute a quorum.
   B.   The affairs of the corporation shall be conducted and carried out by
the board of directors. The board shall elect among its own members, its
president, a vice president, a treasurer and a secretary, one of whom shall be
eligible to hold two (2) offices. The board of directors shall adopt bylaws
(rules and regulations) governing the conduct of the corporation.
   C.   Members of the board of directors shall serve with such compensation as
may be provided in the bylaws to be adopted by the board of directors. (Ord.
165, 11-4-1985)
1-306: FINANCIAL INTEREST:
No director, officer, agent or employee of the corporation shall have directly
or indirectly any financial interest in any property to be included in or any
contract for property, service or materials to be furnished or used in
connection with any industrial development facilities financed through the
corporation. (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-307: POWERS:
The corporation shall have all the powers granted by, as well as limited by,
the act and shall include the following:
   A.   To construct and maintain one or more industrial development
facilities;
   B.   To lease to a lessee all or any part of any industrial development
facility for such rentals and upon such terms and conditions, including options
to purchase, as its board of directors considers advisable and not in conflict
with the act;
   C.   To sell by installment contract or otherwise and convey all or any part
of any industrial development facility for such purchase price and upon such
terms and conditions as its board of directors considers advisable, which are
not in conflict with the act;
   D.   To make loans for the purpose of providing temporary or permanent
financing or refinancing of all or part of the project cost of any industrial
development facility, including the refunding of any outstanding obligations,
mortgages, or advances issued, made, or given by any person for the project
costs; and to charge and collect interest on the loans for the loan payments
upon such terms and conditions as its board of directors considers advisable
which are not in conflict with the act;
   E.   To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of financing all or part of the
project cost of any industrial development facility and to secure the payment
of the revenue bonds as provided in the act;
   F.   As security for the payment of the principal of and interest on any
revenue bonds issued and any agreements made in connection therewith, to
mortgage, pledge, or otherwise encumber any or all of its industrial
development facilities or any part or parts thereof, whether then owned or
thereafter acquired, and to assign any lease or mortgage and repledge any
security conveyed to the corporation, to secure any loan made by the
corporation and to pledge the revenues and receipts therefrom;
   G.   To sue and be sued, complain, and defend in its corporate name;
   H.   To make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or
convenient for the carrying out of its business;
   I.   To have a corporate seal and to use the same by causing it, or a
facsimile thereof, to be impressed or affixed or in any other manner
reproduced;
   J.   Subject to the limitations of section 50-2706, Idaho Code, to borrow
money, accept grants from, or contract with any local, state, or federal
governmental agency or with any financial public, or private corporation;
   K.   To make and alter bylaws not inconsistent with its charter for the
administration and regulation of the affairs of the corporation;
   L.   To collect fees or charges from users or prospective users of
industrial development facilities to recover actual or anticipated
administrative costs;
   M.   To execute financing documents incidental to the powers enumerated in
this section;
   N.   The corporation created under this chapter may not operate any
industrial development facilities as a business other than as lessor, seller,
or lender. The purchase and holding of mortgages, deeds of trust, or other
security interests and contracting for any servicing thereof is not considered
the operation of an industrial development facility;
   O.   The corporation created by this chapter may not exercise any of the
powers authorized in this section or issue any revenue bonds with respect to
any industrial development facility unless the industrial development facility
is located wholly within the boundaries of the county;
   P.   The county of Bonner may not give or lend any money or property nor
exercise its power of eminent domain in aid of the corporation. This provision
shall not preclude the county from dealing with the corporation on an arm's
length basis;
   Q.   The corporation may not issue revenue obligations except upon approval
of Bonner County, and upon approval of the city within whose planning
jurisdiction the proposed industrial development facility lies. (Ord. 165, 11-
4-1985)
1-308: INDEMNIFICATION:
Every person who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party to, or
is involved in any action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or a person of
whom he is the legal representative is or was a director or officer of the
corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the corporation as a
director or officer of another corporation, or as its representative in a
partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, shall be indemnified and
held harmless to the fullest extent legally permissible under the law of the
state of Idaho from time to time against all expenses, liability and loss
(including attorney fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid or to be paid in
settlement), reasonably incurred or suffered by him in connection therewith.
Such rights of indemnification shall be a contract right which may be enforced
in any manner desired by such person. Such right of indemnification shall not
be exclusive of any other right which such directors, officers, or
representatives may have or hereafter acquire, and without limiting the
generality of such statement, they shall be entitled to their respective rights
of indemnification under any bylaw, agreement, vote of stockholders, provision
of law, or otherwise, as well as their rights under this section. The board of
directors may adopt bylaws from time to time with respect to indemnification to
provide at all times the fullest indemnification permitted by the laws of the
state of Idaho, and may cause the corporation to purchase and maintain
insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a director or officer of the
corporation as a director or officer of another corporation, or as its
representative in a partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise,
against any liability asserted against such person and incurred in any such
capacity or arising out of such status, whether or not the corporation would
have the power to indemnify such person. (Ord. 165, 11-4-1985)
1-309: EARNINGS:
Any net earnings of the corporation, beyond those necessary for retirement of
indebtedness incurred by it, shall inure to the county of Bonner, and not for
the benefit of any other person. Alteration of the charter of or dissolution of
or audits of the corporation shall be as provided by the act and by subsequent
ordinances of the county. Upon dissolution of the corporation, title to all
property owned by the corporation shall vest in the county of Bonner. (Ord.
165, 11-4-1985)
TITLE 2
COUNTY ROADS AND RIGHTS OF WAY
CHAPTER 1
RESERVED
CHAPTER 2
OFFICIAL COUNTY HIGHWAY SYSTEM AND MAPS
SECTION:
2-201: Adoption Of County Highway System
2-201: ADOPTION OF COUNTY HIGHWAY SYSTEM:
   A.   The board of county commissioners does hereby adopt official maps which
shall display, designate and establish the Bonner County highway system
pursuant to the provisions set forth at Idaho Code section 40-202. Said maps
shall be maintained in the possession of the Bonner County commissioners and
shall be identified by the certification: (Ord. 284, 6-7-1995; amd. Ord. 329,
1-22-1997)
Official Highway System of Bonner County, Idaho
Adopted pursuant to the provisions of 40-202, Idaho Code.
All roads depicted on this map are a apart of the Bonner County Highway System
except those located within the incorporated limits of municipalities and those
which are U.S. highways or a part of the State highway system.
                                                             
Chairman, Board of County Commissioners
                                                             
   Date
   B.   The Bonner County highway system shall also include those rights of
way, not appearing on the official highway system map, but which have been
deeded, dedicated or conveyed to Bonner County, Idaho, as disclosed by
instruments recorded in the office of the Bonner County Clerk.
   C.   The Bonner County highway system shall also include those roads which
exist within easements by prescription and easements by proscription
established pursuant to the provisions for the establishment of such easements
set forth at Idaho Code title 40, whether or not such easements appear on the
official highway system map. (Ord. 284, 6-7-1995)
CHAPTER 3
FROST LAW, WEIGHT AND HAULING LIMITS
SECTION:
2-300: Purpose
2-301: Imposition Of Speed, Weight And Hauling Limits By Commissioners
2-302: Imposition Of Limits By Commissioners, Or Any Commissioner In Emergency
2-310: Notice Of Imposition Of Speed, Weight And Hauling Limits By Public Works
Director
2-311: Weight
2-312: Speed Restrictions
2-315: Exceptions To Weight Limits
2-350: Inspections, Violations, Penalty
2-300: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established for the safety, prosperity, good order, convenience
and protection of property for Bonner County and its inhabitants. (Ord. 236, 1-
29-1994)
2-301: IMPOSITION OF SPEED, WEIGHT AND HAULING LIMITS BY COMMISSIONERS:
   A.   From time to time impending danger to the roads of Bonner County due to
unusual and extreme weather conditions, requires the immediate operation and
effectiveness of this chapter.
   B.   Whenever in the judgment of the Bonner County board of commissioners
the operation of vehicles, upon roads over which Bonner County has
jurisdiction, will cause damage to the road in question by reason of the
climatic weather, or the condition affecting the safe or efficient use of the
road, then the board of county commissioners shall have the authority to make
regulations reducing the otherwise permissible size, weight or speed of
vehicles operated on said roads for such periods as may be necessary for
protection of the road or for public safety. The limitations shall be imposed
depending upon the moisture, temperature, heaves and severity of frost or other
conditions of the road. (Ord. 236, 1-29-1994)
2-302: IMPOSITION OF LIMITS BY COMMISSIONERS, OR ANY COMMISSIONER IN EMERGENCY:
   A.   The provisions and restrictions contained in this chapter shall have
immediate force and effect upon the motion and resolution of the board of
county commissioners at any regular or special meeting.
   B.   Any member of the board of county commissioners is hereby empowered to
impose the restrictions contained in this chapter when, in his professional
judgment, road or weather conditions are such that immediate damage to county
roads or danger to the traveling public will occur if such restrictions are not
imposed. Such imposition of the restrictions in this chapter by any individual
county commissioner shall be for a period not in excess of thirty (30) calendar
days, or until the next regular meeting of the board of county commissioners,
whichever is shorter. (Ord. 236, 1-29-1994; amd. Ord. 329, 1-22-1997)
2-310: NOTICE OF IMPOSITION OF SPEED, WEIGHT AND HAULING LIMITS BY PUBLIC WORKS
DIRECTOR:
   A.   When imposing the limits and restrictions of this chapter, the public
works director shall cause signs to be erected on each affected road, so as to
reasonably give notice to the road user. Signs shall designate the limitations
of weight and speed of the vehicles subject to the restrictions.
   B.   Reasonable effort shall be made to ensure that signs are posted with
red indicators when the restrictions imposed by this chapter are in force, and
that signs are posted with green indicators when the restrictions imposed by
this chapter are not in force. However, if neither color indicator is in place,
the restrictions imposed by this chapter shall be in force.
   C.   When possible, prior to implementing the restrictions imposed by this
chapter for the first time each year, the signs will be posted with green
indicators. This posting shall serve as notice that weight limits are imminent
and any equipment that needs to be hauled or other hauling must be accomplished
immediately. When the signs are posted with red indicators, the restrictions
imposed by this chapter shall be in full effect. (Ord. 422, 3-12-2002)
2-311: WEIGHT:
Unless otherwise ordered, vehicles using county roads when this chapter is in
effect shall be limited to two hundred fifty (250) pounds per inch, or ninety
eight (98) pounds per centimeter per tire width times the number of tires. The
tire width shall be determined by the manufacturer's description marked on the
sidewall of the tires. (Ord. 368, 1-22-1999)
2-312: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
The maximum allowable speed for all trucks with a gross vehicle weight of
sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or greater traveling upon county controlled
roads shall be thirty (30) miles per hour when the restrictions of this chapter
are in force. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a misdemeanor
not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 422, 3-12-
2002)
2-315: EXCEPTIONS TO WEIGHT LIMITS:
   A.   The vehicle weight restrictions of this chapter shall not apply to
emergency vehicles and buses operating upon the county roads.
   B.   Providers of heating fuel, septic pumping service, milk trucks, hay or
feed providers and garbage trucks shall be allowed to apply for a permit that
will allow the provider to haul half loads (defined as 1/2 the gross vehicle
weight rating GVWR, as defined in Idaho Code title 49-108 (3)) while the
restrictions imposed by this chapter are in place (except as provided for in
subsection E of this section). Permits may be issued after the requested
information on each truck is provided to the Bonner County public works
department. Each vehicle must be permitted separately, and each vehicle must
have a valid permit on board during vehicle operations on county controlled
roads.
   C.   In the event of power outages, or other damaged utilities, those
utilities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for the sole
purpose of repairing damage. This shall in no way exempt utilities for the
purpose of providing new services, hookups or routine maintenance.
   D.   In the event of catastrophic emergency, such as landslide endangering a
household, potable water well failure, tree on house, etc., the public works
director may issue permission for remedial action to take place on a case by
case basis. Emergency permits shall not be granted based on an activity
involving new construction, logging operations, deliveries to businesses
(except as provided for in subsection B of this section), contractual deadlines
or other circumstances where prior planning or scheduling could have avoided
the situation.
   E.   If, at the discretion of the public works director, any roadway becomes
adversely affected due to spring break up or any other reason, the director may
close the road to all hauling, including those vehicles excepted by this
section. Under no circumstances shall emergency vehicles be restricted from any
roadway.
   F.   In an effort to treat all haulers equally, no single trip permits will
be issued (except as provided for in subsection D of this section). Roads will
either be available for use to all haulers, or to none. If equipment must be
moved, it will be the responsibility of the owner to ensure he provides a
trailer with enough axles to legally move the equipment.
   G.   During times of extreme cold weather, some roads may be opened for
early morning hauling, at the direction of the public works director. It shall
be the responsibility of the hauler to contact the public works department to
determine whether or not these modified restrictions are in place. (Ord. 422,
3-12-2002)
2-350: INSPECTIONS, VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
   A.   The operator of a vehicle using roads referred to herein shall submit
his vehicle to a peace officer, immediately upon request, for the purpose of
inspection or weighing the vehicle for the purpose of enforcing compliance with
this chapter. Failure to submit the vehicle as aforementioned shall further be
in violation of this chapter and is punishable as set forth.
   B.   Any person found to have violated any provision established by this
chapter by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth at Idaho Code section 49-1013. (Ord. 236,
1-29-1994)
CHAPTER 4
REGULATIONS FOR USES OF COUNTY ROADS AND RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
2-401: Prohibitions On Parking
2-420: Vehicles Not To Be Parked During Snow Removal Operations
2-430: Removal Of Vehicles Impeding Traffic Or Impeding Snow Removal
2-440: Bonner County Dust Abatement Policy
2-480: Evidence
2-490: Penalties
2-401: PROHIBITIONS ON PARKING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave parked, a vehicle
upon any county street, road or highway within Bonner County in such manner as
to impede the free flow of vehicle traffic or where official signs prohibit
parking.
   B.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic in
compliance with applicable traffic laws, the directions of a peace officer, or
any traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a motor
vehicle, whether occupied or not, at any place where a posted parking
regulation or official sign prohibits parking.
   C.   No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on property owned
by the county or under the regulatory control of the county or any highway
district located therein, in violation of any posted parking regulation.
   D.   Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in subsections B and C of
this section, a person may temporarily stop, stand or park a motor vehicle for
the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers while actually
engaged in such activity.
   E.   No person shall tear down, deface or otherwise alter any traffic
control device containing a posted parking regulation without previous
authorization from an appropriate local authority.
   F.   The sheriff and/or a city or fire district chief, with concurrence of
the Bonner County road and bridge director or independent highway district
within their maintenance jurisdiction, may request official "No Parking" signs
to be installed on county roads in areas with limited or restricted access to
protect public safety vehicle access. Requesting agencies must furnish such
signs to be installed by the county road and bridge department or independent
highway district within their maintenance jurisdiction. In the event the agency
and road and bridge director are unable to agree on the placement of the signs,
the matter will be determined by the board of county commissioners. (Ord. 542,
12-23-2014)
2-420: VEHICLES NOT TO BE PARKED DURING SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave parked, a vehicle upon
any county street, road or highway within Bonner County in such manner as to
impede county snow removal, crews and their equipment in their operation. (Ord.
112, 1-1-1976)
2-430: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IMPEDING TRAFFIC OR IMPEDING SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Whenever a peace officer finds a vehicle which is parked in violation
of section
2-401 or
2-420 of this chapter, he is authorized to remove and tow away said vehicle, or
cause the same to be removed and towed away by any county road crew or
commercial towing service.
   B.   Vehicles towed away for illegal parking pursuant to subsection A of
this section shall be placed in a storage garage or compound, and shall be
restored to the owner upon satisfactory proof of such ownership to the sheriff
and the storage operator, and upon payment of the towing and storage charges.
   C.   The impounding of a vehicle under this section shall not prevent or
preclude the institution of criminal proceedings charging the violator with any
violation of law on account of which the vehicle was impounded. (Ord. 112, 1-1-
1976)
2-440: BONNER COUNTY DUST ABATEMENT POLICY:
   A.   Requirements: Prior to contractor being allowed to apply dust
suppressant in Bonner County:
      1.   A Bonner County dust abatement contractor's permit is required each
year by anyone applying a dust suppressant on Bonner County roads. It is
unlawful for any dust suppressant to be applied on county roads without a
permit.
      2.   Permit bond requirement: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
      3.   Liability insurance: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
naming Bonner County as additional insured.
      4.   Materials certification: Submit current (not more than 30 days old)
certified test report and current MSDS (material safety data sheet) for
products proposed for dust abatement on county roads. (Products must meet the
requirements below.)
      5.   Current Idaho public works license.
      6.   Addresses of storage tanks owned by contractor.
      7.   Contractor must provide a legal, physical address for their office
or home for notification purposes.
      8.   Contractor must submit a copy of their claim process prior to
issuance of permit. (This process must be acceptable to the public works
director.)
   B.   Application Process: Process for applying dust suppressant on Bonner
County roads:
      1.   Each applicator shall contact and gain the approval of the Bonner
County public works department prior to applying any dust suppressant material
to public roadways.
      2.   Application for road grading shall be made by facsimile or e-mail
request from an approved contractor. Contractor shall provide the name,
physical address and telephone number of applicant, as well as dust suppressant
that will be used and application rate.
      3.   Contractor will be given a notice to proceed by facsimile or e-mail
when the road is ready for suppressant.
      4.   Contractor shall complete the application of dust suppressant within
one week of the notice to proceed, or sooner if the public works personnel
advise that the road should be treated within a shorter time period. Failure to
complete the treatment within the time specified may result in the county
regrading the area where the dust suppressant is applied. In this case, the
contractor will be obliged to reapply the suppressant at his/her expense, after
a new notice to proceed is issued. Under these circumstances, this location
will not be made a priority as crews will be grading other roads.
      5.   It shall be a violation of this section for any dust suppressant to
be applied, or to migrate, to a ditch or other drainage facility.
      6.   Asphalt emulsions shall be placed one lane at a time. The opposing
lane can be treated once the emulsion has "cured" to the extent that it does
not pick up on vehicles traveling ten (10) miles per hour or slower. The
contractor shall be responsible for any and all claims resulting from vehicle
damage due to not following this procedure.
      7.   The Bonner County public works department will issue permits for all
non-water soluble products used as dust suppressants if such application is
approved. The Bonner County public works department employees will fill out
these permits and a facsimile copy will be sent to the applicator. These
permits can be generated by phone without necessitating an office visit by the
resident. The application of these products without a permit is prohibited. If
these materials are applied to a county maintained roadway without a permit,
the roadway will be graded as soon as practicable.
      8.   No dust suppressant material shall be applied prior to final spring
grading and approval of the public works department. If this occurs, the public
works department will grade the section of road that was treated during normal
spring grading. It will be the homeowner's/applicator's responsibility to
reapply dust suppressant if grading damages the dust suppressant.
      9.   Bonner County assumes no liability or responsibility for damages due
to the application of dust suppressants.
      10.   Parties who contract for the application of asphalt emulsions or
lignosulfonates shall be responsible for the maintenance of the roadway that
has been treated. Potholes must be filled regularly, or within five (5) days of
a request from the public works department. If the potholes are not filled, the
roadway will be graded.
      11.   "Fresh Oil" or other appropriate signs that state the contractor's
name and phone number shall be required at each end of dust suppressant
application.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   Contractor shall provide a current certified test report of the
product proposed for use on county roads. Petroleum products, other than county
approved emulsified asphalt products, are no longer allowed on Bonner County
roads. Only products specifically labeled as "dust palliative", by the
manufacturer, will be approved for use in Bonner County. The manufacturer or
supplier must submit a letter to the county stating that the product is labeled
as a dust palliative and must also include instructions, recommendations and/or
guidelines for the application of such product as a dust suppressant. The
contractor must provide a current MSDS report on the material. Copies of the
MSDS shall be carried on the applicator truck and made available for inspection
by county personnel upon request.
      2.   The county will sporadically take samples of the dust suppressant
products. The contractor and operators shall cooperate with county personnel in
obtaining the samples from the distributing trucks. An MSDS must be provided at
the time the sample is obtained. If a truck is said to be empty, a county
employee must still be allowed to attempt to obtain a sample.
      3.   If a certified test report shows a significant variation from the
approved dust suppressant as determined by the public works director, the
contractor will no longer be allowed to apply dust suppressant in Bonner County
until quality control procedures are approved by Bonner County.
      4.   When the contractor changes products, a new certified test report
will be required. Failure to provide current information on a dust suppressant
shall result in the termination of contractor's permit.
   D.   Restrictions:
      1.   Petroleum based dust suppressant products, other than approved
asphalt emulsions, are no longer approved for use as a dust suppressant on
Bonner County roads. "Road oils" are no longer allowed in Bonner County.
      2.   Emulsified asphalt products will not be allowed near streams or in
watersheds where the product could migrate into lakes, streams, wetlands or
other water sources.
      3.   Calcium chloride, magnesium chloride or lignosulfonates may be used
in watershed areas. However, care must be taken in all cases and with all
products to ensure that no product is applied to groundwater or other water
sources, or to any area that is close enough to a water source that would allow
even the slightest migration to enter that water source.
      4.   If any product is misapplied within a watershed area, it will be the
contractor's responsibility to remove the product in the manner approved by the
Idaho department of environmental quality (IDEQ) at his/her own expense. If
IDEQ has to respond to a "spill", the contractor assumes full legal and
financial responsibility for the removal process and any fines related to the
misapplication.
   E.   Remediation: Where unauthorized dust suppressants are used, or where
dust suppressant is applied too heavily on hard surface, it may be necessary
for the county to take immediate corrective measures. If such measures are
deemed necessary by the public works director, the contractor shall pay for all
labor and materials involved in the remediation. The contractor shall not be
allowed to apply any dust suppressant within Bonner County until the bill is
paid in full.
   F.   Penalties:
      1.   There shall be a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty per incident
for any applicator violating any provision of this policy, in addition to any
expenses incurred in any corrective measures taken.
      2.   If a contractor violates any provision of this policy, the
contractor's permit shall be revoked until penalty and damages are paid.
      3.   A permit may be denied to any contractor who repeatedly or blatantly
violates the provisions of this policy.
   G.   Permit:
      1.   By his/her signature on the permit, the contractor agrees to follow
each provision of this policy.
      2.   The permit may be canceled at any time the public works director
determines any contractor has violated the provisions herein. (Ord. 409, 6-9-
2001)
2-480: EVIDENCE:
   A.   Registered Owners:
      1.   In any prosecution against the registered owner of a motor vehicle
charging a violation of any regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle under this chapter or other regulation of a local authority, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such provision or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named
in the complaint, was, at the time of parking, the registered owner of the
vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the
vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and
for the time during which, the violation occurred.
      2.   The presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the
person who parked or placed the vehicle at the time and place where the
violation occurred may be rebutted with evidence that the registered owner of
the vehicle was not the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the time and
place where the violation occurred. Such evidence may include, but shall not be
limited to, a written lease or rental agreement for a particular vehicle
described in the complaint on the date and time of the violation, which lease
or rental agreement includes the name and address of the person to whom the
vehicle is leased or rented.
      3.   In the event that there is more than one registered owner of a
vehicle cited for a violation of this chapter, the first named person on the
registration shall be the person subject to prosecution for such violation.
This person shall be subject to the presumption set forth in subsection A1 of
this section, which may be rebutted as set forth in subsection A2 of this
section.
      4.   For purposes of this subsection, proof that a person is the
registered owner of a vehicle is not prima facie evidence that the registered
owner has violated any other provision of law.
   B.   Lessees And Renters:
      1.   In any prosecution against the lessee or renter of a motor vehicle
charging a violation of any regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle under this chapter or other parking regulation of a local authority,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in
violation of any provision of this chapter or regulation, together with proof
that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of parking, the
lessee or renter of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
lessee or renter of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle
at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
      2.   The presumption that the lessee or renter of the vehicle was the
person who parked or placed the vehicle at the time and place where the
violation occurred may be rebutted with evidence that the lessee or renter of
the vehicle was not the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the time and
place where the violation occurred.
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, proof that a person is the lessee
or renter of a vehicle is not prima facie evidence that the lessee or renter
has violated any other provision of this law. (Ord. 542, 12-23-2014)
2-490: PENALTIES:
Any person found in violation of section
2-401 or
2-420 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fixed
penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 561, 3-7-2017)
CHAPTER 5
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
2-501: Title
2-502: Purpose
2-503: Definitions
2-504: General Applicability And Prohibitions
2-505: Establishment Of Fees
2-506: Payment And Collection Of Fees
2-507: Use Of User Fee Revenues
2-508: Operator Qualifications
2-509: Equipment
2-510: Regulations For Operation
2-511: Designated Roadways
2-512: Penalties
2-501: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BONNER COUNTY SNOWMOBILE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
380, 10-21-1999)
2-502: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide for the regulation of the
operation of snowmobiles on trails and roadways designated and maintained by
Bonner County, and to provide for the collection of a voluntary user fee from
those who use and benefit from said trails, in order to partially cover the
cost of maintenance efforts. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-503: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions listed in this section shall apply throughout this chapter:
GROOMED TRAIL: A snowmobile trail that is maintained upon public or private
property located within Bonner County and maintained by funds collected by a
"trail maintenance fee".
OPERATOR: Each person who operates and is in physical control of the
snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE: Every self-propelled device upon any combination of skis, skids,
tracks or endless belts, in and upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon snow or snow covered surface areas, and
expressly includes devices known as "snowmobiles" or "ski-mobiles".
TRAIL MAINTENANCE FEE: The annual voluntary user fee charged by Bonner County
for the ability of an operator to operate a snowmobile upon a maintained trail.
TRAIL MAINTENANCE STICKER: A payment receipt issued by Bonner County that may
be affixed to the snowmobile as a convenient way for the operator to
demonstrate that the operator has paid the voluntary maintenance fee.
WINTER SEASON: That period of time from November 1 to April 15. (Ord. 380, 10-
21-1999)
2-504: GENERAL APPLICABILITY AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   From the effective date as required by law, all operators of
"snowmobiles", as defined in section
2-503 of this chapter, upon maintained trails within the boundaries of Bonner
County, may display voluntary proof that the operator has paid the annual
voluntary trail maintenance fee for use of said trail or trails.
   B.   The operation of any vehicle other than a "snowmobile", as defined in
section
2-503 of this chapter, upon a maintained trail, with the exception of duly
authorized emergency vehicles, is expressly prohibited, regardless of the
payment of use fee by the operator. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-505: ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES:
The Bonner County board of commissioners is hereby authorized to adopt a
voluntary maintenance program to effect the purposes of this chapter. Said
voluntary fees shall be set forth in a resolution of the board. (Ord. 380, 10-
21-1999)
2-506: PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF FEES:
   A.   The voluntary user fees provided for in this chapter shall be collected
by the snowmobile advisory committee east/west at such locations as the
committee from time to time authorizes and directs.
   B.   Upon payment of the voluntary annual fee, the payer shall be issued a
written receipt that identifies the operator being credited with payment by
name and address. The receipt shall be considered to be issued to the named
operator as an individual. The snowmobile advisory committee east/west shall
also provide the payer with a suitable decal sticker that the payer may display
on a snowmobile as evidence that the operator thereof has paid the annual
voluntary fee. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-507: USE OF USER FEE REVENUES:
The annual revenues derived from the payment of said voluntary user fees shall
be used and distributed as follows:
One hundred percent (100%) shall be placed in the county snowmobile fund to be
used only for the county snowmobile groomer operation, including equipment,
maintenance on any groomed trails, posting signs, supplies, fuel and wages for
operation of the equipment. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-508: OPERATOR QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon Bonner County roadways and trails
unless designated herein. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-509: EQUIPMENT:
No snowmobile shall be operated on the roadways of Bonner County, as designated
herein, unless it is equipped with the following:
   A.   At least one and not more than two (2) headlights sufficient to render
clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of two hundred fifty
feet (250') ahead.
   B.   At least one tail lamp and brake lamp which, when lighted, shall emit a
red light plainly visible to the rear at a distance of two hundred fifty feet
(250').
   C.   At least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot. (Ord. 380,
10-21-1999)
2-510: REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile at a speed in excess of
twenty (20) miles per hour on the county roadways as designated herein;
   B.   No sled, toboggan, inner tube, or any other similar equipment or
device, shall be towed by a snowmobile upon the roadways of Bonner County, as
designated herein, unless the item being towed is a disabled snowmobile or a
trailer manufactured for towing behind a snowmobile;
   C.   No person on skis, snowboards or similar devices shall be towed behind
a snowmobile on the roadways of Bonner County, as designated herein;
   D.   All snowmobile drivers utilizing the roadways of Bonner County, as
designated herein, shall abide by the same traffic rules required of motorized
vehicle operators in the state of Idaho and shall comply with the speed limits
designated in subsection A of this section;
   E.   All snowmobiles operated on the roadways of Bonner County, as
designated herein, shall be operated only in a single file manner on the
extreme right hand side of the designated routes described herein and attached
hereto;
   F.   Operations of snowmobiles on the roadways of Bonner County, as
designated herein, shall be limited to ingress and egress to snowmobile trails
and said roadways are not to be used as a place of recreation for snowmobiles.
(Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-511: DESIGNATED ROADWAYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon any roadway in Bonner County,
except those designated county roadways and trails for use upon which to
operate a snowmobile are identified herein. Said road designations may be
amended by resolution of the board. Bonner County roads authorized for use are
those portions of:
   A.   Caribou Creek Road;
   B.   Baldy Road;
   C.   Ruen Road;
   D.   Dry Creek Road;
   E.   Lightning Creek Road;
   F.   The bridge over the Priest River on Dickensheet Road;
   G.   Main Street in Coolin from its intersection with the Dickensheet Road
at Coolin Corners through Coolin to the eastern most public launching ramp on
Priest Lake in Coolin;
   H.   Johnson Creek Road;
   I.   Trestle Creek Road. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
2-512: PENALTIES:
Any violation of subsection
2-504B of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor with a fine of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or thirty (30) days in jail, or both. (Ord. 380, 10-21-1999)
CHAPTER 6
USE OF SNOWMOBILES ON COUNTY ROADS AND RIGHTS OF WAY
(Rep. by Ord. 375, 6-10-1999)
CHAPTER 7
NAMING OF ROADS AND ROAD SIGNS
SECTION:
2-701: Road Naming And Addressing
2-701: ROAD NAMING AND ADDRESSING:
Road names and addressing shall comply with title 13, Bonner County Revised
Code, Bonner County road naming and addressing system ordinance. (Ord. 496, 10-
23-2007)
CHAPTER 8
BONNER COUNTY ROAD SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
2-801: Purpose And Authority
2-803: Applicability; Disclaimers
2-804: Classification Of Existing County Roads; Adoption Of Road Classification
Map
2-805: Classification Of New County Roads
2-810: Adoption Of Road Standards Manuals; Compliance Required
2-811: Removal Of Encroachments; Restoration Of Road Right Of Way Authorized
2-820: Variances From Chapter Or Road Standards Manual
2-830: Penalties And Remedies
2-840: Issuance Of Stop Work Order; Unlawful Continuance
2-801: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide consistent standards for
construction of new roads and appurtenant structures built for dedication to
Bonner County, and all roads new or existing to be entered into the county
maintenance system and for those portions of approaches and driveways which
enter upon county roads, within rights of way owned by Bonner County or onto
county roads maintained by Bonner County but not within dedicated rights of
way, and for construction and maintenance of utilities within rights of way
owned by Bonner County or onto roads maintained by Bonner County but not within
dedicated rights of way. (Ord. 426, 6-28-2002)
   B.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to Bonner
County at Idaho Code title 40, and Idaho Code title 31, chapters 7 and 8. (Ord.
269, 1-17-1995)
2-803: APPLICABILITY; DISCLAIMERS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to:
      1.   The construction of all new roads and appurtenant structures
proposed and built for dedication to Bonner County, and all roads to be entered
into the county maintenance system;
      2.   The construction and maintenance of all utility facilities located
within rights of way owned by Bonner County, or within twenty five feet (25')
of centerline of roads maintained by Bonner County, but not within dedicated
rights of way;
      3.   The construction of all new approaches and driveways entering upon
county maintained roads or located within rights of way owned by Bonner County,
and existing approaches and driveways entering upon county maintained roads or
located within rights of way owned by Bonner County where property improvements
require Bonner County road and bridge department approval;
      4.   The erection or placement of all new road signs within rights of way
owned by Bonner County or within twenty five feet (25') of centerline of roads
maintained by Bonner County. (Ord. 426, 6-28-2002)
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require that Bonner
County undertake to reconstruct, widen or improve an existing county road
within the Bonner County highway system to the standards and specifications
contained in or adopted by this chapter.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require that those
portions of new or existing private roads, approaches or driveways outside of
rights of way owned by Bonner County, be constructed, reconstructed, widened or
improved to the standards and specifications contained in or adopted by this
chapter.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to obligate Bonner County to
accept the dedication of any road or right of way, regardless of the standards
and specifications used for the construction of such road. (Ord. 269, 1-17-
1995)
2-804: CLASSIFICATION OF EXISTING COUNTY ROADS; ADOPTION OF ROAD CLASSIFICATION
MAP:
   A.   There is hereby adopted a classification of all roads within the Bonner
County highway system into one of the following categories: arterial, collector
and local access road. This classification shall be shown on the Bonner County
road classification map, which is adopted hereby as if actually set forth. Said
map shall remain on deposit at the Bonner County courthouse, available for
public inspection during regular business hours. (Ord. 269, 1-17-1995; amd.
Ord. 329, 1-22-1997)
   B.   The Bonner County road classification map shall bear its official
title, and the dated signature of the chairman of the board of county
commissioners.
   C.   The Bonner County road classification map shall be updated as needed to
reflect the inclusion of any new road into the road classification or the
vacation or change of classification of any existing road. An updated map shall
be adopted by a simple majority vote signifying the approval of the map by the
board of county commissioners.
   D.   As may become necessary, any road shown upon the Bonner County road
classification map may be reclassified to another classification by the board
of county commissioners. Such reclassification shall be based upon the factual
evidence that the actual usage and nature of the road has altered.
Reclassification shall be accomplished by a resolution of the board. (Ord. 269,
1-17-1995)
2-805: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW COUNTY ROADS:
   A.   For the purpose of administration of the standards adopted by this
chapter, all new roads shall be classified as arterials, collectors or local
access roads. The classification of new roads shall be made initially by the
Bonner County commissioner in whose district the road is located and shall be
consistent with the following guidelines:
      1.   Arterials: Main transportation routes serving a system of collector
and local access roads, which connect to the state highway system or serve as
an important travel corridor.
      2.   Collectors: Secondary transportation routes serving a system of
local access roads, and connecting to other collectors or to arterials.
      3.   Local Access Roads: Transportation routes primarily providing access
to adjacent lands and connecting to collectors or arterials.
   B.   Upon completion, dedication, acceptance and opening, new roads shall be
shown according to their classification on the Bonner County road
classification map. (Ord. 269, 1-17-1995)
   C.   Should an applicant proposing a new road for dedication to Bonner
County be aggrieved by the determination of the individual commissioner in the
classification assigned to the new road, such applicant may appeal the
determination to the board of county commissioners. (Ord. 269, 1-17-1995; amd.
Ord. 329, 1-22-1997)
2-810: ADOPTION OF ROAD STANDARDS MANUALS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   The "Road Standards Manual" dated December 2005, version I, is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein as if set forth in full. All new construction
of roads built for dedication to Bonner County and construction within county
rights of way for which standards are set forth shall comply with the standards
contained within the manual. As a part of the decision to permit roads and
construction encroachments within the county rights of way, the public works
department may enter into development agreements with the encroachment
applicants that may require the completion of improvements to mitigate the
increase in traffic as a result of the project development or encroachment.
Alternately, the public works department may allow an applicant to participate
proportionately with other applicants and/or other public entities to construct
improvements that are not exclusively the responsibility of any single
applicant or entity. Development agreements shall be approved by the Bonner
County board of commissioners by resolution. (Ord. 472, 1-13-2006)
   B.   The "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", published by the
United States department of transportation, federal highway administration,
1988 edition, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if set forth in
full. The classes of applications which require conformity to the standards set
forth in said manual shall be as specified in the "Road Standards Manual,
Bonner County, Idaho". (Ord. 269, 1-17-1995)
   C.   Copies of the "Road Standards Manual, Bonner County, Idaho", and the
"Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" shall remain on deposit for public
inspection during regular business hours at the offices of the Bonner County
road department and of the Bonner County clerk. (Ord. 269, 1-17-1995; amd. Ord.
329, 1-22-1997)
   D.   Amendments to the "Road Standards Manual" shall hereafter be made by
resolution of the Bonner County board of commissioners. (Ord. 472, 1-13-2006)
2-811: REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS; RESTORATION OF ROAD RIGHT OF WAY AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Bonner County is hereby authorized to remove any encroachment into a
county right of way, including signs, fences and approaches which have been
placed or constructed without permits as required by this chapter or in
violation of the terms of any permit required by this chapter. Such removal
shall proceed in compliance with the provisions set forth at Idaho Code section
40-2319.
   B.   Within a county right of way, Bonner County is authorized to modify,
reshape or restore any drainage, roadside or roadside shoulder or other
topographic feature necessary to protect the integrity of a county right of way
or appurtenant structure, and all authorized uses of such right of way. (Ord.
269, 1-17-1995)
2-820: VARIANCES FROM CHAPTER OR ROAD STANDARDS MANUAL:
   A.   Any person may apply for a variance from the standards contained within
this chapter or within the "Road Standards Manual". Such application shall be
made on forms provided by the Bonner County road department. Application for a
variance shall set forth the specific circumstances of the request and the
standards sought to be modified or waived. Such drawings or sketches as are
necessary to fully describe the requested variance shall accompany the
application.
   B.   Applications for variances shall be heard and determined by the board
of county commissioners at the next available regular meeting, and may be
granted or denied by a motion passed by a majority vote of the board. (Ord.
269, 1-17-1995)
   C.   In making its determination on the application for variance, the board
shall consider the following items:
      1.   The factual circumstances of the application, including the
topographic, geological and hydrological conditions of the site;
      2.   The nature and extent of the variation requested from the standards;
      3.   The effect of the variance request upon the continuity and integrity
of the Bonner County highway system and the safety of the traveling public; and
      4.   The need for access to public and private lands within the county.
   D.   Upon the board's determination, the Bonner County road department shall
provide the applicant with a copy of the application bearing the certification
of the application's approval or denial. (Ord. 269, 1-17-1995)
2-830: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do, cause
or permit to be done, whether acting as principal, agent or employee, any
construction, placement, installation, enlargement, extension or structure
subject to the provisions of this chapter which is not in accord with an
approved permit issued under the terms of this chapter, or without first
procuring a permit from the Bonner County public works department.
   B.   Violations of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by
a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both.
   C.   A separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred for each
construction, placement, installation, enlargement, extension or structure
subject to the provisions of this chapter that is erected, constructed, placed,
installed, enlarged, extended, moved or converted not in compliance with this
chapter. Each day such violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
   D.   The prosecuting attorney may take whatever criminal action deemed
necessary to enjoin any violation of this chapter. The prosecuting attorney
may, with the consent of the county commissioners, bring whatever civil action
deemed necessary to enjoin any violation of this chapter. Civil remedies may be
sought in addition to, or in lieu of, criminal penalties.
   E.   Any person, whether acting as principal, agent, employee, landowner,
tenant, builder, or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in
or maintains such violation, may be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the Bonner County prosecuting attorney and/or
the Bonner County commissioners, or any other public official or private
citizen, from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent
any violation of this chapter.
   F.   Fee for investigation of work without permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required under the terms of this chapter has commenced
without first obtaining said permit, an investigation fee shall be collected
whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of the
investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter, nor from any penalty prescribed by law. A separate
investigative fee shall be charged for each site visit to the subject property
conducted by the Bonner County public works department. (Ord. 472, 1-13-2006)
2-840: ISSUANCE OF STOP WORK ORDER; UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE:
   A.   Whenever the public works director finds any work regulated by this
chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
the public works director or his or her designee, is authorized to issue a stop
work order.
   B.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted on the
premises where the work is being conducted or given to the owner of the
property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons
performing the work. Written notice shall also be provided by the public works
department by certified mail to the landowner at the address shown on the
county assessor's tax rolls. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work
shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the
order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume. (Ord. 472, 1-13-2006)
TITLE 3
PUBLIC WATERS
CHAPTER 1
WATER SAFETY REGULATIONS FOR ALL PUBLIC WATERS
SECTION:
3-100: Authority
3-101: Protection Of The Public
3-102: Definitions
3-103: Basic Rule
3-104: Adult Supervision And Age Restrictions
3-105: Distances For No Wake Zones On Lakes And The Pend Oreille River
3-106: Speed Limits On Specified Waters
3-107: Speed Limits For Rivers
3-107.1: No Wake Distances For Rivers
3-108: Noise
3-109: Restricted Zones
3-110: Restricted Zones; Violations
3-111: Personal Watercraft Safety Regulations
3-112: Waterskiing Safety Regulations
3-113: Eluding A Peace Officer; Failure To Yield
3-114: Use Of County Docks At Facilities With Ramps With Exceptions
3-115: Use Of County Docks At Facilities Without Ramps
3-116: Parking Of Motor Vehicles And Trailers
3-117: Boat Sewage Disposal
3-118: Derelict Docks And Float Houses
3-119: Boater Right Of Way
3-120: Impoundment
3-121: Facility Restrictions
3-122: Penalties
3-123: Marine Event Permit
3-124: Hazards To Navigation
3-100: AUTHORITY:
This chapter shall be known as the BONNER COUNTY PUBLIC WATERS ORDINANCE. By
authority granted to Bonner County pursuant to Idaho Code sections 67-7013(7)
and 67-7031 et seq., the board of county commissioners of Bonner County hereby
enact this chapter as follows. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-101: PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC:
It is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
general public, and for the protection of public and private property, to
regulate the operation of watercraft and swimming on the public waters of the
state of Idaho situated in Bonner County, Idaho, but outside the municipal
boundaries of the various incorporated cities within said county. The board of
commissioners specifically find that it is necessary for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the general public to adopt and enforce rules and
regulations governing all county owned or controlled parks and waterways
facilities, including all property directly owned by Bonner County or under its
sole control as a public easement, or under a cooperative agreement on public
lands with other public agencies, such as the Idaho department of lands, Idaho
department of fish and game, United States bureau of land management, United
States forest service, United States corps of engineers and the city of
Sandpoint. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-102: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall be applicable:
ADULT SUPERVISION: Having a person age eighteen (18) or over on or in a vessel
and in a position to supervise.
BRIDGE: A structure spanning and providing passage over a body of water.
COMEBACK BAY: A body of water from the bridge over Fry Creek upstream to the
headwaters.
FACILITY: Any park, boat launch facility, dock or other waterways property
owned, operated, managed or maintained by Bonner County.
MARINE EVENT: A regatta, race, marine event, tournament or exhibition on any
waters within Bonner County authorized by the sheriff of the county.
MOORING: Parking a vessel in the water.
MOORING BUOY: An offshore floating buoy anchored to the bottom that serves as a
mooring point to secure a vessel.
MOTOR DRIVEN WATERCRAFT: Any boat or vehicle of any type, which is propelled by
any type of motor or engine.
MOTORBOAT: Any vessel propelled by motor whether or not such machinery is the
principal source of propulsion.
NEGLIGENT OPERATION: Operating any vessel on the waters of the state of Idaho
in a careless or heedless manner so as to be indifferent to any person or
property of other persons, or at a rate of speed greater than will permit him
in the exercise of reasonable care to bring the vessel to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.
NIGHT: One hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise.
NO SWIMMING ZONE: A designated area where the swimming shall not be allowed. A
"no swimming zone" also precludes the use of float tubes and other nonmotorized
devices not designed or modified to be used as a means of transportation on the
water, such as inflatable air mattresses, single inner tubes, and beach and
water toys.
NO WAKE: The act of operating any vessel whereby the visible tract of
turbulence is not more than six inches (6") or the speed is not more than five
(5) miles per hour.
NO WAKE ZONE: A designated area where the operation of watercraft must be
accomplished at not more than five (5) miles per hour, nor with more than a six
inch (6") wake.
OVERNIGHT: From one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise.
PADDLEBOARDING: A water sport in which a person paddles a long streamlined
board with their hands while lying or kneeling on the paddleboard. A derivation
of paddleboarding is stand up paddleboarding (SUP) in which a paddle is used to
propel or guide the board. A paddleboard is classified as a vessel.
PEND OREILLE RIVER: The body of water from the railroad bridge at Sandpoint
downstream to the Idaho-Washington border.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT: A watercraft, powered by a water jet pump, which can be
operated by persons sitting, standing or kneeling.
POSTED WATERS: An area which is a portion of the waters of Bonner County,
Idaho, marked with regulatory markers in compliance with Idaho Code section 67-
7031 and IDAPA 26.66.21, to regulate the actions of watercraft and persons in
such marked portions of the waters.
PUBLIC WATERS: Any river, lake or other body of water within Bonner County,
Idaho, other than those which are entirely privately owned, regardless of
navigability.
SHORELINE: The line of demarcation between water and land at the time in
question without regard to property lines or high or low water lines or marks.
STAND UP PADDLEBOARD (SUP): A vessel similar to a surfboard which is usually
propelled on the surface of the water with a paddle. A stand up paddleboard is
classified as a vessel.
VESSEL: Every description of watercraft, including a seaplane on the water,
used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, but does
not include float houses, diver's aids operated and designed primarily to
propel a diver below, or modified to be used as a means of transportation on
the water, such as inflatable air mattress, single inner tubes, and beach and
water toys. For purposes of this title, vessel, motorboat, motor driven craft
and watercraft are synonymous.
WAKE: The visible track of turbulence created by watercraft moving through the
water.
WATERSKIING: Waterskiing or skiing shall include kneeboarding, wakeboarding,
wakesurfing, wakeskating or any other type of towed recreational activity. This
is not intended to define the towing of a vessel or other objects at no wake.
WATERWAYS: Any river, lake or other body of water within Bonner County, Idaho.
(Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-103: BASIC RULE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of vessel or
watercraft on the public waters within Bonner County, Idaho, in a negligent
manner not having due regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing,
or any rate of speed greater than stated herein, or will permit, in the
exercise of reasonable care, to bring said watercraft to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.
   B.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-104: ADULT SUPERVISION AND AGE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate, or to allow the operation of a motor
driven watercraft by a person under the age of ten (10), except under direct
adult supervision.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to operate, or to allow someone to operate, a
motor driven watercraft when the operator is between the ages of ten (10) to
fourteen (14), without adult supervision unless the vessel is powered by a
motor rated at ten (10) horsepower or less.
   C.   The age restrictions provided for in this section shall apply to the
operation of personal watercraft.
   D.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-105: DISTANCES FOR NO WAKE ZONES ON LAKES AND THE PEND OREILLE RIVER:
Specific distances set for no wake zones:
   A.   Within two hundred feet (200') from any shoreline, dock, pier, bridge,
other structure, or any person in the water, shall be no wake.
   B.   Within fifty feet (50') of any other vessel shall be no wake.
   C.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-106: SPEED LIMITS ON SPECIFIED WATERS:
Specific speed limits for all the public waterways within Bonner County, Idaho,
except the Clark Fork River from the mouth of the river to the dam, Johnson
Creek and Priest River from the mouth of the river upstream to the Outlet Bay,
are as follows:
   A.   Within one hundred feet (100') of any other vessel, the speed shall be
reasonable and prudent, but not in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
   B.   At night, where the speed is not otherwise restricted, the speed limit
shall not exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour.
   C.   During the day, where the speed is not otherwise restricted, the speed
limit shall be reasonable and prudent, but not in excess of fifty (50) miles
per hour; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any motor
driven watercraft while the same is being operated while actively engaged in
any regatta, race, tournament or exhibition authorized by the Bonner County
sheriff's department, if the permit issued by the sheriff's department allows
the watercraft participating in any regatta, race, tournament, or exhibition to
exceed the posted speed limits.
   D.   This section shall apply to speed limits on the Pend Oreille River.
   E.   This section shall not apply to any motor driven watercraft being
operated under emergency conditions, or by any authorized agent of any law
enforcement agency of the State of Idaho, a political subdivision, or the
United States of America, while said agent is acting in the performance of his
duties or any aircraft which is landing or taking off on the water.
   F.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-107: SPEED LIMITS FOR RIVERS:
Specific speed limits for the Clark Fork River from the mouth of the river to
the dam, Johnson Creek, and Priest River, are as follows:
   A.   Speed Limit During Day: During the day, where the speed is not
otherwise regulated, the speed limit shall be reasonable and prudent, but not
in excess of thirty five (35) miles per hour.
   B.   Speed Limit At Night: At night, the speed limit shall not exceed twenty
five (25) miles per hour.
   C.   Within Fifty Feet Of Another Vessel: Within fifty feet (50') of another
vessel the speed shall be reasonable and prudent, but not in excess of fifteen
(15) miles per hour.
   D.   Violation: A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.
   E.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any motor driven watercraft
being operated under emergency conditions or by any authorized agent of any law
enforcement agency of the State of Idaho, the United States of America, or any
political subdivision, while said agent is acting in the performance of his
duties, or any aircraft which is landing or taking off on the water. The speed
limits on the Pend Oreille River are the same as the speed limits on Pend
Oreille Lake. See section
3-106 of this chapter. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-107.1: NO WAKE DISTANCES FOR RIVERS:
Specific no wake limits for the Clark Fork River, Priest River, Comeback Bay
and Johnson Creek are as follows:
   A.   No Wake Zone: Within one hundred feet (100') of the shoreline, dock,
pier, bridge, or other structure or person in the water will be a no wake zone.
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any motor driven watercraft
being operated under emergency conditions or by any authorized agent of any law
enforcement agency of the State of Idaho, or the United States of America, or
any political subdivision, while said agent is acting in the performance of his
duties, or any aircraft which is landing or taking off on the water.
   C.   Pend Oreille River: The no wake distances for the Pend Oreille River is
the same as the no wake limits on Pend Oreille Lake. See section
3-105 of this chapter.
   D.   Violation: A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.
(Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-108: NOISE:
   A.   Applicability: The requirements of this section shall apply to the
operation of any watercraft upon public waters, and shall be enforced by the
Bonner County Sheriff's Department.
   B.   Noise Levels: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or permit
the operation of, any watercraft on the waters of Bonner County in such a
manner as to exceed the following noise levels:
      1.   For motorboats manufactured before January 1, 1995, a noise level of
ninety (90) decibels.
      2.   For motorboats manufactured on or after January 1, 1995, a noise
level of eighty eight (88) decibels.
   C.   Mufflers: No person shall operate, or give permission for the operation
of, any motorboat on the waters of the State of Idaho that is equipped with an
altered muffler or a muffler cutout, bypass or other device designed or so
installed so that it can be used to continually or intermittently bypass or
otherwise reduce or eliminate the effectiveness of any muffler or muffler
system installed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   D.   Sound Amplification Systems: It is unlawful for any operator of a
vessel to cause, operate, or permit the operation of, any sound amplification
system to include but not limited to items such as radios, compact disc players
or attached portable music devices which can be heard outside of the vessel
from two hundred (200) or more feet when the vessel is being operated on Bonner
County waters, unless that system is being operated to request assistance or
warn of a hazardous situation.
      1.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any motor driven
watercraft being operated under emergency conditions or by any authorized agent
of any law enforcement agency of the State of Idaho, or the United States of
America, or any political subdivision, while said agent is acting in the
performance of his duties, or any aircraft which is landing or taking off on
the water.
   E.   Violation: A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.
(Ord. 568, 9-7-2017)
3-109: RESTRICTED ZONES:
   A.   The board of county commissioners, by ordinance, may designate or
repeal a designation of a specific area or areas on the public waterways of
Bonner County as restricted zones. The zones are defined as follows:
    ALBENI FALLS DAM: See section
3-601 of this title.
   CABINET GORGE DAM: See section
3-601 of this title.
   FLOODING OR THREAT OF FLOODING: A. Once flood stage is reached on Lake Pend
Oreille of 2,063.5 feet elevation as measured at the Hope gauge, the "no wake
zone" will automatically be extended to five hundred feet (500') from shore on
Lake Pend Oreille and the Pend Oreille River. Once the water level decreases
below 2,063.5 feet, these restrictions will automatically expire.
   B.   The board, by resolution duly enacted, may impose any and all
restricted zones listed in this section on any public waterway within the
county upon finding that actual flooding has occurred or that an imminent
threat of flooding exists.
   NO MOTOR DRIVEN WATERCRAFT ZONE: An area where no motor of any kind can be
used to propel a watercraft.
   NO SWIMMING ZONE: A designated area where swimming shall not be allowed. A
"no swimming zone" precludes the use of float tubes and other nonmotorized
devices not designed or modified to be used as a means of transportation, such
as inflatable air mattresses, single inner tubes, and beach and water toys
within the designated boundaries of the area in order to protect and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
   NO WAKE ZONE: An area that limits the speed of any watercraft to a speed
that will produce no "wake", as defined in section
3-102 of this chapter.
   NO WATERCRAFT ZONE: An area that prohibits the operation of any vessel
within the designated boundaries of the area in order to protect and promote
the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
   NO WATERSKIING ZONE: An area that prohibits any motor driven watercraft from
towing a waterskier, a tube, a wakeboard, a kneeboard, or any other type of
appliance. This area also prohibits wakeboarding and wakesurfing. However, this
is not intended to prohibit the towing of a watercraft or other objects at "no
wake" speed as defined in section
3-102, "Definitions", of this chapter.
   NONMOTORIZED VESSEL ZONE: A zone in which a vessel may not employ any type
of motor as a means of propulsion of said vessel. This shall include
combustion, electric, solar or any mechanical means for providing artificial
propulsion.
   PACK RIVER: See section
3-701 of this title.
   RESTRICTED MOTOR ZONES: An area that limits the type of motor or the
horsepower of a motor that may be used to power a vessel on the water within
the zone.
   RESTRICTED PERSONAL WATERCRAFT ZONE: An operational zone for personal
watercraft on any waters within Bonner County, Idaho. A "restricted personal
watercraft zone", also known as a "personal watercraft operational zone", may
limit the operation of personal watercraft within the zone to: a) no wake or
less than five (5) miles per hour; b) personal watercraft only; c) no personal
watercraft allowed; or d) distance from shoreline. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-110: RESTRICTED ZONES; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate a watercraft, personal watercraft or
vessel, or to swim within any of the restricted zones in a manner that is
contrary to the restrictions as set forth in the ordinance passed by the Bonner
County board of commissioners.
   B.   A violation of the following restricted zones in section
3-109 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor:
      1.   Albeni Falls Dam.
      2.   Cabinet Gorge Dam.
      3.   Pack River.
   C.   A violation of all other restricted zones in section
3-109 of this chapter shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-111: PERSONAL WATERCRAFT SAFETY REGULATIONS:
   A.   A person shall not operate a personal watercraft unless each person
aboard the personal watercraft is properly wearing a coast guard approved
personal flotation device.
   B.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-112: WATERSKIING SAFETY REGULATIONS:
   A.   No vessel operator may tow or attempt to tow a waterskier on any
waterway within Bonner County unless such craft shall be occupied by at least
an operator and an observer. The observer shall continuously observe the person
or persons being towed and shall display a flag immediately after the towed
person or persons fall into the water and during the time preparatory to skiing
while the person or persons are still in the water. Such flag shall be a bright
red or brilliant orange color, measuring at least twelve inches (12") square,
mounted on a pole not less than twenty four inches (24") long and displayed as
to be visible from every direction.
   B.   The observer and the operator shall not be the same person. The
observer shall be a competent person.
   C.   No person shall engage or attempt to engage in waterskiing without
properly wearing a coast guard approved personal flotation device.
   D.   No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in waterskiing, or
operate any vessel in towing a waterskier, on the waterways of Bonner County
during the period from one hour after sunset until one hour prior to sunrise.
   E.   No person engaged in waterskiing either as operator, observer or skier,
shall conduct himself or herself in a manner that endangers, or is likely to
endanger, any person or property.
   F.   No person or persons shall engage in waterskiing within one hundred
feet (100') of any boat launching ramp, motionless vessel, vessel underway,
swimmer, buoy or shoreline; with exceptions as specified in subsection G of
this section.
   G.   Except on takeoffs, no person or persons shall engage in waterskiing
operations within two hundred feet (200') of the shoreline. Any takeoff from
within two hundred feet (200') of the shoreline must be made outward and at
right angles to the shoreline. At no time can such takeoff cause risk or hazard
to other vessels or persons on the water.
   H.   During drop offs, the towing vessel and skier will comply with all
speed and distance regulations in regards to shorelines and docks.
   I.   No vessel shall follow behind a person waterskiing or being towed in
any manner closer than two hundred feet (200'), nor cross the towing vessel bow
by less than two hundred feet (200').
   J.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-113: ELUDING A PEACE OFFICER; FAILURE TO YIELD:
   A.   Any person operating a vessel who wilfully flees or attempts to elude a
pursuing police vessel, when given a visual or audible signal to bring the
motor driven watercraft to a stop, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The signal
given by a peace officer may be by emergency lights or siren.
A person convicted of eluding a peace officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by
a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both.
   B.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency or police vessel
making use of any audible or visible signal, the driver of every other vessel
or watercraft shall yield the right of way and stop until the authorized
emergency or police vessel has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
peace officer.
A violation of this subsection B shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552, 5-
3-2016)
3-114: USE OF COUNTY DOCKS AT FACILITIES WITH RAMPS WITH EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsections B, C and D of this section, no person
shall moor a vessel or leave a vessel unattended at a county dock having one or
more ramps.
   B.   The restriction in subsection A of this section is not applicable to
the county dock and ramp facility located at Lakeview, Idaho.
   C.   Emergency response vessels, with permission from the board of county
commissioners, may request to moor at a county dock if there is adequate space
available without any negative impact on the general public. The board of
county commissioners reserves the right to subject the permittee under this
subsection to any and all reasonable permit restrictions and conditions,
including, and without being limited to, insurance requirements and moorage
fees.
   D.   The county mooring slips located at Slee Street in Coolin shall permit
two (2) hour boat parking in the mooring slips.
   E.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-115: USE OF COUNTY DOCKS AT FACILITIES WITHOUT RAMPS:
   A.   No person shall moor a boat at a county dock without a launch ramp for
more than twenty four (24) hours within a forty eight (48) hour period, or in
violation of the posted regulations at the location. Boats and other personal
property left at a dock for a longer period of time without the written
permission of the board of county commissioners may be impounded at the owner's
expense, in addition to any penalty prescribed in this chapter.
   B.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-116: PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
   A.   Parking on boat ramp areas or blocking access to a boat ramp is
prohibited, except when in the actual process of loading or unloading a vessel.
Vehicles left in the boat ramp areas may be impounded at the owner's expense in
addition to any penalty prescribed in this chapter.
   B.   Overnight parking of boats, vehicles or trailers is prohibited in any
of the parking areas associated with all of the county boat launch facilities.
Vehicles left in the boat launch parking areas may be impounded at the owner's
expense in addition to any penalty prescribed in this chapter.
   C.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-117: BOAT SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Dumping of boat sewage is prohibited, except in designated approved
boat pump out stations.
   B.   No person shall dump sewage from holding tanks into toilet facilities
or on the ground, or into the water.
   C.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-118: DERELICT DOCKS AND FLOAT HOUSES:
   A.   No person shall allow a personal dock, float house or waterfowl blind
to be released on any public body of water under which Bonner County has boater
safety responsibility.
   B.   Owners of floating devices such as docks and float houses who fail to
properly secure them will be subject to payment of recovery and abatement
costs.
   C.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-119: BOATER RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   All persons using docks primarily placed for boat use shall not
interfere with boats approaching or departing dockage.
   B.   Bonner County docks designated for public use are included in schedule
B on file with the county.
   C.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-120: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   The Bonner County sheriff's department is hereby authorized to impound
a vessel or vehicle when the vessel has been abandoned, when a vessel has been
improperly moored or left unattended, when it is adrift, when a vehicle has
been improperly parked at a waterways facility or under circumstances where the
vessel is presenting a hazard to safe boating on the waterways of Bonner
County. The sheriff is further authorized to impound a vessel when the operator
of the vessel has been arrested and the registered owner of the vessel is not
immediately available to assume lawful possession and control of the vessel
following the arrest of the operator.
   B.   Whenever an authorized officer impounds a vessel or a trailer pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter or pursuant to state law, the Bonner County
sheriff's department shall substantially comply with the provisions of Idaho
Code title 49, chapter 18, that provide, among other procedures, that the
registered owner of the property, if known, be given written notice of the
impoundment and the opportunity for a post storage hearing. (Ord. 552, 5-3-
2016)
3-121: FACILITY RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The rules and regulations governing a waterways and parks and
recreation facility shall be posted in such a manner to be visible to the
general public utilizing the facility.
   B.   It shall constitute a misdemeanor to violate the duly adopted and
posted rules and regulations governing conduct at a waterways and parks and
recreation facility. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-122: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and subjected to a
penalty as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113A, wherein said penalty shall
not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Infraction fine amounts shall be
set forth in schedule A on file with the county which shall be approved on an
annual basis by the board of county commissioners and posted at the sheriff's
office, courthouse and commissioner's office. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-123: MARINE EVENT PERMIT:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to motor driven
watercraft operating under a permit pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-7030
after approval of a marine event permit application by the sheriff, as long as
the vessel is being operated within the conditions of the permit. The
provisions of this chapter may be waived only after approval by the sheriff of
Bonner County.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter to fail to operate a vessel pursuant
to the terms and conditions imposed by a marine event permit.
   C.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-124: HAZARDS TO NAVIGATION:
   A.   No person shall place a floating object into the public waters of
Bonner County that would unreasonably or unnecessarily interfere with the free
and proper navigation on county waterways or that would pose a hazard to
boaters in the area. These objects may be, but are not limited to, trampolines,
floating islands, cubes and swim/dive platforms.
   B.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 2
PRIEST LAKE, UPPER PRIEST LAKE AND THE "THOROUGHFARE"
SECTION:
3-201: Wakeless Speed In "Thoroughfare"
3-203: Waterskiing Prohibited In "Thoroughfare" And Upper Priest Lake
3-201: WAKELESS SPEED IN "THOROUGHFARE":
   A.   At no time shall any person or persons operate any water going craft of
any size or description in such a manner or at such speed as to create any wake
upon the waterway connecting those bodies of water known as Priest Lake and
Upper Priest Lake, which waterway is known as the "Thoroughfare" or
"Thorofare", and which is further described as follows:
That body of water which lies between the southernmost end of Upper Priest Lake
and that point whereat said waterway intersects that line which forms the
eastern boundary of Section 9, and [the] western boundary of Section 10,
Township 62 North, Range 4 West, Boise Meridian.
   B.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
3-203: WATERSKIING PROHIBITED IN "THOROUGHFARE" AND UPPER PRIEST LAKE:
   A.   At no time shall any person or persons engage in waterskiing in any
manner whatever in or upon the waters of the waterway described in section
3-201 of this chapter, or in or upon the body of water known as Upper Priest
Lake.
   B.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552,
5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 3
GAMLIN (GAMBLE) LAKE
SECTION:
3-300: Purpose
3-301: Certain Watercraft Prohibited
3-300: PURPOSE:
It is the finding of the board of commissioners of Bonner County that the
enjoyment of certain small lakes located within the county depends upon
maintenance of the appropriate scale of watercraft on such lakes in order that
recreational pursuits such as fishing and other quiet water related activities
can be enjoyed by the public. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-301: CERTAIN WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is hereby unlawful to operate a watercraft of any type powered by an
engine with a manufacturer's rating of greater than ten (10) horsepower on
Gamlin (Gamble) Lake, located in Sections 6 and 7, Township 56 North, Range 1
East, of the Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho.
   B.   Operation of any jet ski or other personal watercraft of similar design
on Gamlin (Gamble) Lake is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 4
SHEPHERDS LAKE
SECTION:
3-400: Purpose
3-401: Certain Watercraft Prohibited
3-400: PURPOSE:
It is the finding of the board of commissioners of Bonner County that the
enjoyment of certain small lakes located within the county depends upon
maintenance of the appropriate scale of watercraft on such lakes for the
preservation of water quality and wildlife and for the purpose of enjoyment of
fishing and other quiet water related activities. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-401: CERTAIN WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is hereby unlawful to operate a watercraft powered by any engine or
motor, other than an electric motor, on Shepherds Lake, located in Sections 23,
24, and 26, Township 56 North, Range 2 West, Bonner County, Idaho.
   B.   Operation of any jet ski or other personal watercraft of similar design
on Shepherds Lake is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 5
KELSO LAKE
SECTION:
3-501: Purpose
3-502: Certain Watercraft Prohibited
3-501: PURPOSE:
It is the finding of the board of commissioners of Bonner County that the
enjoyment of certain small lakes located within the county depends upon
maintenance of the appropriate scale of watercraft on such lakes for the
preservation of water quality and wildlife and for the purpose of enjoyment of
fishing and other quiet water related activities. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-502: CERTAIN WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED:
It is hereby unlawful to operate a watercraft powered by any engine or motor,
other than an electric motor, on Kelso Lake, located in Sections 21 and 22,
Township 54N, Range 3W, Bonner County, Idaho. Operation of any jet ski or other
personal watercraft of similar design on Kelso Lake is hereby prohibited. (Ord.
552, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 6
ALBENI FALLS DAM AND CABINET GORGE DAM
SECTION:
3-601: Restricted Zones
3-602: Violations
3-601: RESTRICTED ZONES:
That area of the Pend Oreille River extending from Albeni Falls Dam downriver
to a distance of one thousand feet (1,000'), that area of the Pend Oreille
River extending from Albeni Falls Dam upriver to a line fifty feet (50')
upstream of the Burlington Northern-Santa Fe Railroad Bridge (bridge number
249), that area of the Clark Fork River extending from Cabinet Gorge Dam
downriver to a distance of one thousand three hundred feet (1,300'), and that
area of the Clark Fork River extending from Cabinet Gorge Dam upriver to the
boater safety cable, a distance of one thousand feet (1,000'), as indicated by
warning signs, are designated as restricted zones, or specifically "No
Watercraft Zones" and "No Swimming Zones". (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
3-602: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel, or to swim within either of the
restricted zones, as set forth in this chapter, in a manner that is contrary to
the restrictions as set forth in the ordinance passed by the Bonner County
board of commissioners. (Ord. 552, 5-3-2016)
CHAPTER 7
PACK RIVER
SECTION:
3-701: Restrictions
3-701: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The area of the Pack River Flats extending from the State Highway 200
Bridge, over the Pack River, downstream to the Burlington Northern Santa Fe
Railway Bridge, is designated as a no wake zone where speed is limited to no
more than five (5) miles per hour, which shall extend from shoreline to
opposite shoreline, encompassing all the water area between.
   B.   The Pack River upstream of the Highway 200 Bridge is designated a
nonmotorized vessel zone, which shall extend from shoreline to opposite
shoreline, encompassing all the water area between.
   C.   Further, this chapter shall not apply to activities authorized by or
undertaken by the Idaho department of fish and game, the United States army
corps of engineers, or by the Bonner County sheriff's office in the performance
of its official business or to emergency response activities.
A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 552, 5-3-
2016)
TITLE 4
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-101: Establishment Of Emergency Management Department
4-102: Coordinator; Appointment And Duties
4-110: Declaration Of Emergency
4-120: Departments And Services Made Available In Emergency
4-101: ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT:
The Bonner County disaster services/civil defense department shall hereafter be
known as the Bonner County emergency management department. The emergency
management department shall be responsible for the necessary coordination and
control of emergency preparedness operations as may be necessary from time to
time, with guidance from the latest edition of the Bonner County "emergency
operations plan". (Ord. 274, 3-3-1995)
4-102: COORDINATOR; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES:
The emergency management department shall be administered by a coordinator,
appointed by the board of county commissioners. The coordinator shall be
responsible for the administration and coordination of the emergency management
organization, updating and revising the Bonner County "emergency operations
plan", subject to the direction and control of the board of county
commissioners. (Ord. 274, 3-3-1995)
4-110: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
The chairperson of the board of county commissioners may declare local disaster
emergencies. Such declaration and any subsequent renewal of such declaration
shall not exceed seven (7) days' duration each, except with the consent of the
board of county commissioners. Such declaration of emergency shall be made and
maintained in compliance with the requirements of Idaho Code section 46-1011.
(Ord. 274, 3-3-1995)
4-120: DEPARTMENTS AND SERVICES MADE AVAILABLE IN EMERGENCY:
All departments and services of Bonner County, including resources of any
nature, shall be assigned and made available, as required during emergencies,
to carry out the mission and objectives of the plan and programs of the
emergency management organization. (Ord. 274, 3-3-1995)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
SECTION:
4-201: Authority
4-202: Definitions
4-203: General Provisions
4-204: Bonner County Medical Director And Medical Control
4-205: Bonner County Advisory Council
4-206: Fees
4-207: Master Agreement
4-208: Chapter Provisions
4-201: AUTHORITY:
   A.   The provision of ambulance service is a governmental function; the
board of county commissioners of Bonner County has determined that regulation
of emergency medical services within Bonner County is necessary to provide
reasonable, adequate and professional services to the citizens and visitors of
Bonner County; and
   B.   The board of county commissioners of Bonner County is authorized to
establish ambulance service under Idaho Code title 31, chapter 39, and pursuant
to the authority granted by the Idaho constitution article 12, section 2; Idaho
Code title 31, Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-828 and 31-866. This authority is
subject to the provisions contained in Idaho Code sections 56-1011 through 56-
1018B, and any valid regulations enacted pursuant thereto. Through these grants
of authority, the board of county commissioners, in its capacity as the
governing board of the Bonner County ambulance service district, has the
authority to establish a Bonner County emergency medical services (hereinafter
referred to as BCEMS) department, to administer, oversee and regulate the
provision of emergency medical services by service providers within Bonner
County; to assist service providers by levying taxes and supplying funds as are
necessary and available to enable provision of such essential services; and, to
provide for safety and promote the health and welfare of the citizens of, and
visitors to, Bonner County by whatever additional means the board of county
commissioners may deem appropriate.
   C.   There is hereby established under the board of county commissioners
(hereinafter referred to as the board) a department known as Bonner County
emergency medical services (hereinafter referred to as BCEMS). (Ord. 456, 1-11-
2005)
4-202: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: Any individual, firm, partnership, public or private association,
public entity, or public or private corporation, which offers or provides
prehospital emergency medical services, out of hospital medical care or health
related transportation services to the public.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE(S) OR EMS: Direct patient care provided by
nontransport or transport agencies or service providers to any person
experiencing a medical emergency, and direct patient care provided for out of
hospital medical transport services. Expressly excluded from the definition are
the operation of medical offices by licensed physicians and the operation of
licensed healthcare facilities.
SERVICE PROVIDER(S): Any individual, firm, partnership, public or private
association, public entity, or public or private corporation, that is properly
licensed, assents to a master agreement and provides EMS in Bonner County under
the jurisdiction of this chapter. (Ord. 456, 1-11-2005)
4-203: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   The board will establish and adopt rules and regulations for all
emergency medical services in Bonner County, and such rules and regulations, or
amendments thereto, as adopted shall be considered a part of this chapter and
shall be enforceable as if included fully herein.
   B.   These rules and regulations shall include, but not limited to:
      1.   The certification/licensing, by BCEMS, of all EMS providers within
the county.
      2.   The classification and clinical capabilities required of all EMS
providers by the Idaho department of health and welfare and this chapter.
      3.   The requirement for twenty four (24) hour/seven (7) day service by
all EMS providers.
      4.   The establishment of defined primary response areas for each service
provider.
      5.   A system for response and treatment data collection from service
providers.
   C.   The board shall cause certain policies to be developed and implemented
as necessary to provide direction and focus to the service providers, and a
mutual aid system that ensures the availability of services to all of Bonner
County.
   D.   The board may enter into agreements with other counties and/or service
providers within and outside the state of Idaho concerning intercounty and
interstate provision of services, including, but not limited to, the method by
which intercounty or interstate services may be provided, service areas and
payments between counties to equitably compensate counties and service
providers for the provision of intercounty or interstate services.
   E.   Service providers rendering emergency medical care to a patient at the
scene of an emergency to which they have been dispatched or summoned shall be
deemed to have complete medical authority, to their level of certification,
until the patient is released to another appropriate level of service provider
or treatment facility. This section is intended to apply only to EMS and shall
not affect authority at the scene of an emergency concerning law enforcement,
fire suppression, or other nonEMS activities undertaken by legally responsible
public agencies.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or
otherwise, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise
engage in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of providing
emergency care or the transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys or
any public or private way or place of Bonner County, unless they are in
compliance with this chapter, Idaho Code and IDAPA rules.
   G.   Failure of an agency or service provider to comply with, to maintain
compliance with, or an agency or service provider which violates any applicable
provisions, standards or requirements of this chapter, or any regulation or
policy promulgated hereunder, or any other applicable federal or state laws or
state administrative rules, shall be grounds to deny, suspend, revoke or
terminate an agency's or service provider's participation as a service provider
in Bonner County. Should the board suspend, revoke, deny or terminate any
agency's or service provider's participation, the board will make immediate
written notification to the state of Idaho, and any other state where the
agency may be licensed, indicating the date of the action and the reason for
the action. Further, the agency or service provider that is suspended, revoked,
denied or terminated will immediately cease EMS operations in Bonner County.
(Ord. 456, 1-11-2005)
4-204: BONNER COUNTY MEDICAL DIRECTOR AND MEDICAL CONTROL:
   A.   The board may, by written agreement, contract with an Idaho licensed
physician according to the requirements of Idaho Code and IDAPA rules, whose
title shall be the Bonner County medical director, and who will be the medical
director for all service providers.
   B.   The agreement shall describe the duties and function of the medical
director, including, but not limited to, quality control and service
improvement, training, standards of care, development of standing written
orders or protocols, medical review, emergency medical dispatch, medical
direction, on line and off line medical control, and such other activities and
services as are deemed appropriate by the board.
   C.   Until a medical director is provided by BCEMS pursuant to this section,
each agency or service provider licensed by Bonner County under this chapter
will utilize a medical director who is a "qualified physician", as defined in
Idaho Code or IDAPA rules. (Ord. 456, 1-11-2005)
4-205: BONNER COUNTY ADVISORY COUNCIL:
The board shall establish an advisory council of no less than five (5) members,
to be known as the Bonner County emergency medical services advisory council,
whose primary functions shall be advisory to BCEMS and the board on matters
pertaining to the provision of services within the county. (Ord. 456, 1-11-
2005)
4-206: FEES:
   A.   Fees for emergency medical transport services rendered to patients may
include, but are not limited to, treatment, transportation to a hospital or
other treatment facility, and supplies used in the course of such treatment
and/or transportation. Fees for service in Bonner County shall be charged
according to fee schedules approved by the board.
   B.   The board shall comply with the requirements of Idaho Code section 63-
1311A, including the requirement to hold a public hearing, prior to approval of
any proposed fees whenever any new fee is to be charged or whenever any fee is
to be increased by five percent (5%) or greater.
   C.   All such fees may at the direction of the board, be collected,
accounted for and paid to the county treasurer for deposit in the ambulance
district fund, and shall be used to pay expenses as incurred in the maintenance
and operation of ambulance service.
   D.   Bonner County shall assess, collect, budget and manage the county
ambulance district tax levy and any monies received directly by Bonner County
from any state, federal or other source. (Ord. 456, 1-11-2005)
4-207: MASTER AGREEMENT:
Service providers and their relationship to BCEMS shall be governed by a master
agreement authorized by the board and signed by all service providers who
desire to participate as a contracting party and which assent to the terms of
the master agreement. The board may also enter into separate agreements with
other service providers for the provision of services on such terms as are
mutually agreeable. If no master agreement is in force at any time, the
provisions of the previous master agreement shall govern, except as may
otherwise be agreed to by the contracting parties. (Ord. 456, 1-11-2005)
4-208: CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
   A.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.
   B.   The adoption of this chapter shall not in any manner affect the
prosecution for violation of any other ordinance of Bonner County. This chapter
shall not be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due under any
other ordinance or in any manner affect the validity of any action heretofore
taken by the Bonner County board of commissioners.
   C.   Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, or be both so fined and
imprisoned for each offense. Each day that any violation of or failure to
comply with this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense under this section and shall be punishable as
such hereunder; provided, however, that the court may, in appropriate cases,
stay the accumulation of penalties. (Ord. 456, 1-11-2005)
TITLE 5
USES OF COUNTY PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
RECEIVING WORKS OF PUBLIC ART
SECTION:
5-101: Procedure For Receipt And Display Of Public Art On County Property
5-101: PROCEDURE FOR RECEIPT AND DISPLAY OF PUBLIC ART ON COUNTY PROPERTY:
   A.   All requests to give or bequeath works of art to Bonner County shall be
reviewed by, and if deemed appropriate, approved by the Bonner County board of
commissioners. The term "works of art", as used in this section shall comprise
paintings, mural decorations, stained glass, statues, or other sculptures,
monuments, fountains, arches or structures of a permanent or temporary
character intended for ornament or commemoration.
   B.   No existing work of art in the possession of Bonner County shall be
removed, relocated or altered in any way without the written approval of the
Bonner County board of commissioners.
   C.   All requests to give or bequeath works of art to Bonner County shall be
made in writing to the Bonner County board of commissioners, to include
accompanying plans, photographs, prototypical drawings and a written
description stating the purpose or theme the work of art is to convey. The
board will consider the aesthetics and aesthetic quality of any such submitted
work of art and the work of art must advance a public interest. Any work of art
failing to meet this standard shall be rejected.
   D.   The Bonner County board of commissioners will consider submitted
requests at the board's regular business meeting.
   E.   The location and display of any accepted work of art is at the sole
discretion of the board. (Ord. 407, 5-31-2001)
CHAPTER 2
BONNER PARK WEST
SECTION:
5-201: Bonner Park West Described
5-202: Rules For Bonner Park West
5-210: Violations And Penalties
5-201: BONNER PARK WEST DESCRIBED:
The rules and regulations of this chapter shall be for that parcel of land
particularly described in ordinance 414, of Bonner County, Idaho, effective on
September 1, 2001, and commonly known as "Bonner Park West". (Ord. 414, 9-1-
2001)
5-202: RULES FOR BONNER PARK WEST:
Bonner park west shall be subject to the following rules and regulations:
   A.   No animal shall be permitted in the park, except on leash, tethered,
tied or restrained in a vehicle.
   B.   There shall be no overnight camping anywhere within the park,
including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles, motor vehicles, boats, or
any other type of facility, contrivance, tent, camper, trailer or other
vehicle.
   C.   The park shall be closed from sunset to sunrise, during which time no
person or persons shall be allowed in the park, nor shall there be any
vehicular traffic, other than that specifically for the purpose and intent of
active boat launching or removal.
   D.   No boats or water vehicles of any description shall be docked or parked
overnight at the beach or launch area, but may be trailered and parked
overnight in the parking lot.
   E.   All glass containers, including, but not limited to, beverage
containers, drinking glasses and water jugs, are prohibited within the park
outside of the confines of a motor vehicle.
   F.   The discharge of fireworks and firearms within the park area shall be
prohibited at all times. The discharge of fireworks on the beach area shall be
allowed in compliance with the applicable sections of Idaho Code.
   G.   There shall be no open burning, except in those areas designated and
equipped for cooking fires.
   H.   Any person, corporation or association wishing to conduct any
commercial activity soliciting crowds at the park shall first apply for and
obtain a permit for such activity from the board of county commissioners.
   I.   There shall be no swimming allowed in the boat launch area, and those
persons swimming in the swim area shall be prohibited from engaging in
dangerous play on the docks surrounding the area.
   J.   Bicycles shall be prohibited within the park, unless secured at the
designated bike rack. No bicycles shall be ridden within the park area or on
the docks. (Ord. 414, 9-1-2001)
5-210: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter and the regulations herein is declared to be a
misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 414, 9-1-2001)
CHAPTER 3
GARFIELD BAY RECREATION AREA
SECTION:
5-300: Legal Description
5-310: Administration
5-320: Definitions
5-330: Recreation Area General Regulations
5-340: Boat Launch And Parking Area
5-350: Picnic And Lawn Area
5-360: Beach Area
5-370: Roadside Parking On Garfield Bay Road Right Of Way
5-380: Campground Area
5-390: Penalties
5-300: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The Garfield Bay recreation area shall be the parcel as shown on the
interactive Bonner County mapping application. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-310: ADMINISTRATION:
The recreation area is operated by Bonner County under a license from Idaho
department of fish and game and administered by the department of parks and
waterways. This area is administered for free public use of the day use area
and the fees charged for use of the campground facilities shall be set by the
county commissioners. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-320: DEFINITIONS:
CAMP HOST: That person employed or contracted by Bonner County to supervise
campground, collect fees and assist campers as needed.
CAMPING: Considered any overnight stay in, but not limited to, recreational
vehicles, motor vehicles, boats, trailers, or any type of contrivance, tent,
camper or other vehicle.
CAMPING FEES: Those costs assigned to use the Garfield Bay Campground as set by
the county commissioners.
DAY USE AREA: The area from the Garfield Bay Road into the lake consisting of
the boat launch ramps and docks, jetty, parking lot, picnic area, and the
beach.
FIREWORKS: Considered any combustible or explosive composition prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect as defined in Idaho statutes.
GARFIELD BAY RECREATION AREA: The entire parcel of land in Garfield Bay owned
by Idaho department of fish and game and managed by Bonner County.
OFF ROAD VEHICLE: Includes all all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), motorbikes,
motorcycles, specialty off highway vehicles, and utility type vehicles.
PERSONAL POSSESSIONS: Any of the incidental items used in outdoor and water
recreation including, but not limited to, towels, chairs, lounges, coolers,
picnic supplies, barbecues, air mattresses, flotation devices, sunshades and
canopies.
PETS: Considered those domesticated animals traveling with their owners within
the passenger areas of their vehicle.
QUIET TIME: The time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. when users are restricted from any production of noise that may be
disturbing to other campers, including generators, loud music, and voices.
TOW AWAY ZONE: Those areas properly posted with notices compliant with Idaho
Code 49-1806.
VEHICLE: Any device in which any person may be transported upon a highway or
road. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-330: RECREATION AREA GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Allowed:
      1.   Pets shall be permitted in the park on a leash, tethered, tied, or
restrained in a vehicle. Owners shall pick up and properly dispose of all waste
created by their pets.
      2.   The boat launch ramps and parking, the picnic area and the beach
area all are free for public use as day use areas.
      3.   Commercial activity can only be conducted with approval by the parks
director and the board of county commissioners.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Pets shall not be left unattended or allowed to become an annoyance
to other visitors.
      2.   The discharge of firearms is prohibited.
      3.   There shall be no open burning except in those areas designated and
equipped for cooking fires.
      4.   There shall be no personal possessions left overnight in the day use
area.
      5.   There shall be no overnight camping in the day use area. (Ord. 553,
5-24-2016)
5-340: BOAT LAUNCH AND PARKING AREA:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No boat, vessel or watercraft may be left unattended for any period
of time, nor moored at the docks or on the beach of the boat launch area. (Ord.
553, 5-24-2016)
5-350: PICNIC AND LAWN AREA:
   A.   Picnic area is the lawn area with tables and fireboxes for general
public use on a first come, first serve basis, but open equally for all to use.
      1.   Prohibitions:
         a.   Visitors using the area may not prevent others from using the
area around them. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-360: BEACH AREA:
   A.   Beach area is that shoreline east of the jetty to the property's edge.
      1.   Prohibitions:
         a.   All glass containers, including, but not limited to, beverage
containers, drinking glasses and water jugs, are prohibited within the beach
area. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-370: ROADSIDE PARKING ON GARFIELD BAY ROAD RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Allowed:
      1.   South (shore) side: Parking is permitted in right of way.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   North (upland) side: Parking is prohibited in northern right of way.
The northern right of way becomes a tow away zone when so posted with proper
notification. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-380: CAMPGROUND AREA:
   A.   Allowed:
      1.   Reservations can be made with the parks department or with the camp
host.
      2.   One vehicle per campsite is included in camping fee and extra
vehicles will be charged a daily fee.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Guests must not spend a night at any campsite without filling out a
registration envelope and paying the appropriate fees.
      2.   Guests are allowed a maximum stay of ten (10) consecutive days in
one camping spot. (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
5-390: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subjected to a
penalty as authorized by Idaho Code section 31-714 as limited by Idaho Code
section 18-113A, wherein said penalty shall not exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00). (Ord. 553, 5-24-2016)
TITLE 6
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
SECTION:
6-101: Purpose
6-102: Initiative, Referendum; Effect
6-110: Petitioners, Petitions; Procedures
6-101: PURPOSE:
To comply with Idaho Code section 31-717, the Bonner County commissioners
hereby adopt this title for direct legislation by the people through initiative
and referendum. (Ord. 141, 2-4-1980)
6-102: INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM; EFFECT:
   A.   "Initiative" means the right of the people at an election to propose a
county ordinance.
   B.   "Referendum" means the right of the people at an election to approve or
reject an ordinance adopted by the board of county commissioners. (Ord. 282, 5-
10-1995)
   C.   Neither referendum nor initiative shall be available to pass, reject or
affect laws, ordinances, acts or measures of Bonner County or the Bonner County
commissioners if prohibited by Idaho laws or the Idaho constitution. (Ord. 141,
2-4-1980)
6-110: PETITIONERS, PETITIONS; PROCEDURES:
The qualifications for petitions and petitioners, and the procedures for
filing, certification, verification and processing shall be as set forth in
Idaho Code. (Ord. 282, 5-10-1995)
CHAPTER 2
FORMS OF PETITION
SECTION:
6-201: Form For Petition
6-202: Verification Of Signatures On Petition
6-210: Certification Of Signatures By Clerk
6-220: Proving Of Signatures (Rep. by Ord. 282, 5-10-1995)
6-230: Violations, Penalties
6-201: FORM FOR PETITION:
   A.   The following shall be substantially the form for petition for
initiatives and referendums:
It is unlawful for any one to sign any initiative or referendum petition with
any name other than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more than once for
the measure, or to sign such petition when he is not a qualified elector.
   INITIATIVE PETITION
TO the Commissioners of Bonner County:
We the undersigned qualified electors of Bonner County, Idaho, respectfully
demand that the following proposed county ordinance, to wit: (setting out full
text to measure proposed) shall be submitted to the qualified electors of
Bonner County of the State of Idaho, for their approval or rejection at the
next lawful election date. Each for himself says: I have personally signed this
petition; I am a qualified elector of Bonner County, Idaho, and I am registered
to vote in the next general election, my residence and post office are
correctly written after my name.
                                         
Signature
Printed name, residence, street & number, city or post office
(Here follow twenty (20) numbered lines for signatures.)
   B.   The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the Bonner
County commissioners shall be in substantially the same form with appropriate
title and changes, setting out in full the text of the ordinance of the Bonner
County commissioners to be referred to the people for their approval or
rejection. (Ord. 282, 5-10-1995)
6-202: VERIFICATION OF SIGNATURES ON PETITION:
Each and every sheet of every initiative or referendum petition containing
signatures shall be verified on the face thereof in substantially the following
form, by the person who circulated said sheet of said petition, by his or her
affidavit thereon, and as a part thereof:
   ELECTIONS
STATE OF IDAHO )
) ss.
County of Bonner )
I,                             , being first duly sworn, say: That I am a
qualified elector of Bonner County, Idaho, and that every person who signed
this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in my
presence: I believe that each has stated his or her name, post office address
and residence correctly, that each signer is a qualified elector of the Bonner
county, Idaho, and is registered to vote at the next general election.
Signed                         
Post office address                        
Subscribed and sworn before me this       day of         , 20    .
(SEAL)                                              
Notary Public-State of Idaho
Residing at:                          
                                           
(Ord. 282, 5-10-1995)
6-210: CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES BY CLERK:
In addition to said affidavit, the county clerk of Bonner County shall
carefully examine said petitions and shall attach to the sheets of said
petition containing such signatures a certificate substantially as follows:
STATE OF IDAHO )
) ss.
County of Bonner )
I,                          , Clerk of Bonner County, hereby certify that
(number) signatures on this petition are those of qualified electors.
(SEAL OF OFFICE)   (SIGNED)                           
By:                                
Deputy
(Ord. 282, 5-10-1995)
6-220: PROVING OF SIGNATURES:
(Rep. by Ord. 282, 5-10-1995)
6-230: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to sign any initiative or referendum
petition with any name other than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more
than once for the measure, or to sign such petition in the full knowledge that
he is not a qualified elector.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false affidavit
concerning any petition in this title, or to leave a petition unattended for
the purpose of gathering signatures.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Idaho Code. (Ord.
282, 5-10-1995)
TITLE 7
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
SECTION:
7-100: Definitions
7-101: Authority; Purpose
7-110: Reserved
7-150: Powers And Duties Of Board
7-160: Municipal Solid Waste Collection Systems
7-100: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms shall have the meaning:
APPROVED DISPOSAL SITE: Any county operated dumpster station, any landfill site
operated by Bonner County, and any privately operated landfill site approved as
such by the Panhandle health district and the Idaho department of health and
welfare.
BULKY WASTE: That waste which is characterized by an extraordinary volume to
weight ratio making handling at a landfill facility inconvenient or wasteful of
disposal space.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any land use, other than a single- or two-family
residence, or "agricultural unit", as defined by Idaho law.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE HAULER: Any person who collects, hauls or transports
solid waste on any highway or county road for business or profit or
remuneration.
DISPOSAL: The act or process of final placement, distribution or arrangement in
an orderly manner of solid waste so as to deal with it conclusively in
compliance with Idaho Code and rules and regulations relating to solid waste.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste which is of a kind and type usually produced
by normal household activity, exclusive of industrial waste or byproducts.
RESOLUTION: Any motion, written motion or other action taken by the board of
county commissioners at an official meeting of the board.
SOLID WASTE: All solid material that is considered to be useless, unwanted or
discarded by any person in possession of it. This includes, but is not
restricted to, garbage, trash, rubbish and construction waste.
SYSTEM: As defined in Idaho Code section 31-4401. (Ord. 146, 6-15-1981; amd.
Ord. 212, 1-9-1992; Ord. 238, 3-28-1994)
7-101: AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
   A.   This title is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code title
31, chapter 44.
   B.   It is the purpose of this title to institute within the Bonner County,
a functional solid waste collection and disposal system, a system to fund its
operation, and, in the course of doing so, to provide for protection of the
public health, safety, welfare and the environment. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-110: RESERVED:
7-150: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
   A.   Through this title, Bonner County (hereinafter referred to as the
"county"), exercises its governmental powers and duties as set forth in Idaho
Code title 31, chapter 44, to the extent that said duties are not carried out
by an incorporated city within the county.
   B.   The Bonner County board of commissioners are hereby identified as the
party responsible for administration of the Bonner County solid waste disposal
system. The board may assign its administrative duties to such staff assistants
as it may choose to assist it in performance of these responsibilities.
   C.   The board of county commissioners shall have the authority to establish
rules and policies regarding the collection, disposal, transportation,
ownership, separation and generation of solid waste within Bonner County. The
board may also establish rates and charges for solid waste system use and
availability, levy taxes to support system costs as necessary, or implement any
revenue option to support the system of solid waste disposal which may be
authorized by law.
   D.   Collection and disposal rates shall be subject to the jurisdiction of
the county commissioners. Should a mutually agreed upon collection rate not be
resolved between the commercial hauler and any commercial establishment, the
county commissioners shall decide the proper rate. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-160: MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SYSTEMS:
Any incorporated city in Bonner County may exercise its authority pursuant to
Idaho Code title 31, chapter 44, to operate a complete solid waste disposal
system for its residents to the exclusion of the system operated by Bonner
County. If any city elects to carry out these duties, independent from the
county system, it shall notify Bonner County at least six (6) months prior to
the beginning of a county fiscal year. Upon such notification, residents of
said city shall not be charged any disposal system user fees for the period of
operation of the solid waste disposal system by any city providing such
notification. Cities providing or requiring mandatory solid waste collection
service within their limits shall inform the county at least six (6) months
before the beginning of any fiscal year in order that disposal fees may be set
appropriate for the level of service to be provided. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
CHAPTER 2
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
7-201: Private Residences
7-202: Commercial Establishments And Public Entities
7-210: Collection; Use Of County Collection Sites
7-211: Containers
7-220: Hauling
7-221: Types Of Trucks For Hauling
7-230: Storage
7-240: Disposal
7-201: PRIVATE RESIDENCES:
   A.   The collection system for county private household residences shall
consist of a bulk containerized system, a bulk containerized and house to house
collection system, a house to house collection system, or whatever the board of
county commissioners deems to be the most appropriate method of collection of
solid waste.
   B.   Mobile homes are treated as single-family residences. (Ord. 212, 1-9-
1992)
7-202: COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND PUBLIC ENTITIES:
A county approved solid waste disposal and collection system must be used by
all commercial and public entities. All commercial and public establishments in
Bonner County, including, but not limited to, motels, hotels, resorts,
automobile repair garages, churches, schools, office buildings, recreational
vehicle parks, restaurants, campgrounds, bars, taverns, grocery stores, gas
stations, retail stores and commercial buildings shall have their municipal
solid waste collected by an authorized commercial hauler. The frequency of
collection for commercial and public establishments shall be such that a public
health hazard or nuisance does not result. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-210: COLLECTION; USE OF COUNTY COLLECTION SITES:
   A.   The authorized collection system must be utilized for all municipal
solid waste that is not considered a "post consumer product".
   B.   Any county established containerized collection site (drop box) is
deemed a collection component of the solid waste disposal system. Any solid
waste to be deposited at the bulk containerized sites shall be placed in the
provided containers.
   C.   Collection sites and containers are only for use by private household
residents.
   D.   No brush, yard waste, household appliances or household furnishings in
excess of five (5) cubic feet total volume, or construction waste, shall be
deposited into the dumpsters located at a county operated collection site. All
such items, and other materials of similar character too large or too heavy to
fit into the provided containers at a collection site, must be transported to
the designated waste disposal site whose location is identified at the
collection location. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-211: CONTAINERS:
Those users requiring mandatory collection shall provide a sufficient number of
containers to contain all waste materials generated during periods between
regularly scheduled collection or removal as may be necessary. (Ord. 212, 1-9-
1992)
7-220: HAULING:
Any person hauling solid waste to a collection or disposal site must prevent
littering, spilling, leaking or dripping upon county roads. (Ord. 212, 1-9-
1992)
7-221: TYPES OF TRUCKS FOR HAULING:
All commercial solid waste trucks will be of a type suitable for the collection
of garbage, modern, sanitary, clean, in good repair and of leak proof
construction, and no "open" type trucks will be used in hauling putrescible
waste. Open type trucks may be used for bulk type hauls, providing a tarp or
canvas is used to cover the load to keep materials from blowing off. (Ord. 212,
1-9-1992)
7-230: STORAGE:
All solid waste awaiting collection shall be securely contained within a
sanitary container or hauler provided bin to avoid scattering or spreading by
wind or animals. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-240: DISPOSAL:
   A.   All solid waste and refuse shall be disposed of at a location approved
by the Panhandle health district, and designated by the county therefor, or
under provisions of Idaho Code section 31-4404. (Ord. 146, 6-15-1981)
   B.   All commercial solid waste transported or collected, except
postcollection hauling by contract with the county, shall be hauled to a county
approved disposal site. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
CHAPTER 3
FUNDING AND FEES
SECTION:
7-301: Funding; Failure To Pay Fees
7-302: Residential Fees
7-307: Reporting And Billing Requirements
7-308: Estimates By Commercial Establishments
7-310: Establishment Of Fees, Billing System
7-311: Funding Collection And Disposal Of Residential Solid Waste
7-312: Solid Waste Fee Waiver
7-301: FUNDING; FAILURE TO PAY FEES:
Users of the Bonner County disposal system shall be responsible for paying the
full costs of its operation. Potential system users who do not pay the
requisite fees or charges shall not be allowed to use the county solid waste
disposal system. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-302: RESIDENTIAL FEES:
Residences ready for or capable of occupancy shall be obligated to pay the
required fees. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-307: REPORTING AND BILLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any city operating its solid waste collection system or any commercial
hauler operating within Bonner County shall comply with the reporting and
billing requirements established by this title or by resolution of the board of
commissioners. Any city or commercial hauler failing to comply with said
requirements shall be excluded from use of the county waste disposal system and
shall thereafter be responsible for disposal of collected solid waste in
accordance with this title and applicable provisions of state and federal law.
   B.   Each city or commercial hauler shall report to the county, on a monthly
basis, the volume, capacity and frequency of solid waste collection from all
commercial operations within their jurisdiction or served by them respectively.
Each commercial hauler operating within the county shall bill and collect
established solid waste disposal charges, subject to allowance by the county of
an administrative fee established by resolution. In the alternative, the county
is hereby authorized to charge the commercial hauler a like amount, to be
billed directly to the hauler. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-308: ESTIMATES BY COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS:
In the absence of an accurate report of waste system capacity at any commercial
establishment, waste generation will be estimated based on the type of business
or other information which can be discerned about potential solid waste
volumes. If any estimate proves to be inaccurate, the establishment or owner
may be back billed for services provided, but not paid for. (Ord. 212, 1-9-
1992)
7-310: ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES, BILLING SYSTEM:
   A.   Fees may be established commensurate with the level of service
provided. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
   B.   Each incorporated city shall pay to the county for its share of the
disposal and the administrative costs of the county. The cost paid to the
county by the city shall be the amount of money determined by multiplying the
total cost of all disposal and administration by the percentage of the total
Bonner County population residing in the city. The county shall collect or
charge no fee to any resident of a city that has mandatory collection. (Ord.
146, 6-15-1981)
   C.   The county may establish rates and charges on a rational basis, by
resolution of the board, as it finds such charges to be appropriate and
necessary to fund total disposal system costs. Said disposal charges may be
established for both residential and commercial uses throughout the county.
   D.   All solid waste contracts let by public agencies or governmental
entities, i.e., U.S. forest service, transportation department, state lands,
fish and game, army corps of engineers, school districts and others, shall
include a disposal charge payable to the county equivalent to the rates charged
to other commercial system users.
   E.   Rates and charges for system use may be based upon any rational fee
system established by the board of commissioners. Billing may be by statement
to the user or owner of the property served, through the billing system of an
authorized commercial hauler, or by such other method deemed appropriate by
resolution of the board of commissioners. The billing system may set fees based
upon any measure of system use deemed reliable by the board of county
commissioners. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-311: FUNDING COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE:
The financing of such collection and disposal shall be by any of the methods
authorized by Idaho Code section 31-4404. Fees and charges may be established
by resolution of the board of commissioners. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-312: SOLID WASTE FEE WAIVER:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy And Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to
institute within Bonner County, a functional policy setting forth the criteria
by which a group or entity qualifies for a waiver of solid waste fees.
   B.   Definitions:
    AGENCY: A department or service unit of the state or political subdivision,
municipality or highway district.
   APPROVED DISPOSAL SITE: Any county operated dumpster station, any landfill
site operated by Bonner County, and any privately operated landfill site
approved as such by the Panhandle health district and the Idaho department of
health and welfare.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE HAULER: Any person or contractor who collects, hauls
or transports solid waste on any highway or county road for business or profit
or remuneration.
   DISPOSAL: The act of process of final placement, distribution or arrangement
in an orderly manner of solid waste so as to deal with it conclusively in
compliance with Idaho Code and rules and regulations relating to solid waste.
   GOVERNMENT: Shall include the state of Idaho and any agency or political
subdivision of the state as set forth by Idaho Code.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Shall include any county or city as set forth by
Idaho Code.
   RESOLUTION: Any motion, written motion or other action taken by the board of
county commissioners at an official meeting of the board.
   SOLID WASTE: All solid material that is considered to be useless, unwanted
or discarded by any person in possession of it. This includes, but is not
restricted to, garbage, trash, rubbish and construction waste.
   SPECIAL EVENT: A particular activity, such as an annual city cleanup or an
Idaho transportation department adopt a road cleanup, which is undertaken by
the state of Idaho, its agency, or its political subdivision, for the benefit
of the public or for the purpose of providing for protection of the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment. These activities will typically be
one day or less in duration, though they may encompass a specified number of
days.
   C.   Performance Of Duties And Administration:
      1.   The Bonner County board of commissioners is hereby identified as the
party responsible for administration of the Bonner County solid waste fee
waiver ordinance.
      2.   The Bonner County board of commissioners shall have the authority to
establish and administer the policy regarding waiver of solid waste fees as set
forth in this section.
   D.   System Operation Requirements:
      1.   Under the provisions of this section, state "government" or its
"agency" or "political subdivision", as defined in subsection B of this
section, may apply to the Bonner County board of commissioners, or their
designee, and request a waiver of solid waste fees for a special event. The
solid waste generated by or during this special event shall be hauled by the
state government, its agency or political subdivision, or by a commercial solid
waste hauler for final disposal at an approved disposal site. This hauling and
disposal shall be done in accordance with Bonner County solid waste disposal
ordinance 212.
      2.   Waiver of solid waste fees shall not be granted on any basis other
than special event.
      3.   No group or entity other than state government, its agencies, or a
political subdivision of the state of Idaho shall be given a waiver of solid
waste fees.
      4.   Any group or entity other than state government, its agencies, or a
political subdivision of the state of Idaho who had been granted a waiver of
solid waste fees on any basis other than for a special event, shall be allowed
to retain that waiver for the period of time specified when the waiver was
granted. (Ord. 405, 5-8-2001)
CHAPTER 4
VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS
SECTION:
7-401: Violations
7-410: Enforcement; Liability For Costs
7-411: Appeals
7-420: Penalties
7-401: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this title to dispose of or abandon solid
waste other than in compliance with this title, or with the signs posted at
collection site locations.
   B.   Utilization of the county operated bulk containerized sites by
commercial enterprises, their owners or agents, is prohibited.
   C.   It shall be a violation of this title for any person to dispose of or
abandon solid waste at a location other than at a county approved solid waste
disposal site, or to dispose of solid waste at county solid waste collection
sites outside of the bulk containers provided.
   D.   Using the system without paying the established charges for such use
shall be a violation of this title. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-410: ENFORCEMENT; LIABILITY FOR COSTS:
   A.   The county has the authority to remove solid waste that is disposed of
in violation of this title and charge the person responsible for the service
provided.
   B.   The Bonner County prosecuting attorney may cause proceedings to be
commenced against violators of the provisions of this title by civil or
criminal actions, or both, as may be directed by the Bonner County
commissioners.
   C.   Bonner County may also bring a civil action to abate or enjoin a
violation of this title and to collect and enforce payment of any sums of money
due to Bonner County by reason of this title or resolutions adopted pursuant
thereto, together with reasonable legal fees and court costs. (Ord. 212, 1-9-
1992)
7-411: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any levy, assessment, fee, tax notice, action or order
of Bonner County may, within ten (10) days thereof, request an informal hearing
before the board of county commissioners, which shall take place as soon as
possible. A written notice of the final determination shall be sent to the
person upon the rendering of the decision. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
7-420: PENALTIES:
Any person in violation of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
subject to a fine not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), and may be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or shall be subject to both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 212, 1-9-1992)
TITLE 8
SPECIAL LICENSES
CHAPTER 1
LICENSING FOR PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
8-101: Definition
8-102: License Required; Posting
8-103: Location Of Pawnshops
8-105: License Application; Deposit; Issuance; Revocation
8-106: License Application; Investigation By County Sheriff
8-108: License; Nonuse, Nontransferable
8-110: Registration Of Employees
8-120: Practices Of Pawnbrokers
8-150: Prohibited Acts; Acts Of Employees
8-190: Violation, Penalty
8-101: DEFINITION:
Any person within the county who loans money on deposits of personal property
or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of
selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor, or who loans or
advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security
thereon, and takes or receives such personal property into his possession, is
hereby declared to be a "pawnbroker". (Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-102: LICENSE REQUIRED; POSTING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker
business or pawnshop in the county without first having procured a county
license thereof as hereinafter provided. The fee for such license shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per year.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker
business in the county unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in
the place of business the license certificate therefor, and a copy of all
ordinances relating to pawnbrokers. (Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-103: LOCATION OF PAWNSHOPS:
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued in any location in which such business
is not permitted by the zoning ordinance of the county. (Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-105: LICENSE APPLICATION; DEPOSIT; ISSUANCE; REVOCATION:
   A.   The application shall state the name of the person, and, in case of a
firm or corporation, the names of all of the partners in such firm, or of the
directors, officers and stockholders of such corporation; also the place,
street and number where such business is to be carried on, and shall specify
the amount of capital proposed to be used by the applicant in such business,
and shall be signed by at least ten (10) citizens of the county, of good
reputation, certifying to the good reputation and moral character of the
applicant.
   B.   At the time of filing such petition, the applicant shall deposit an
amount of money equal to at least one-half (1/2) year's, and not more than one
year's charge for the license applied for. This sum of money shall be refunded
to the applicant, upon demand, in case the license petitioned for shall not be
granted.
   C.   No such license shall be issued to any person, corporation,
copartnership or association other than the real and actual proprietor of the
business and place of business for which it is issued.
   D.   The applicant shall file, with the application, a bond running to the
county, conditioned for the faithful observance of all provisions of this title
respecting pawnbrokers, during the continuance of such license, and any renewal
thereof, for not more than one year. This bond shall be in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with a corporate surety or two (2) or more
individual sureties. To such bond shall be attached a justification to the
effect that the sureties are residents within the county and each is worth the
amount specified in such bond, over and above all just debts and liabilities,
and exclusive of property exempt from execution.
   E.   The county commissioners may revoke any pawnbroker's license for
repeated violations of the provisions of this chapter. Any licensee shall have
the opportunity for a hearing before such revocation. (Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-106: LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION BY COUNTY SHERIFF:
All applications for pawnbroker's licenses or renewals thereof shall be
presented to the county commissioners at a regular meeting thereof. No
application shall be acted upon until a recommendation for or against the
application is received from the sheriff; provided, that the county
commissioners shall not be bound by the sheriff's recommendation. (Ord. 170,
12-23-1986)
8-108: LICENSE; NONUSE, NONTRANSFERABLE:
   A.   The license issued under this title shall state the name of the person
to whom issued, the place of business and street number where such business is
located and the amount of capital employed. Such license shall entitle the
person receiving it to do business at the place designated in such license.
   B.   If a pawnbroker shall not conduct said business for a period of ninety
(90) days, the license shall be null and void. Pawnbroker's licenses shall not
be transferable to any other person, except by a majority vote of the county
commissioners, and the filing of an application and a new bond by the person to
whom such license is, or may be, transferred or assigned. It shall be unlawful
for any person to do business, or attempt to do business, under a license
transferred to him without such approval of the county commissioners. (Ord.
170, 12-23-1986)
8-110: REGISTRATION OF EMPLOYEES:
Every employee of a "pawnshop", as hereinafter defined, shall, within thirty
(30) days from the effective date hereof, register his name and address with
the sheriff's office, and shall have had his thumbprints, fingerprints and
photograph taken and filed with the county, and receive a certificate showing
compliance therewith. For the purpose of this section, an employee of a
pawnshop shall include all persons working in a pawnbroker's shop and any
owner, stockholder if the owner is a corporation, partner or other person who
receives income in any manner from the operation of said pawnshop. Every person
seeking to be registered under the provisions of this section shall first pay
to the county the sum of one dollar twenty five cents ($1.25) as a condition
precedent to having issued to him or her a certificate as provided herein.
(Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-120: PRACTICES OF PAWNBROKERS:
   A.   The pawnbroker shall retain in his possession every pledge or pawn
fourteen (14) days after the maturity of the loan, or fourteen (14) days after
the last payment of interest, or part of the principal, whichever is greater.
If the pledgor shall fail or neglect for fourteen (14) days after maturity of
the loan, or fourteen (14) days after the last payment of interest, or part of
the principal, to redeem the pawned property, the pawnbroker may sell any such
property held for redemption; provided, that such property shall have been held
for redemption for a period of not less than thirty (30) days from the date of
pledge. After a loan is in default, the pawnbroker may refuse to accept any
payment less than the entire principal and interest due.
   B.   Each pawnbroker shall furnish to the pledgor a printed receipt clearly
showing the amount loaned with a specific, detailed description of the pledged
property pawned or received, date of receipt thereof, time for redemption, the
name of the pledgee. The reverse side of said receipt shall be marked in such a
manner that the amounts of principal and interest and other charges paid by the
person securing the loan can be clearly designated thereon. Each payment shall
be entered upon the reverse side of said receipt and shall designate how much
of the payment is being credited to principal, how much to interest, and how
much to any other charge, with the date of said payments shown thereon. The
pawnbroker shall affix to each article or thing a tag upon which shall be
inscribed a number, of legible characters, which shall correspond to the number
on the pawn ticket and be entered in the book required to be kept by subsection
F of this section. The pawnbroker shall furnish all information required by law
to be given to borrowers by state law and federal law. The following
information shall be printed on the front or back of each pawn ticket required
to be given to the pledgor:
In the event of failure to pay the loan with thirty (30) days from the date
hereof, or within fourteen (14) days after maturity, or within fourteen (14)
days after payment of any month interest when due, whichever period of time is
the greater, you shall thereby forfeit all right and title unto such pledged
and pawned property to the pawnbroker who shall thereby acquire an absolute
title to the same.
   C.   Upon redemption of any pledge, the pawnbroker shall furnish to the
pledgor at the time of redemption a written signed receipt indicating the exact
amount paid on principal and interest in order that said pledgor may have the
benefit of said receipt for income tax purposes and other matters. Said written
receipt shall be either printed or stamped with the name of the pawnbroker and
the address, and shall be legibly written so that the figures thereon are
clearly discernible.
   D.   Every pawnbroker shall prepare and deliver to the pledgor at the time
of the pledge a separate pawn ticket for each and every item pledged.
   E.   Each and every pawnbroker shall post and maintain in a prominent
location within the confines of said pawnshop, a printed sign not less than
fifteen inches by twenty inches (15" x 20") with clearly discernible red
lettering on a white background in not less than two inch (2") size, the
following words:
Maximum interest, if any        percent per month, or $          service
charge.
   F.   Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be entered and
legibly written in ink, at the time of each loan or receipt of personal
property, an accurate account and description of the goods, articles or things
pawned, or received, the amount of money loaned or advanced thereon, the number
of the pawn ticket given to the pledgor, the time when redeemable, the time,
both day and hour, of pawning or receiving such goods, articles or things, and
the name, residence, age, sex, and color and description as near as possible of
the person pawning or delivering the goods, articles or things. No entry made
in such book shall be erased, obliterated or defaced. The book, as well as
every article or thing pawned, pledged or deposited, shall at all reasonable
times be open to inspection by the sheriff or any officer directed by the
sheriff.
   G.   Every pawnbroker of pawnshop keeper in the county must, before the hour
of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Monday of each week, deliver to the sheriff,
at the sheriff's office, a full, true and detailed copy of all pawn tickets
legibly written, setting forth an exact description of each article or thing
pawned or received by such pawnbroker or pawnshop keeper during the period
since the last such report. Said ticket shall be a full, detailed and correct
copy of all entries in the book required to be kept in subsection F of this
section. If no article or thing has been pawned or received, a report must be
made to that effect.
   H.   Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions hereof shall provide a
safe place for the keeping of the pledges received by him and shall have
sufficient insurance on the property held on pledges, for the benefit of the
pledgors, in case of destruction by fire. (Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-150: PROHIBITED ACTS; ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to use a false name, a fictitious address
or any address other than the true address or to furnish any false, untrue or
misleading information or statement relating to the information required by any
section of this chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, pawnshop keeper, his servant
or employee to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge from a
person who is intoxicated, under the influence of drugs, insane or a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to employ any clerk or person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to receive any pledge or make any loan.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or receive any
appraisal fee, storage fee, or any fee or charge other than the amounts
specified in this chapter. No charges shall be made for restoring stolen
property to its rightful owners.
   E.   No licensed pawnbroker shall buy, sell or take for pledge, pawn or
security, any brass knuckles.
   F.   The holder of a pawnbroker's license shall be responsible for any and
all acts of his employees, and for any violation by them of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 170, 12-23-1986)
8-190: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for
not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord.
170, 12-23-1986)
CHAPTER 2
RETAIL BEER SALES LICENSES
SECTION:
8-201: License Approval By Board Required
8-205: Application To Board; Approval, Denial
8-207: Proceedings Before Board; Transcribable Record, Minutes
8-201: LICENSE APPROVAL BY BOARD REQUIRED:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 23-1015, from and after August 29, 1983, no
state application for issuance, renewal or transfer shall be granted for retail
beer license until approval thereof by the board of county commissioners. (Ord.
156, 8-29-1983)
8-205: APPLICATION TO BOARD; APPROVAL, DENIAL:
   A.   A copy of the state application shall be submitted to the clerk of the
board of county commissioners along with the application for the county
license. The applicant shall tender the required fees for the county license
and a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for processing of the state application.
   B.   Upon submission of such application, the board of county commissioners
shall, within a period of thirty (30) days, advise the applicant in writing of
its approval or denial.
   C.   If the application is denied, said notification shall specify:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reasons for denial;
      3.   The actions, if any, the applicant can take to obtain the license,
transfer, or renewal thereof. (Ord. 156, 8-29-1983)
8-207: PROCEEDINGS BEFORE BOARD; TRANSCRIBABLE RECORD, MINUTES:
   A.   Proceedings before the board of county commissioners shall be recorded
by a transcribable verbatim recording of the proceedings, which shall be
maintained for a period of six (6) months, unless judicial review is sought as
provided by Idaho Code section 23-1015, in which case they shall be preserved
until all judicial remedies are exhausted. The applicant, upon written request,
and upon payment of the estimated cost, may have the record transcribed within
the periods prescribed in this section.
   B.   The county, in addition to the transcribable record, shall maintain
minutes of the meeting to be retained indefinitely, or as otherwise provided by
law. (Ord. 156, 8-29-1983)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR, WINE AND BEER SALES
SECTION:
8-301: Sales Of Liquor By The Drink
8-302: Sales Of Wine And Beer
8-301: SALES OF LIQUOR BY THE DRINK:
   A.   From and after July 1, 1986, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code
section 23-927(2), it shall be lawful for any establishment within the county
of Bonner, state of Idaho, duly licensed to sell liquor by the drink on
Sundays, Memorial Day, and Thanksgiving.
   B.   From and after July 1, 1986, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code
section 23-927(2), it shall be lawful for any establishment within the county
of Bonner, state of Idaho, duly licensed to sell liquor by the drink to remain
open and dispense alcoholic beverages until two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
   C.   All other restrictions and prohibitions contained in Idaho Code section
23-927 shall remain in effect and unchanged relative to the sale of liquor by
the drink in Bonner County, state of Idaho. (Ord. 169, 6-24-1986)
8-302: SALES OF WINE AND BEER:
From and after July 1, 1987, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section
23-1210(4), it shall be lawful for any establishment within the county of
Bonner, state of Idaho, duly licensed to sell beer and wine to remain open and
dispense beer and wine until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. (Ord. 178, 7-7-1987)
TITLE 9
SPECIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH
CHAPTER 1
PHOSPHOROUS BAN
SECTION:
9-100: Purpose
9-101: Definitions
9-102: Enforcement
9-103: Household Cleaning Products; Content, Distribution, Labeling
9-150: Exemptions
9-190: Violations, Penalties
9-100: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants
of Bonner County, Idaho, to ban the commercial sale of household cleaning
products containing more than a trace level of phosphorus. (Ord. 187, 4-10-
1989)
9-101: DEFINITIONS:
HOUSEHOLD CLEANING PRODUCTS: Shall include, but not be limited to, soaps,
detergents, laundry bleaches, laundry additives, and such other products used
for domestic or commercial cleaning purposes, including, but not limited to,
the cleaning of fabrics, dishes, food utensils, and household and commercial
premises.
TRACE QUANTITY: That incidental amount of phosphorus which is not a part of the
household cleaning product formulation, and is present only as a consequence of
manufacturing, and does not exceed one-half percent (0.5%) of the content of
the product by weight expressed as elemental phosphorus. (Ord. 187, 4-10-1989)
9-102: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Bonner County sheriff's
department. (Ord. 187, 4-10-1989)
9-103: HOUSEHOLD CLEANING PRODUCTS; CONTENT, DISTRIBUTION, LABELING:
   A.   No household cleaning product which contains more than a trace quantity
of phosphorus shall be sold, offered, distributed or exposed for commercial
sale or distribution within Bonner County, Idaho.
   B.   All household cleaning products commercially sold or distributed in
Bonner County, Idaho, shall have affixed thereto labeling which clearly
indicates the percent of phosphorus contained in the product to the nearest
one-tenth percent (1/10%) accuracy. (Ord. 187, 4-10-1989)
9-150: EXEMPTIONS:
The following products are specifically exempt from the provisions of this
title:
   A.   Existing stocks of household cleaning products; provided however, that
such existing stocks shall be exempt for a period of only six (6) months after
the effective date hereof.
   B.   Automatic dishwasher detergents containing eight and seven-tenths
percent (8.7%) or less phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental phosphorus.
   C.   Those products used for cleaning medical or surgical equipment or
supplies in licensed acute care or long term healthcare facilities. (Ord. 187,
4-10-1989)
9-190: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be sentenced to jail for a period not greater
than thirty (30) days, and fined an amount not greater than three hundred
dollars ($300.00), or both such jail sentence and fine. (Ord. 187, 4-10-1989)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM (911)
SECTION:
9-201: Service Area
9-202: Election To Establish Telephone User Line Fee
9-203: Establishment Of Emergency Communications Board
9-204: Appointment Of Members, Designees, Terms
9-205: Bonner County Board Of Commissioners Appointed As Administrator For 911
System
9-206: Powers And Duties Of Emergency Communications Board
9-207: Agency To Service 911 Calls
9-201: SERVICE AREA:
The consolidated emergency communications system for Bonner County, Idaho,
shall have a service area comprising the whole of Bonner County, including
incorporated municipalities. (Ord. 333, 6-12-1997)
9-202: ELECTION TO ESTABLISH TELEPHONE USER LINE FEE:
   A.   The telephone line user fee of not more than one dollar ($1.00) per
month shall be initiated and maintained in accordance with the election results
from the November 1996 general election and in accordance with all applicable
provisions of Idaho Code for the purpose of establishing and maintaining the
emergency communications system.
   B.   All providers of wireless telephone service in Bonner County will
collect the telephone use fee in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per wireless
and nonwireless telephone and remit the proceeds on a monthly basis to Bonner
County treasurer's office at 215 South First Avenue, Sandpoint, Idaho, 83864.
This remittance will occur on the last day of the month following the
provider's billing cycle.
   C.   Pursuant to Idaho Code section 31-4804 and this chapter, wireless and
nonwireless telephone providers shall be entitled to deduct and retain three-
fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the collected telephone line user fee each
month as the cost of administration for collection of the charge. (Ord. 419, 2-
15-2002)
9-203: ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS BOARD:
There is hereby established an "emergency communications board" (ECB) for
Bonner County, Idaho. The membership of the ECB shall be composed of
representatives of emergency service providers and citizens of Bonner County
who shall be appointed and serve on the ECB pursuant to the terms of this
chapter. (Ord. 333, 6-12-1997)
9-204: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS, DESIGNEES, TERMS:
   A.   The membership of the emergency communications board shall be as
follows:
      1.   One seat on the board shall be held by a member representing
emergency medical services.
      2.   One seat on the board shall be held by a member representing fire
services.
      3.   One seat on the board shall be held by a member representing law
enforcement.
      4.   One seat on the board shall be a member representing the citizens of
the county (a citizen member).
      5.   One seat on the board shall be held by a member of the emergency
services director for Bonner County.
   B.   Membership on the board shall be at pleasure of the board of Bonner
County commissioners and said members may be removed with or without cause. The
citizen member shall serve for a fixed term of four (4) years, except that the
initial appointment shall have one member appointed for terms of two (2) years,
two (2) members appointed for terms of three (3) years, and two (2) members
appointed for terms of four (4) years. (Ord. 419, 2-15-2002)
9-205: BONNER COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED AS ADMINISTRATOR FOR 911
SYSTEM:
The Bonner County board of commissioners is hereby designated and appointed as
the "administrator" for the 911 system for Bonner County, with the authority to
operate the 911 system and receive funds for the operation as set forth in
ordinance 333, this chapter and in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code
title 31, chapter 48. The Bonner County board of commissioners as
"administrator" for the 911 system shall, in addition to all other statutory
duties under Idaho Code title 31, chapter 48, have the ability to appoint
committees, approve budgets and expenditures in accordance with the provisions
of Idaho Code, and perform such other duties and functions as may be necessary
in order to administer the 911 system. (Ord. 378, 8-4-1999)
9-206: POWERS AND DUTIES OF EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS BOARD:
   A.   The board of directors shall be an advisory board to the Bonner County
board of commissioners/"administrator" and shall submit recommended budgets to
the Bonner County commissioners for approval, as well as make recommendations
for management, operation, maintenance and development and planning for
improvements and further developments of the 911 system. The emergency
communications board shall perform all other duties and functions as may be
necessary for making recommendations to the board of county commissioners/
"administrator" for enhancement of the 911 system.
   B.   At its first meeting, the emergency communications board shall adopt
such rules of organization, and bylaws as may be necessary for the operation of
the emergency communications board. (Ord. 378, 8-4-1999)
   C.   (Rep. by Ord. 419, 2-15-2002)
   D.   The board of directors shall elect from its membership such executive
officers as are required by the rules of organization of the emergency
communications board. (Ord. 378, 8-4-1999)
9-207: AGENCY TO SERVICE 911 CALLS:
The Bonner County sheriff's department is hereby designated pursuant to section
31-4803, Idaho Code, as the agency to service the 911 calls. (Ord. 562, 3-28-
2017)
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-101: Purpose; Disclaimer
10-102: Duty Of Sheriff To Enforce
10-110: Applicability
10-111: Exclusions
10-112: Applicability To Police Dogs, Search And Rescue Dogs
10-120: Definitions
10-130: Interfering Or Obstructing Animal Control Officer Or Peace Officer
10-140: Violations, Penalties
10-101: PURPOSE; DISCLAIMER:
It shall be the purpose of this title to provide standards and procedures for
responsible care and ownership of dogs and other domestic animals within the
unincorporated areas of Bonner County. This chapter does not address all
aspects of animal ownership, rather, it establishes some minimum standards for
animal care, control and treatment in the interest of public safety and animal
welfare. The responsibility for actions and behavior of domestic animals
remains with the owner. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-102: DUTY OF SHERIFF TO ENFORCE:
It shall be the duty of the Bonner County sheriff, or his designee, to enforce
the provisions of this title. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-110: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this title shall be applicable to all animals resident in
Bonner County, Idaho, and acts related to all animals while present in Bonner
County, except as specifically excluded by the provisions of this title. (Ord.
248, 8-2-1994)
10-111: EXCLUSIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not be construed as interfering with or
allowing interference with:
   A.   Normal or accepted veterinary practices;
   B.   The humane slaughter of any animal normally and commonly raised as food
or for the production of fiber;
   C.   The humane destruction of an animal which is diseased or disabled
beyond recovery, or the humane destruction of animals for population control;
   D.   Normal or accepted practices of animal identification and animal
husbandry;
   E.   The killing of an animal that is vicious and at large or that is posing
an imminent threat to human life or the life of another domestic animal, by an
animal control officer, law enforcement officer or veterinarian;
   F.   The killing or destruction of predatory animals, venomous reptiles,
vermin or other animals in accordance with the laws and rules covering such
animals;
   G.   The laws or rules of the department of fish and game, or any law for or
against the destruction of certain birds. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-112: APPLICABILITY TO POLICE DOGS, SEARCH AND RESCUE DOGS:
No portion of this title shall in any way inhibit the use of any police dog or
military dog, or other law enforcement dog by a public law enforcement agency,
or any dog used for and actively engaged in a search and/or rescue operation.
(Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-120: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms shall have the specific
meaning:
ABANDON: For an owner to desert an animal in the custody or possession of the
owner without making reasonable arrangements for its proper care, sustenance
and shelter.
ADULT DOG OR CAT: Any dog or cat more than six (6) months of age.
ALTERED: A full ovariohysterectomy in the case of the female and complete
removal of the testicles in the male. A vasectomized male dog is not an
"altered" animal.
ANIMAL: Shall include, but not be limited to, birds, amphibians, fish,
reptiles, mammals and nonhuman primates.
AT LARGE: Any animal being on any private property, without the permission of
the person who owns, or has a right to possess or use the property, or in any
other place or condition which presents substantial risk to animal or public
health, safety or welfare. "At large" shall also mean any dog unrestrained by a
leash on either public property, or private property other than the property of
the owner or without the permission of the property owner. "At large" shall not
be construed to mean domestic livestock on an open range.
ATTACK: Biting, attempted biting, the infliction of a severe injury, or
aggressively pursuing with a present ability to bite or injure a person.
BOARD: The Bonner County board of county commissioners.
CRUEL OR CRUELTY: Any or all of the following:
   A.   The intentional or negligent infliction of pain, physical suffering,
injury or death upon an animal;
   B.   To intentionally or negligently kill, maim, wound, overdrive, overload,
drive when overloaded, overwork, torture, torment, deprive of necessary
sustenance, drink or shelter, cruelly beat, mutilate or cruelly kill an animal;
   C.   To subject an animal to needless suffering, inflict unnecessary
cruelty, drive, ride or otherwise use an animal when the animal is unfit;
   D.   To abandon an animal;
   E.   To use any live mammal or bird as a training aid for hunting dogs,
racing dogs or for pleasure, which results in the maiming, mutilating or
cruelly killing such live mammal or bird.
DEPARTMENT: The Bonner County sheriff's department, its agents, deputies or
other persons designated by the sheriff.
DOG: Canis familiaris of either sex, altered or unaltered, or any other member
of the Canis genus if owned, kept or harbored.
HUNTING DOG: Any dog of the hunting type breeds, which is actively engaged in
lawful hunting pursuant to the regulations established by the Idaho department
of fish and game.
LEASH: Any rope, leather strap, chain or any other material, not exceeding six
feet (6') in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling,
and actually controlling, the animal to which it is attached.
NUISANCE: Any animal which by loud, continued or frequent barking, howling,
yelping, or other noise, or by noxious or offensive odors, or by chasing,
aggressing, attacking or scaring passersby, chasing vehicles or attacking other
domestic animals, endangers the health and welfare or disturbs the peace of or
annoys any reasonable person or neighborhood.
OWNER: Any person who is the legal owner, or any person who keeps, harbors or
possesses any animal, or any person who has an animal in his care or acts as
caretaker of an animal.
RABIES TAG: A piece of metal or other durable material, inscribed with a date
and number, which has been issued by a veterinarian, as evidence that the dog
has been vaccinated for rabies.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle
tears or disfiguring lacerations, or requires multiple sutures or corrective or
cosmetic surgery.
STOCK DOG: Any dog of the herding type breeds which is actively engaged in the
herding of livestock, while under the control of the owner of the dog.
VACCINATED ANIMAL: Any animal inoculated with a rabies vaccine, and wearing a
current rabies tag, or whose owner has a current rabies certificate in his
possession indicating proof of such vaccination.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which:
   A.   Has twice, within a forty eight (48) month period, bitten, attacked or
otherwise caused injury to a person engaged in lawful activity; or
   B.   Has once attacked or bitten a person engaged in a lawful activity,
causing death or severe injury. (Ord. 544, 3-31-2015)
10-130: INTERFERING OR OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER OR PEACE OFFICER:
Any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with, or obstruct an animal
control officer or any peace officer or person authorized by the department to
enforce this title, in the capturing, securing or taking possession of any
animal to be impounded, or who shall open or in any manner directly or
indirectly aid, counsel or advise the opening of any animal control cage,
ambulance, wagon or other vehicle used for the collection or conveyance of
animals to an animal shelter or other place of animal custody, shall be deemed
to have violated this title. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-140: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this title shall be deemed a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, such violations shall carry a penalty of a fine of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or six (6) months' imprisonment, or both. For the
purposes of this title, a separate violation shall be deemed to occur for each
provision violated with respect to any individual animal. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL DISEASES
SECTION:
10-210: Rabies Vaccines; Certificate Forms
10-211: Rabies Vaccination Required For Dogs; Certificates, Tags, Exemption
10-220: Reporting Suspected Cases Of Rabies
10-221: Reporting Of Bites
10-222: Isolation Of Biting Animals, Animals With Suspected Rabies
10-230: Injuries And Communicable Diseases; Department To Take Possession;
Owner Responsible For Costs And Fees
10-210: RABIES VACCINES; CERTIFICATE FORMS:
   A.   Rabies vaccines administered to comply with the terms of this chapter
must be approved by the state of Idaho, and administered by a licensed
veterinarian at such times and intervals as to maintain current effectiveness
consistent with standard veterinary practices.
   B.   A "rabies certificate form" produced for compliance with the terms of
this chapter must be issued by a licensed veterinarian and must show:
      1.   Animal owner's name, address and telephone number;
      2.   Animal's name, species, breed, color, sex and age;
      3.   The type, lot number and manufacturer of the rabies vaccine;
      4.   The date of the vaccination;
      5.   The date on which the vaccination expires;
      6.   The signature of the veterinarian who vaccinated the animal, or
other signature, authorized by the veterinarian administering the vaccination.
(Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-211: RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED FOR DOGS; CERTIFICATES, TAGS, EXEMPTION:
   A.   Dog owners shall obtain a rabies vaccination for each dog they own,
keep, harbor or possess, within thirty (30) days after it becomes six (6)
months of age, or within thirty (30) days after obtaining any dog over six (6)
months of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or possess
any dog, unless such dog has a current rabies vaccination, administered by a
licensed veterinarian, with a rabies vaccine approved for use in a dog. Such
vaccinations shall be repeated at such intervals as determined by the type of
vaccine used and licensing requirements of said vaccine.
   B.   Any veterinarian who vaccinates a dog for rabies shall also certify, by
properly completing a rabies certificate form.
   C.   Every dog owner shall securely affix the current rabies tag to the
collar or harness of the dog for which it was issued, and shall ensure that the
dog wears such rabies tag at all times.
   D.   A rabies tag issued for one dog shall not be transferred or attached to
another dog.
   E.   No person, other than the dog's owner, shall remove a rabies tag or
identification tag from such dog.
   F.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a dog need not be
vaccinated for rabies during an illness, if a licensed veterinarian has
examined the dog, and has certified in writing that such vaccinations should be
postponed. Said temporary exemption shall be valid only for the duration of the
illness or other medical condition for which it is granted. Any owner of a dog
which has not been vaccinated for medical reasons shall retain written evidence
of such exemption and shall produce it to the department upon demand. (Ord.
248, 8-2-1994)
10-220: REPORTING SUSPECTED CASES OF RABIES:
   A.   Any owner of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in
a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that the animal may have
rabies shall notify the department and the Panhandle health district.
   B.   Upon the order of the department or the Panhandle health district, a
suspected rabid animal shall be isolated in strict confinement under the proper
care and observation of a licensed veterinarian, in a veterinary hospital,
animal shelter or other facility approved by the department or the Panhandle
health district. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-221: REPORTING OF BITES:
All persons bitten, and parents or guardians of minor children bitten, by a
dog, cat, skunk, fox, coyote, bobcat, or other animal of a species subject to
rabies, shall notify the department and the Panhandle health district as soon
as possible thereafter. Physicians treating such bites, and other persons
having knowledge of such bites, shall also notify the department and the
Panhandle health district. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-222: ISOLATION OF BITING ANIMALS, ANIMALS WITH SUSPECTED RABIES:
Any animal of a species subject to rabies which bites, and any suspected rabid
animal, shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved
by the department or the Panhandle health district for at least fourteen (14)
days after the date of the bite. Dogs or cats shall be so isolated and observed
for at least ten (10) days after the infliction of the bite or exposure. Dogs
and cats which have been isolated under the immediate supervision of a licensed
veterinarian may be released on the fifth day if, upon examination by the
veterinarian, the veterinarian certifies in writing that no clinical signs or
symptoms of rabies exist. Notwithstanding all the foregoing provisions, the
department, with the permission of any known owner of the animal, may authorize
the euthanasia of the animal for the purposes of laboratory examination. (Ord.
248, 8-2-1994)
10-230: INJURIES AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASES; DEPARTMENT TO TAKE POSSESSION;
OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR COSTS AND FEES:
   A.   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal with a serious
injury, or inflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other contagious
disease, unless such animal is being given adequate treatment for such disease
or injury.
   B.   The department may take immediate possession of a diseased or injured
animal, not being adequately treated, or not responding to treatment, and
transport the animal to a place of safe custody or a veterinarian office, or
humanely destroy the animal if such animal is beyond recovery, unless the owner
places such animal under the control and treatment of a veterinarian forthwith.
   C.   The owner of such an animal in the possession of the department for
injury or disease, shall pay all fees and expenses related to treatment,
including, but not limited to, any transportation, confinement, board,
veterinary care and associated treatment costs, and any protective impoundment
fees. Failure to pay said costs and fees shall preclude return of the animal to
its owner, except as set forth at subsection D of this section.
   D.   The department may waive all or part of any costs and fees when such
costs and fees would create an undue hardship upon the owner and when such
waiver would serve the best interests of the animal. The department may also
make arrangements for return of the animal to the owner and postpone the
payment of all or part of any costs and fees when such arrangement would serve
the best interests of the animal. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
10-310: Dogs To Be Under Owner's Control; Not To Become Nuisances
10-311: Dogs Not To Be At Large; Leashes; Exception
10-312: Confinement Of Female Dogs In Estrus
10-310: DOGS TO BE UNDER OWNER'S CONTROL; NOT TO BECOME NUISANCES:
   A.   Any person, who, after complaint has been made by any person to the
sheriff, who shall serve a copy of said notice upon such person complained of,
wilfully or negligently permits any dog owned or possessed, or under his or her
custody or control to become a "nuisance" as defined in section
10-120 of this title, within Bonner County shall be guilty of the crime of
animal nuisance, and shall be punished as provided in subsection B of this
section.
   B.   A first violation of this provision is an infraction and is punishable
by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person who pleads guilty to or
is found guilty of a second violation of this section, within five (5) years of
the first conviction, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by
a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   C.   Any defendant who violates the provisions of this section, who has pled
guilty to or been convicted of animal nuisance two (2) times in the previous
five (5) years, who is charged with a third offense or more is a habitual
offender and shall be charged with a misdemeanor offense. Such offense is
punishable as provided in section
10-140 of this title.
   D.   It shall not be a defense to animal nuisance that the offenses charged
are not for the same animals. (Ord. 544, 3-31-2015)
10-311: DOGS NOT TO BE AT LARGE; LEASHES; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Dog owners shall at all times prevent their dogs from being at large.
   B.   When a dog is leashed so as not to be at large under the terms of this
title, the leash shall be a rope, leather strap, chain or any other material,
not exceeding six feet (6') in length, being held in the hand of a person
capable of controlling, and actually controlling, the animal to which it is
attached.
   C.   Dogs may be free from a leash, and shall not be deemed to be at large,
while participating in field trials and obedience trials, while actively
engaged in herding livestock, while assisting a peace officer engaged in law
enforcement duties or search and rescue operations, or while hunting pursuant
to Idaho department of fish and game regulations. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-312: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN ESTRUS:
Dog owners shall securely confine their female dogs within an enclosure while
in season (estrus). (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 4
HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
SECTION:
10-410: Inhumane Treatment, Abandonment, Poisoning
10-420: Transportation Of Animals; Animals In Unattended Vehicles
10-430: Authorization To Place Animals In Protective Impoundment; Fee
10-431: Release Of Animals From Protective Impoundment
10-440: Liability Of Owner For Humane Pick Up Fee When Animal Not Reclaimed
From Impoundment
10-410: INHUMAN TREATMENT, ABANDONMENT, POISONING:
   A.   No person shall treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner, or
wilfully or negligently cause or permit any animal to suffer unnecessary
torture or pain.
   B.   No person shall abandon any animal on any public or private property,
or allow any animal to be without potable water at any time, or allow the
animal to be without the quantity of food necessary to maintain a healthy body
weight, except an animal under the care of a licensed practicing veterinarian.
   C.   No person shall wilfully administer any poisonous substance to an
animal, the property of another, or maliciously place any poisonous substance
where it would attract an animal, with the intent that the poison shall be
taken, ingested or absorbed by such animal, except that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to the poisoning of rodents, vermin or declared
agricultural pests conducted in accordance with the laws and rules covering
such animals. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-420: TRANSPORTATION OF ANIMALS; ANIMALS IN UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
   A.   (Rep. by Ord. 291, 7-29-1995)
   B.   No person shall leave an animal in any unattended vehicle, trailer or
conveyance without adequate security to protect the public, or without adequate
ventilation, or in any manner as to subject the animal to extremes of
temperature which adversely affect the health or welfare of the animal. Upon
discovery of an animal so confined and adversely affected, or posing an
immediate threat to the safety of the public, the sheriff, any peace officer or
animal control officer, is hereby authorized to use the minimum effective force
to open such vehicle, trailer or conveyance to rescue such animal, take
possession of such animal in a protective impoundment and immediately transport
such animal to a licensed veterinarian for care. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-430: AUTHORIZATION TO PLACE ANIMALS IN PROTECTIVE IMPOUNDMENT; FEE:
   A.   The sheriff, or his designee, is hereby authorized to place any
injured, diseased, cruelly or inhumanely treated animal in protective
impoundment, and transport such animal to a licensed veterinarian for care.
Such protective impoundment and transportation shall be indicated for any
animal known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate,
and exhibiting such signs as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling,
broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat, drink or stand, blistering,
irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, irrational
behavior, orificial discharge or bleeding or similar indications of injury,
disease, abuse or neglect. The sheriff, or his designee, is hereby authorized
to place any animal in protective impoundment when the animal's owner is
incarcerated or incapacitated and the animal would otherwise be left without
care.
   B.   The owner of an animal placed in protective impoundment shall be
responsible for payment of the "humane pick up" fee, for each animal placed in
such protective impoundment and transported for care. The "humane pick up" fee
shall be in the amount of:
      1.   Ten dollars ($10.00) for animals under fifty (50) pounds in weight;
      2.   Twenty dollars ($20.00) for animals weighing from fifty (50) pounds
to one hundred (100) pounds;
      3.   Thirty dollars ($30.00) for animals weighing over one hundred (100)
pounds, but less than five hundred (500) pounds;
      4.   Forty dollars ($40.00) for animals weighing five hundred (500)
pounds or more. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-431: RELEASE OF ANIMALS FROM PROTECTIVE IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Any owner may obtain the release of an animal placed in protective
impoundment, where no other violation of this title has occurred, by paying the
full costs of all veterinary care, any costs of feed, shelter or custodial
care, and the humane pick up fee.
   B.   The department may waive all or part of any costs and fees when such
costs and fees would create an undue hardship upon the owner and when such
waiver would serve the best interests of the animal. The department may also
make arrangements for return of the animal to the owner and allow postponement
of the payment of all or part of any costs and fees when such arrangement would
serve the best interests of the animal. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-440: LIABILITY OF OWNER FOR HUMANE PICK UP FEE WHEN ANIMAL NOT RECLAIMED
FROM IMPOUNDMENT:
The humane pick up fee set forth in this chapter shall be deemed a fee for
service rendered and remain the responsibility of the owner of the animal, even
in the instance where such owner refuses to redeem such animal, or in the
instance where a court delivers custody of the animal to any person other than
the owner. The department may institute appropriate proceedings to recover such
fees as a separate action or as a part of any prosecution for violation of this
title. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 5
IMPOUNDED ANIMALS
SECTION:
10-510: Authority To Impound Animals At Large
10-520: Impoundment Of Animals
10-530: Redemption Of Impounded Animals
10-531: Redemption Of Impounded Dogs And Cats; Adoption
10-532: Redemption Of Animals From Protective Impoundment
10-510: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND ANIMALS AT LARGE:
Any peace officer, animal control officer or any other person authorized by the
sheriff may seize and impound any and all animals found running at large upon
the public streets, alleys or other public places, or on private premises
without the permission of the owner of said premises. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to domestic livestock on an open range. (Ord. 248, 8-2-
1994)
10-520: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
Any animal impounded for a violation of this title shall be placed in an animal
shelter or other confinement or pasture as is appropriate for the care and
custody of such animal. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-530: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   Any animal, except dogs and cats, impounded for any violation of this
title, may be reclaimed by the owner after paying any fines, fees and costs
incurred.
   B.   Any animal impounded whose owner cannot be identified shall be held for
a minimum of three (3) working days, after which they become eligible for
adoption, sale, auction or disposal. The department or the shelter shall make a
good faith effort to locate the owner of such an animal.
   C.   Any animal impounded whose owner is known shall be held for five (5)
working days, after which the animal shall become eligible for adoption, sale,
auction or disposal, except as may be otherwise specifically provided at Idaho
Code section 25-2301 et seq. The department or the shelter shall make a good
faith effort to contact the owner, and may mail a notice of impoundment to the
last known address of the owner.
   D.   Animals may be adopted from the shelter or place of impoundment once
they have been resident at the shelter for the time periods specified in this
section. The shelter may charge an adoption fee. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-531: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; ADOPTION:
   A.   Any dog or cat impounded for violation of this title may be reclaimed
from impound after paying the appropriate fees at any time prior to adoption,
and may be taken from the shelter by the owner or any authorized person so long
as the person reclaiming the dog pays the person in charge of the shelter or
area of impoundment the impound fees in an amount to be determined from time to
time by resolution of the board. The owner of any unvaccinated dog or cat shall
obtain a rabies vaccination for the dog or cat and provide proof of same to the
shelter within thirty (30) days. If proof is not provided as required, a
violation of this title shall be deemed to have occurred.
   B.   All unidentified impounded dogs and cats shall be held for a minimum of
three (3) working days, after which time they become the property of the
shelter. All identified impounded dogs and cats shall be held for five (5)
working days after which they become the property of the shelter. A notice of
impoundment may be mailed by the shelter to the last known address of an
identified owner. Such dogs and cats then may be disposed of by the shelter or
offered for sale by the shelter in an amount to be determined by the shelter.
   C.   Dogs and cats may be adopted from the shelter once they have been
resident at the shelter for the time period specified in this section. The
shelter may charge an adoption fee and refundable deposit sufficient to cover
the cost of vaccination and alteration. The new owner shall submit proof to the
shelter within thirty (30) days or within thirty (30) days of the dog or cat
becoming six (6) months of age, that a rabies vaccination has been obtained and
the animal has been altered. Upon such proof the shelter will refund the
deposit and give the owner a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-532: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS FROM PROTECTIVE IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Any animal may be released from protective impoundment to the animal
owner upon:
      1.   Certification by a licensed veterinarian that the animal has
returned to health;
      2.   Payment of the costs of veterinary care, the costs of feed, shelter,
boarding or other custodial care of the animal;
      3.   Payment of the humane pick up fee.
   B.   Any animal placed in protective impoundment which remains unclaimed by
the animal owner for a period of two (2) weeks after the animal is certified to
have returned to health, and any animal placed in protective impoundment whose
owner refuses to pay the amounts specified at subsection A of this section,
shall become eligible for placement with an animal shelter for adoption,
independent adoption, sale or auction, at the discretion of the department upon
a determination of the best interests of the animal. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 6
VICIOUS ANIMALS
SECTION:
10-601: Vicious Animals; Exceptions
10-602: Vicious Animals; Authority To Impound; Fresh Pursuit
10-603: Vicious Animals; Public Nuisance
10-610: Declaration Of Vicious Animal; Notification And Procedure
10-620: Vicious Animals; Requirements Of Ownership And Control
10-630: Abatement Proceedings; Habitual Offender; Proceedings
10-601: VICIOUS ANIMALS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   For the purposes of the imposition of the restrictions contained in
this chapter a "vicious animal" shall be deemed to include any animal which:
      1.   Has twice, within a forty eight (48) month period, bitten, attacked
or otherwise caused injury to a person engaged in lawful activity; or
      2.   Has once attacked or bitten a person engaged in a lawful activity,
causing death or severe injury.
   B.   No animal shall be deemed vicious if any injury or damage is sustained
by a person who, at the time of the injury or damage was sustained, was
committing a trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or
keeper of the animal, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or
was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   C.   No animal shall be deemed vicious if the animal was protecting or
defending a person from a physical attack or assault. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-602: VICIOUS ANIMALS; AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND; FRESH PURSUIT:
   A.   Any peace officer, animal control officer or any other person
authorized by the sheriff may seize and impound any and all vicious animals, or
any animal posing an immediate threat to the safety of the public or other
animals, or any animal at large that has attacked any person or other animal.
   B.   Any peace officer or animal control officer, or other person authorized
by the sheriff, is hereby authorized to enter private property to take
possession of and impound any animal whenever the peace officer or other
authorized person is in fresh pursuit of an animal which is in violation of a
provision of this chapter at the time the animal enters onto private property,
or nonenclosed, nondwelling buildings. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-603: VICIOUS ANIMALS; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any person owning or having custody or control of a vicious animal shall be
deemed to have violated this chapter if, as a result of that person's failure
to exercise reasonable care, the animal injures any other person or animal
engaged in lawful activities. A "vicious animal", within the meaning of this
chapter, shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter for the remainder of its life. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-610: DECLARATION OF VICIOUS ANIMAL; NOTIFICATION AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   The department, its deputies or assigns may make a preliminary
declaration that an animal is a "vicious animal", pending a formal declaration
of such "vicious animal" status by the board. The department shall notify the
owner of any animal preliminarily declared vicious of the department's
preliminary declaration. Notification shall be attempted by certified mail at
the owner's last known address, in addition to notification by first class
mail.
   B.   The preliminary declaration shall be effective upon mailing and the
animal shall be maintained in secure confinement until the administrative
procedures within this section are complete. The owner shall have ten (10) days
from the date of the preliminary declaration to request a hearing before the
board, for the purpose of contesting the declaration. In the event the owner
fails to request such a hearing, the preliminary declaration that the animal is
a "vicious animal" shall automatically become permanent, without action of the
board.
   C.   In the event the owner of such animal requests such a hearing, the
board shall hold a hearing within fourteen (14) days and in any event, as soon
as possible. The department shall present all pertinent information supporting
its declaration that the animal is a "vicious animal" during such a hearing.
During such a hearing, the owner of the animal may present any written evidence
regarding the facts of the case. Oral testimony may be limited as the
commission schedule dictates.
   D.   The board shall advise the owner of the animal within ten (10) days of
the hearing of their findings. Until the owner of the animal has been advised
by the board of their findings, the animal shall be maintained in compliance
with the provisions of the preliminary "vicious animal" declaration or
impounded if proper precautions are not in place. In the event the animal has
been impounded, the owner shall pay all board fees, impound fees and quarantine
fees set forth in chapter 5 of this title for the redemption of impounded
animals, regardless of the outcome of the hearing. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-620: VICIOUS ANIMALS; REQUIREMENTS OF OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL:
Any person who possesses, harbors, keeps or owns an animal which has been
declared a "vicious animal", shall:
   A.   Keep such animal restrained in a manner which prevents any further
attacks or bites.
   B.   The owner of a declared vicious animal shall notify the department
immediately in the event the animal escapes. The owner shall make every
possible effort to recapture such an animal immediately and to warn others of
its release.
   C.   Notify the department in the following manner:
      1.   Owners of a vicious animal who sell or in any way transfer the
ownership, custody, care or change the place of residence of the animal shall,
at least fourteen (14) days prior to the sale or transfer of ownership or
change of residence, inform the department in writing, of the name, address and
telephone number of the new owner or custodian or new residence location. Said
notification shall include the name and description of the animal.
      2.   The owner shall, in addition, notify the new owner, in writing, of
the details of the animal's record and the terms and conditions of the animal's
maintenance.
      3.   Prior to placement of the vicious animal at its new residence, the
department shall be called to inspect the premises. If the premises does not
conform to the standards set by this title, the vicious animal shall not assume
residence.
      4.   Failure to accord with these requirements shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
   D.   While on the owner's property, a vicious animal must be securely
confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure,
suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the
animal from escaping. Such pen or structure for a vicious animal must have
minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet (5' x 10') and must have secure
sides and a secure top. If the structure has no bottom secured to the sides,
the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet (2'). The
enclosure must also provide adequate protection from the elements for the
animal. Each such enclosure must be surrounded by a secondary fence or other
barrier which would prevent a child or others from reaching the vicious animal
by any foreseeable means.
   E.   The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his or her premises warning
that there is a vicious animal on the property. This sign shall be legible from
the closest public access. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a
sign with a symbolic warning for children indicating the presence of the
vicious animal.
   F.   The owner or keeper of the vicious animal shall at any time allow the
department, its agents or assigns, or any peace officer, to inspect the
premises where the vicious animal is located to ensure compliance with this
chapter and any order of a court respecting the keeping of the vicious animal.
   G.   The vicious animal shall be altered within ten (10) days of having been
declared vicious, unless clinically advised otherwise by a licensed
veterinarian. The cost of alteration shall be borne by the owner of the vicious
animal.
   H.   The owner of any vicious animal shall pay a special license fee of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) per year. Said fee shall offset the costs of
annual inspection of the premises by the department.
   I.   No animal which has been declared vicious pursuant to this chapter
shall be taken into any public place, other than to a veterinarian's office,
regardless of the control measures undertaken by the animal's handler. (Ord.
248, 8-2-1994)
10-630: ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS; HABITUAL OFFENDER; PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Any animal that has been impounded more than three (3) times in any one
year period of time, or whose owner has been convicted more than three (3)
times in any one year period of time for violation of any portion of this
chapter relating to the animal in question, or any combination of impoundments
and/or convictions more than three (3) times in any one year period of time,
may be abated by the department. The department may seek to abate such animal
by causing it to be destroyed or by requiring the animal to be taken out of
Bonner County, at the discretion of the department, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The department, its deputies or assigns shall notify the owner of any
animal to be abated for being a habitual offender of its intent to do so.
Notification shall be attempted by certified mail to the owner's last known
address, in addition to notice by first class mail. The owner shall have ten
(10) days to request a hearing before the county commissioners. In the event
the owner fails to request such a hearing, the declaration shall become
effective at the end of the ten (10) day period. In the event the owner of the
animal requests such a hearing, the county commissioners shall hold such a
hearing within fourteen (14) days, or in any case as soon as possible. During
such a hearing, the owner of the animal may present any evidence regarding the
facts of the case. The department shall present all pertinent information
during such a hearing. The county commissioners shall advise the owner of the
animal of their findings within ten (10) days of the hearing. In the event the
animal has been impounded, the owner shall pay all boarding fees, impound fees,
medical treatment costs and quarantine fees regardless of the outcome of the
hearing. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 7
MAINTENANCE OF MULTIPLE ANIMALS, CAGED ANIMALS
SECTION:
10-701: Maintenance Of Multiple Animals
10-710: Standards For Maintenance Of Multiple Animals
10-711: Standards For Maintenance Of Multiple Animals In Outdoor Enclosures
10-712: Standards For Maintenance Of Multiple Animals In Cages
10-701: MAINTENANCE OF MULTIPLE ANIMALS:
   A.   Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or maintains more than six (6)
adult dogs or more than six (6) adult cats, or any combination thereof
exceeding the number six (6), on any single parcel or aggregated parcels of
real property, shall be deemed to maintaining multiple animals.
   B.   Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or maintains more than six (6)
animals of any other type, except domestic livestock, on any single parcel or
aggregated parcels of real property shall be deemed to be maintaining multiple
animals.
   C.   The maintenance of multiple animals shall be conducted in compliance
with the terms of this chapter, and shall not result in the creation of a
public nuisance due to odor, noise or collection of fecal matter. (Ord. 248, 8-
2-1994)
10-710: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF MULTIPLE ANIMALS:
In addition to the requirements of this title for the health, control and care
of all animals, the owner of multiple animals shall be responsible for
compliance with the following standards for the maintenance of multiple
animals:
   A.   Food shall be wholesome, palatable and free from contamination. Food
shall be provided in sufficient quantity and be of adequate nutritive value to
maintain all animals in good health. All food receptacles shall be kept clean
and sanitary, and be stored in covered receptacles.
   B.   Clean drinkable water shall be available at all times for all animals.
All water receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary, be of appropriate
design and size for the animal, and be positioned or affixed to prevent spills.
   C.   Both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall receive cleaning as necessary
to remove excreta, dirt and debris so as to minimize disease hazards, odor and
danger to animals. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-711: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF MULTIPLE ANIMALS IN OUTDOOR ENCLOSURES:
The owner of multiple animals kept in outdoor enclosures shall be responsible
for compliance with the following standards:
   A.   Space available to each animal shall be usable, maintained in a safe
and healthful manner, and have a dry resting or loafing area, free of
accumulated waste and debris. Where animals are kept in permanent enclosures,
pens, kennels, etc., the minimum space available for each animal shall be:
 
Number Of Animals1 Small            Medium            Large
                   (To 25 Pounds)   (25-50 Pounds)    (Over 50 Pounds)
1                  3 feet x 7 feet  6 feet x 10 feet  8 feet x 10 feet
                   (21 square feet) (60 square feet)  (80 square feet)
2                  4 feet x 8 feet  8 feet x 10 feet  8 feet x 12 feet
                   (32 square feet) (80 square feet)  (96 square feet)
3                  5 feet x 9 feet  8 feet x 12 feet  10 feet x 14 feet
                   (45 square feet) (96 square feet)  (140 square feet)
4                  8 feet x 10 feet 10 feet x 12 feet 12 feet x 16 feet
                   (80 square feet) (120 square feet) (192 square feet)
 
   Note:
      1.    Number of animals kept in the individual enclosure.
   B.   All animals kept in outdoor enclosures shall have access to shelter
that provides protection from inclement weather conditions (wind, rain, snow)
and shade from the sun during hot weather. Shelter shall be well constructed
and appropriate for the species, age, physical condition and haircoat of the
animals. (Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
10-712: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF MULTIPLE ANIMALS IN CAGES:
The owner of multiple animals kept in cages shall be responsible for compliance
with the following standards:
   A.   Caging for small mammals and rodents, such as guinea pigs, rabbits and
hamsters, shall be of a size sufficient to permit normal activity levels,
contain a place to burrow or nest and space necessary for the animal to
exercise.
   B.   Cats confined in cages must be provided with litter pans and litter
material. Litter pans shall be cleaned and litter materials changed as
necessary to prevent odor and accumulation of urine and fecal matter.
   C.   Cage confinement of dogs and cats should not exceed a continuous period
of more than twelve (12) hours, except upon veterinary advice, transport or
enforced rest to promote healing of an injury, disease or medical condition.
   D.   Dogs confined in cages shall be exercised outside of the cage at least
twice a day, morning and afternoon or evening, and cages shall be kept free of
urine and fecal matter.
   E.   Cages in which birds, amphibians, reptiles and fish are kept shall be
of sufficient size to permit normal levels of activity for the confined animal.
(Ord. 248, 8-2-1994)
TITLE 11
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING LOCATION PERMITS
SECTION:
11-101: Building Location Permits Required
11-101.1: Designation; Authority
11-102: Manufactured Structure Placement; Building Location Permits Required
11-103: Exceptions
11-104: Small Structures
11-105: Contents Of Building Location Permit
11-108: Building Location Permit Fees
11-109: Fee For Investigation Of Work Without Permit
11-110: Agency Authorizations
11-112: Examination Of Application And Issuance Of Building Location Permit;
Examination Of Plans And Inspection Of Structures Where Located In Floodplains
Or Floodways
11-113: Initial Inspection
11-114: Denial Of Building Location Permit Application
11-116: Appeal Of Denial Of Building Location Permit Application
11-118: Notification Of Bonner County Assessor
11-119: Notice Of Completion; Notice Of Occupancy
11-120: Compliance With Other Codes
11-122: Expiration Date; Abandonment
11-124: Compliance
11-125: Violations; Inspections
11-126: Authority; Issuance Of Stop Work Order; Unlawful Continuance
11-101: BUILDING LOCATION PERMITS REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no structure subject to the
provisions of this title shall be erected, constructed, set, placed, installed,
enlarged, extended, moved or converted in unincorporated Bonner County without
first procuring a building location permit from the Bonner County planning
department prior to the start of construction. Applications for such permit
shall be made on forms provided by the planning department. (Ord. 548, 12-8-
2015; amd. Ord. 683, 1-5-2022)
11-101.1: DESIGNATION; AUTHORITY:
The board of county commissioners shall designate a planning director who shall
be charged with facilitating the enforcement of the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 449, 2-13-2004)
11-102: MANUFACTURED STRUCTURE PLACEMENT; BUILDING LOCATION PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   No manufactured structure shall be set, placed, installed or moved in
unincorporated Bonner County without first procuring a building location permit
from the Bonner County planning department. Applications for such permit shall
be made on forms provided by the planning department.
   B.   As of the effective date hereof, mobile homes as evidenced by proof of
title constructed prior to June 15, 1976 (pre-HUD code), must meet the
following rehabilitation requirements prior to obtaining a building location
permit: (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
      1.   A smoke detector (which may be a single station alarm device) shall
be installed on any wall in a hallway or space communicating with each bedroom
area and the living area on the living area side and, when located in a
hallway, the detector shall be between the return air intake and the living
area. Each smoke detector shall be installed in accordance with its listing and
the top of the detector shall be located on a wall four inches (4") to twelve
inches (12") below the ceiling. The detector may be battery powered or may be
connected to an electrical outlet box by a permanent wiring method into a
general electrical branch circuit, without any switch between the over current
protection device protecting the branch circuit and the detector.
      2.   The walls, ceilings and doors of each compartment containing a gas
fired furnace or water heater shall be lined with five-sixteenths inch (5/16")
gypsum board, unless the door opens to the exterior of the home, in which case,
the door may be all metal construction. All exterior compartments shall seal to
the interior of the mobile home.
      3.   Each room designated expressly for sleeping purposes shall have an
exterior exit door or at least one outside egress window or other approved exit
device with a minimum clear dimension of twenty two inches (22") and a minimum
clear opening of five (5) square feet. The bottom of the exit shall not be more
than thirty six inches (36") above the floor.
      4.   All electrical systems shall be tested for continuity to assure that
metallic parts are properly bonded, tested for operation to demonstrate that
all equipment is connected and in working order, and given a polarity check to
determine that connections are proper. The electrical system shall be properly
protected for the required amperage load. If the unit wiring is of aluminum
conductors, all receptacles and switches rated twenty (20) amperes or less
directly connected to the aluminum conductors shall be marked CO/ALR. Exterior
receptacles other than heat tape receptacles shall be of the ground fault
circuit interrupter (GFI) type. Conductors of dissimilar metals (copper/
aluminum or copper clad aluminum) must be connected in accordance with section
110-14 of the National Electrical Code.
      5.   The mobile home's gas piping shall be tested with the appliance
valves removed from the piping system and piping capped at those areas. The
piping system shall withstand a pressure of at least six inch (6") mercury or
three (3) psi gauge for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes without
showing any drop in pressure. Pressure shall be measured with a mercury
manometer or a slope gauge calibrated so as to read in increments of not
greater than one-tenth (1/10) pound or an equivalent device. The source of
normal operating pressure shall be isolated before the pressure test is made.
After the appliance connections are reinstalled, the piping system and
connections shall be tested with line pressure of not less than ten inches
(10") nor more than fourteen inches (14") water column air pressure. The
appliance connections shall be tested for leakage with soapy water or a bubble
solution. All gas furnaces and water heaters shall be vented to the exterior in
accordance with chapter 9 of the Uniform Mechanical Code.
      6.   A full water or air pressure test will be performed on the mobile
home's water and sewer system.
         a.   Water piping shall be tested and proven tight under a water
pressure not less than the working pressure under which it is to be used. The
water used for tests shall be obtained from a potable source of supply. A fifty
(50) pound per square inch (344.5 kPa) air pressure may be substituted for the
water test. In either method of test, the piping shall withstand a test without
leaking for a period of not less than fifteen (15) minutes.
         b.   A water test shall be applied to the drainage and vent system
either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the entire system, all
openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except at the highest opening,
and the system filled with water to the point of overflow. If the system is
tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly plugged except the highest
opening of the section under the test and each section shall be filled with
water, but no section shall be tested with less than a ten foot (10') (3 m)
head of water. In testing successive sections, at least the upper ten feet
(10') (3 m) of the next preceding section shall be tested, so that no joint or
pipe in the structure, except the uppermost ten feet (10') (3 m) of the system,
shall have been submitted to a test of less than a ten foot (10') (3 m) head of
water. The water shall be kept in the system or in the portion under testing
for at least fifteen (15) minutes before inspection starts. The system shall be
tight at all points. (Ord. 425, 6-4-2002; amd. Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
      7.   Proof of compliance shall be provided by an ICBO certified building
inspector, gas utility provider, licensed electrical contractor or licensed
plumbing contractor on a mobile home rehabilitation certificate form provided
by the Planning Department, or proof of compliance shall be provided as
specified on a "certificate of compliance" issued by the Administrator of the
Division of Building Safety of the State of Idaho. (Ord. 427, 7-2-2002; amd.
Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-103: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to those structures listed as
exceptions under the “structure” definition of chapter 2 of this title. Such
exceptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of Bonner County or
other local, State, or Federal laws.
   A.   The provisions of this title shall not apply to those structures listed
as exceptions under the “structure” definition of chapter 2 of this title. Such
exceptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of Bonner County or
other local, State, or Federal laws.
   B.   All structures built prior to November 18, 2008 shall be considered
nonconforming structures and reconstruction shall follow the requirements
included in Title 12-3.4 Nonconforming Uses and Structures and Title 14 Flood
Damage Prevention. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014; amd. Ord. 640, 9- -2021)
11-104: SMALL STRUCTURES:
   A.   A complete Building Location Permit application shall be filed with the
Planning Department. The small structure application shall be completed on a
Building Location Permit application form provided by the Planning Department.
   B.   A small structure shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   A detached non-habitable, accessory structure used as a tool or
storage shed, playhouse, carport, shop, agricultural, garage or similar
structure provided the floor area does not exceed one thousand eighty (1,080)
square feet;
      2.   Shall have no sewage disposal utilities;
      3.   Shall not be a place of employment excepting structures used for
agricultural direct marketing activities;
      4.   Additions shall not be added to previously exempted structures that
would cause the floor area of the structure to exceed one thousand eighty
(1,080) square feet;
      5.   An open shell structure, open shell lean-to addition, or an open
shell deck addition to a residential or residential accessory structure that do
not exceed one thousand eighty (1,080) square feet of floor area.
   C.   The small structure shall comply with the requirements of Title 12 and
Title 14 of this Code and any other laws or ordinances of Bonner County or
other local, State or Federal laws.
   D.   Every small structure issued under the terms of this title shall expire
by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by
such small structure is not commenced within one (1) year from the issuance
date of such small structure, or if the building or work authorized by such
small structure is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is
commenced for a period of more than one (1) year. (Ord. 564, 4-19-2017; amd.
Ord. 640, 9- -2021; amd. Ord. 683, 1-5-2022)
11-105: CONTENTS OF BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT:
   A.   The applicant for a building location permit shall provide: a site plan
showing the location of the structure or building, showing distances from the
building’s greatest architectural projections to each and all property lines
and all environmental features (such as wetlands, shorelines, slope, etc.); a
copy of the recorded deed legally describing the property on which the
structure or building is to be located; and a description of the intended use
of the building or structure and diagrammatic plans of the structure in
sufficient detail to identify the size and use of all components and floors of
the structure. Unless otherwise provided by this title, the plans need not be
prepared by a licensed engineer or architect.
   B.   Applicants for building location permits where located in mapped
floodplains or floodways, shall provide building construction plans certified
by an Idaho registered engineer or Idaho licensed architect as being in
compliance with Title 14 of this Code. (Ord. 532, 3-20-2013; amd. Ord. 603, 5-
26-2020; Ord. 683, 1-5-2022)
11-108: BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT FEES:
   A.   The Board of County Commissioners shall, by resolution, establish a fee
schedule for building location permits, time extensions, investigation of work
without permits and other building location permit related matters. A copy of
the official fee schedule shall be maintained by the Bonner County Planning
Department and shall be available for public inspection during normal business
hours.
   B.   Building location permit applications to be processed under the terms
of this title shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth by the official
fee schedule of Bonner County.
   C.   All filing fees shall be payable to the Bonner County Planning
Department and are nonrefundable. No permit shall become effective until all
fees have been paid.
   D.   The board may waive all or part of any fees for political subdivisions
or public agencies.
   E.   The Planning Director may reduce any fine, investigative fee or
assessment imposed by this title, upon a showing of good cause as by the
landowner showing an undue hardship because of errors, equitable principles,
excusable neglect or inadvertence. In no case shall the fee reduction be
granted if it results in a grant of special privilege. Ignorance of the law by
any person shall not justify such relief. (Ord. 469, 10-1-2005; amd. Ord. 494,
7-25-2007; Ord. 535, 4-2-2014; Ord. 640, 9- -2021)
11-109: FEE FOR INVESTIGATION OF WORK WITHOUT PERMIT:
Whenever any work for which a permit is required under the terms of this title
has commenced without first obtaining said permit, an investigation fee as set
forth by the official fee schedule of Bonner County, shall be collected whether
or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of the
investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of this title, nor from any penalty prescribed by law. A separate
investigative fee shall be charged for each site visit to the subject property
conducted by the Bonner County Planning Department. (Ord. 469, 10-1-2005)
11-110: AGENCY AUTHORIZATIONS:
   A.   No building location permit shall be issued for the construction,
placement, installation, enlargement or extension of any building, residence or
structure unless approval has first been obtained from the agency having
jurisdiction over the access serving the subject site. Where access is from a
private road, confirmation shall be provided that the travelway is not within
the jurisdiction of the public.
   B.   No building location permit shall be issued for the construction,
placement, installation, enlargement or extension of any commercial,
residential, industrial or public building or structure, or multi-family
residence, unless approval has first been obtained from the applicable fire
district and the applicable sewer district.
   C.   Where the designated authority of a fire district has explicitly waived
the need for residential fire safety review, in writing and on record with the
Bonner County Planning Department, the residential fire safety requirements on
a plat need not be satisfied.
   D.   No building location permit shall be issued for the construction,
placement, installation, enlargement or extension of any building, residence or
structure without a comment letter from Panhandle Health indicating they have
reviewed the file, or the comment period has passed, whichever occurs first.
Upon receipt of the completed building location permit application, Panhandle
Health shall review the application and provide a comment letter within ten
(10) working days. (Ord. 554, 6-21-2016; amd. Ord. 640, 9- -2021; Ord. 654, 1-
5-2022; Ord. 683, 1-5-2022)
11-112: EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT;
EXAMINATION OF PLANS AND INSPECTION OF STRUCTURES WHERE LOCATED IN FLOODPLAINS
OR FLOODWAYS:
The Planning Director or designee shall administer this title. The Planning
Director or designee shall examine the building location permit to determine:
   A.   Whether the setbacks shown on the plot plan meet the minimums specified
for the use and in the zone district in which it is located;
   B.   Whether the stated use of the structure is a permitted use in the zone
district in which it is located;
   C.   Whether the property was subdivided in accordance with the minimum lot
or parcel size for the zoning district in which the parcel is located;
   D.   Whether the permit complies with other applicable provisions of this
Code;
   E.   Whether the permit includes the applicable agency authorizations as
specified in this title; and (Ord. 401, 4-6-2001)
   F.   Whether building construction plans for commercial, industrial, public
and residential structures or buildings, including single-family or duplex
residential, where located in mapped floodplains or floodways, have been
certified by an Idaho registered engineer or Idaho licensed architect in
compliance with title 14 of this Code. (Ord. 494, 7-25-2007)
11-113: INITIAL INSPECTION:
Prior to the commencement of the construction of any structure the permit
holder or the permit holder’s representative shall:
   A.   Post the building location permit at the job site’s vehicular entrance
to the public right-of-way or public or private easement at a location that is
clearly visible at said entrance. The permit shall remain posted until
construction has ceased or the structure has been occupied.
   B.   Establish temporary erosion control measures, if applicable.
   C.   Contact Bonner County Planning Department and request an initial
inspection.
   D.   Receive initial inspection approval from Bonner County Compliance.
(Ord. 697, 7-25-2023)
11-114: DENIAL OF BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT APPLICATION:
Should the Planning Director or designee determine that the building location
permit application does not meet the requirements set forth in this title, the
Planning Director or designee shall provide written notice to the applicant as
to the actions that can be taken by the applicant to obtain the permit. Reasons
for denial of a building location permit application may include that the
permit fails to comply with any particular provision of this Code. (Ord. 401,
4-6-2001)
11-116: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Any decision or determination made by the Planning Director in the
administration of the provisions of this title shall be appealable to the Board
of County Commissioners. Affected persons aggrieved by any administrative
decision or determination shall notify the Planning Director in writing no
later than thirty (30) days after the final decision of the nature of the
decision or determination to be appealed. The Planning Director shall schedule
a meeting with the board within ten (10) working days to hear the appeal and
shall provide written notice to the affected persons of the time and place of
the meeting. The affected persons and the Planning Director shall be provided
an opportunity to present the relevant issues to the board at that meeting. The
board's decision shall be final, and further recourse for the affected persons
shall be to the courts as provided by law.
   B.   An administrative appeal shall not be granted if it would function as a
grant of special privilege or to provide an exception to the regulations
contained within this Code. (Ord. 401, 4-6-2001)
11-118: NOTIFICATION OF BONNER COUNTY ASSESSOR:
One (1) copy of each issued building location permit shall be conveyed by the
Planning Department to the Bonner County Assessor's Office. (Ord. 401, 4-6-
2001)
11-119: NOTICE OF COMPLETION; NOTICE OF OCCUPANCY:
Prior to the occupancy or use of any structure for its intended purposes, the
owner or owner's representative shall provide to the Bonner County Planning
Department notice confirming completion of work and readiness to occupy. The
notice confirming completion shall include the following:
   A.   An acknowledgment from Panhandle Health District, if applicable, that
wastewater disposal requirements have been met.
   B.   A final inspection completed by Bonner County Compliance.
Failure to provide notice pursuant to this section will result in additional
inspections and may be subject to fees and fines as provided by this Code or
Idaho Code. Once Bonner County has performed a site inspection to confirm
compliance with the terms of the approved building location permit, this title
and title 12 of this code, a copy of the final site inspection report shall be
provided by the planning department to the assessor's office. Prior to
occupancy of the structure, where plans and inspections were required for
construction within the floodplain or floodway, the landowner shall provide to
the planning department a copy of the inspection report certified by an
International Code Council (ICC) certified building inspector confirming
compliance with flood damage prevention standards of Title 14 of this code.
Where applicable, the landowner shall provide to the planning department a
final elevation certificate prior to occupancy. (Ord. 494, 7-25-2007; amd. Ord.
640, 9- -2021; Ord. 683, 1-5-2022; Ord. 695, 6-27-2023)
11-120: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to relieve an applicant for a building
location permit from compliance with any other requirements contained within
this code, Idaho Code, or state or federal regulations, such as obtaining
sewage disposal, electrical and plumbing permits. (Ord. 401, 4-6-2001)
11-122: EXPIRATION DATE; ABANDONMENT:
   A.   Every building location permit issued under the terms of this title
shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work
authorized by such building location permit is not commenced within one year
from the issuance date of such building location permit, or if the building or
work authorized by such building location permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of more than one year. Before
such work can be recommenced, a new building location permit shall be first
obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be the amount required for a new
building location permit for such work; and provided further, that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action
on a building location permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay the
amount required for a new permit for such work.
   B.    Any permittee holding an unexpired, issued building location permit
may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under
that building location permit when the permittee is unable to commence work
within the time required by this title. The planning director or designee may
extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one year
for three consecutive years upon submittal of a time extension request by the
permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have
prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once.
   C.   An application that has been filed under the terms of this title which
has received a notice of incompleteness from the planning department and has
remained incomplete for one hundred twenty (120) days minimum may be considered
abandoned by the planning department; provided, however, that a written notice
has been sent by certified mail by the planning department to the applicant,
wherein the applicant is notified that the application will be considered
abandoned by the planning department if not determined complete by the planning
department within thirty (30) days thereafter. If no response is provided by
the applicant or the application remains incomplete after the thirty (30) day
period, the application may be considered abandoned. (Ord. 401, 4-6-2001; amd.
Ord. 494, 7-25-2007, Ord. 640, 9- -2021)
11-124: COMPLIANCE:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   No building location permit may be lawfully issued, nor may a notice
of completion be granted, until the director has given authorization indicating
all requirements of this code, all conditions of approval, and any other
specific project related requirements have been met.
      2.   If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or physically maintained, or any building,
structure or land is occupied or used in violation of the provisions of this
code or any amendment hereto, the county may pursue any one or more of the
following actions:
         a.   Seek voluntary compliance;
         b.   Issue a civil citation (infraction) pursuant to I.C. § 67-6527
and BCRC 11-125;
         c.   Pursue a civil action to enforce compliance with the terms of
this code or to enjoin, restrain or abate any violation of the terms of this
code; or
         d.   Pursue criminal prosecution.
         e.   The pursuit of any of the foregoing enforcement actions shall not
preclude other enforcement action(s) related to the same violation, facts or
conditions; provided, however, that if an alleged violator is cited pursuant to
an administrative enforcement procedure, the alleged violator shall not be
subject to a criminal charge arising out of the same facts.
      3.   Violation of any conditions of approval, an administratively issued
permit, a conditional/special use permit/variance, or any other requirements of
this title is a violation of this code and may also subject such permit to
revocation. Revocation of any such permit may be made by the approving entity
after notice and hearing as provided by this code (BCRC 12-226 D). (Ord. 641,
9- -2021)
11-125: VIOLATIONS; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   General Penalties: Except as otherwise stated in this code, violations
of any of the provisions of this title shall be punishable as follows:
      1.   For a first violation the violator will be deemed guilty of an
infraction and shall pay the fixed penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      2.   For a second violation within two (2) years, the violator will be
deemed guilty of a second offense infraction and shall pay the fixed penalty of
three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      3.   For a third violation within two (2) years, the violator will be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and may be jailed for up to six (6) months.
      4.   A citation shall be issued in person by a uniformed officer of the
county or authorized designee, or may be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owners contractor on file with the permit, the
occupant and the owner of record if the occupant is not the owner of record.
The citation shall include the date(s) of the violation, the location of the
property, and reference to the section(s) of this code violated.
      5.   Each day of continuing violation may be assessed as a separate
violation.
   C.   Notification, Action of Prosecuting Attorney: Whenever the
administrator shall determine that a violation has occurred, he shall notify
the prosecuting attorney of such violation and recommend action that should be
taken.
   D.   The prosecuting attorney may take whatever criminal action deemed
necessary to enjoin any violation of this title. The prosecuting attorney may,
with the consent of the county commissioners, bring whatever civil action
deemed necessary to enjoin any violation of this title. Civil remedies may be
sought in addition to, or in lieu of, criminal penalties, including the
recovery of any costs, civil fines or penalties imposed by this title and the
filing with the recorder’s office of a notice to title of a building violation
that has remained unresolved for forty five (45) days or more after the first
notice of violation was sent by certified mail by Bonner County to the
landowner at the address shown on the county assessor’s tax rolls. The notice
of violation shall identify the violation, location and the actions required to
resolve the violation. After the violation has been resolved, the landowner
shall pay a fee as set forth in the official fee schedule established by this
title to process and record a lifting of the notice to title.
   E.   Action of the County: In the event any action is taken or any
construction commenced in violation of the provisions of this code, the proper
authorities of the county, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful action or
construction or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. (Ord. 535, 4-
2-2014; amd. Ord. 641, 9- -2021)
11-126: AUTHORITY; ISSUANCE OF STOP WORK ORDER; UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE:
   A.   Whenever the planning director finds any work regulated by this title
being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this title, the
planning director or his or her designee is authorized to issue a stop work
order.
   B.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted on the
premises where the work is being conducted or given to the owner of the
property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons
performing the work. Written notice shall also be provided by the planning
department by certified mail to the landowner at the address shown on the
county assessor's tax rolls. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work
shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the
order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume.
   C.   Any person who shall continue to work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, without the expressed written
authorization of the planning director, or his or her designee, shall be
subject to the penalties as prescribed by this title. (Ord. 449, 2-13-2004)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-200: Application
11-201: Definitions - A
11-202: Definitions - B
11-203: Definitions - C
11-204: Definitions - D
11-205: Definitions - E
11-206: Definitions - F
11-207: Definitions - G
11-208: Definitions - H
11-209: Definitions - I
11-210: Definitions - J
11-211: Definitions - K
11-212: Definitions - L
11-213: Definitions - M
11-214: Definitions - N
11-215: Definitions - O
11-216: Definitions - P
11-217: Definitions - Q
11-218: Definitions - R
11-219: Definitions - S
11-220: Definitions - T
11-221: Definitions - U
11-222: Definitions - V
11-223: Definitions - W
11-224: Definitions - X
11-225: Definitions - Y
11-226: Definitions - Z
11-200: APPLICATION:
The use of the following words within this title shall apply as follows:
   A.   "Shall" and "must" are mandatory and not discretionary.
   B.   "May" is permissive.
   C.   "Should" refers to a guideline that is encouraged, but not mandatory.
   D.   The language of this title shall be interpreted using the plain,
ordinary meaning of the language, except as further defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-201: DEFINITIONS - A:
ABANDONED: To stop or discontinue work authorized by building location permit,
for the period of time specified in this title.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A use or structure on the same lot and of a nature
that is incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or
structure.
AFFECTED PERSONS: Anyone having a bona fide interest in real property that may
be adversely affected by approval, denial or failure to act upon an application
submitted under the provisions of this title.
AGENT: A person who shall have charge, care or control of any structure or
property as owner, or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this code to the same extent as if that person was the owner.
AGRICULTURAL: Uses related to cultivation of the land, floriculture,
horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, grazing or pasturing of livestock,
general farming.
APPROVED: Accepted or authorized by the planning director or designee.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Anything attached to and extending outward from the
exterior wall or face of a structure, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Eaves: The lower edge or edges of a roof, usually projecting beyond the
sides of a building.
   B.   Awning: Architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is
attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight, rigid skeleton structure
over which a covering is attached.
   C.   Balcony: An exterior floor projecting from and supported by a structure
without additional independent supports.
   D.   Canopy: An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is supported by the building to which it is
attached.
   E.   Deck: An exterior floor system supported on at least two (2) opposing
sides by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers, or other independent
supports.
   F.   Platform: A raised, horizontal surface of wood, stone, metal,
composite, or similar materials.
ATTACHED: A structure that has at least part of a wall in common with another
building. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-202: DEFINITIONS - B:
BASEMENT: That portion of a building all or partly below grade but having at
least one-half (1/2) of its height, the distance between the ceiling and floor,
below grade.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended to be used for support, shelter,
occupancy, or storage.
BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT: An official document or certificate issued by the
planning department having jurisdiction that authorizes performance of a
specified activity. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-203: DEFINITIONS - C:
CERTIFIED BUILDING INSPECTOR: International Code Council certified building
inspector.
CLEARING: The destruction and/or removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical or
chemical means, except that for the purposes of this title, the term shall not
include agricultural and silvicultural practices, gardening, landscaping, snow
removal and other incidental practices not associated with vegetative removal
as a precursor to actual construction to which this title is applicable.
COMMERCIAL: Of or connected with commerce or trade. Made, done or operating
primarily for profit.
CONSTRUCT: To build, form, erect, fabricate, reconstruct, alter, convert or
devise by fitting parts or elements together systematically.
CONVERT: To change from one form or use to another. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-204: DEFINITIONS - D:
DETACHED: Freestanding and structurally separated from other buildings.
DIAGRAMMATIC FLOOR PLAN: A sketch, drawing or plan illustrating the intent of a
building plan and detailing room dimensions, walls, doors, windows and proposed
uses on each floor.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential
purposes, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, but
shall not include hotels, boarding and lodging houses.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A detached residential building, containing two (2) dwelling
units only.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A detached residential building containing three (3)
or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached residential building containing one
dwelling unit only.
DWELLING UNIT: Space within a dwelling, apartment house or any type of
multiple-family dwelling building, consisting of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family only. (Ord. 535,
4-2-2014)
11-205: DEFINITIONS - E:
ENLARGE: To make larger; increase in size, volume, extent; broaden; expand.
ERECT: To raise or construct a building or structure.
EXCAVATION: The mechanical removal of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of rock,
natural soil or fill in any configuration. Shall not include agricultural
operations, well drilling, digging for utility lines or other similar
activities incidental or accessory to a permitted use.
EXTEND: To enlarge in area, scope, widen, broaden, expand or spread. (Ord. 535,
4-2-2014)
11-206: DEFINITIONS - F:
FENCE: An enclosure or barrier made of wood, iron, wire, plastic or other
materials used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FINISH WORK: Painting, staining, trim, plastering, glazing, or similar work.
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area of lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by
water of a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency. The floodplain includes
the channel, floodway and floodway fringe, as established per the engineering
practices as specified by the army corps of engineers, as follows:
   A.   Flood Of One Hundred Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   B.   Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by
overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
   C.   Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse or perceptible extent,
with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
   D.   Floodway: The channel or watercourse and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater of any watercourse.
   E.   Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the
floodway. Such area will include those portions of the floodplain which will be
inundated by a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor, measured from the
interior finished walls or the centerline of walls separating two (2)
buildings. Where a building has no walls, the floor area shall be measured from
the inside faces of the support structure. A structure shall be deemed to have
a floor, even if unfinished or dirt.
FOUNDATION: The base on which something rests; specifically, the supporting
part of a wall or structure usually consisting of masonry or concrete. (Ord.
535, 4-2-2014)
11-207: DEFINITIONS - G:
GRADE: The lowest finished ground level adjoining the structure. (Ord. 535, 4-
2-2014)
11-208: DEFINITIONS - H:
HEIGHT: Measured from the lowest finished grade of the building, structure or
wall to the topmost point of the roof, wall or uppermost point. Chimneys,
vents, utility structures or similar projections are not included in the
measurements. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-209: DEFINITIONS - I:
INDUSTRIAL: Of or relating to the assembly fabrication, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods.
INHABITED: Lived in or occupied by humans. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-210: DEFINITIONS - J:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-211: DEFINITIONS - K:
KITCHEN: Any room or interior space principally used, intended or designed to
be used for cooking or the preparation of food. The presence of a range or
oven, or utility connections suitable for servicing a range or oven, shall
normally be considered as establishing a kitchen. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-212: DEFINITIONS - L:
LANDOWNER: A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any
other group acting as a unit, or a person who has legal title to any structure
or premises with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, and shall
include the duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary
and any person having a vested or contingent interest in the premises in
question.
LEAN-TO: A roofed shelter or structure that rests against the wall of another
building.
LOT: A platted piece of land which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
book of plats in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-213: DEFINITION - M:
MANUFACTURED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which is made or
assembled, on or off the building site, for installation or assembly on the
building site.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance
with the HUD manufactured home construction and safety standards, and is
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
(8) body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and
complies with the standards established under 42 USC section 5401 et seq.
MEMBRANE STRUCTURE: Structure, such as a yurt, tent, teepee, that is covered by
canvas, plastic or other thin, flexible material and supported by metal, wood,
plastic or other framework or air.
MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures generally constructed
prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service connections and
made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on their own running gear
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a permanent
foundation. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-214: DEFINITIONS - N:
None at this time. (Ord. 640, 9- -2021)
11-215: DEFINITIONS - O:
OCCUPANCY: Use of the property by any person as a residence including occupancy
of improvements or use in storage of vehicles, boats or household goods,
provided such use is not solely related to construction or sale of the
property; or use of the property for any business or commercial purpose
unrelated to the construction and sale of the property; or any possessory use
of the property for which the owner received any compensation or consideration.
OCCUPIED:
   A.   Use of the property by any person as a residence including occupancy of
improvements or use in storage of vehicles, boats or household goods, provided
such use is not solely related to construction or sale of the property; or
   B.   Use of the property for any business or commercial purpose unrelated to
the construction and sale of the property; or
   C.   Any possessory use of the property for which the owner received any
compensation or consideration. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014; amd. Ord. 683, 1-5-2022)
11-216: DEFINITIONS - P:
PARCEL: An unplatted piece of land which is uniquely described within a legal
instrument of conveyance.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity. A "person" shall include a
trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of the above.
PLAYHOUSE: A freestanding, small structure used exclusively for children to
play in.
PLOT PLAN (SITE PLAN): A drawing of the building site prepared by the
applicant, illustrating the location of a proposed structure, existing
structures, property dimensions, setbacks, accesses, easements, utilities,
wetlands, floodplain, waterways, and other details pertinent to the building
site.
PREFABRICATED: To construct beforehand; to construct in standardized sections
for shipment and assembly on site.
PUBLIC: Owned or operated by the state, federal, local government or political
subdivisions thereof. For the use or benefit of the community. (Ord. 535, 4-2-
2014)
11-217: DEFINITIONS - Q:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-218: DEFINITIONS - R:
RECONSTRUCTED: To rebuild; make over; to build up from remaining parts.
RESIDENTIAL: Of or connected with housing.
RETAINING WALL: A barrier constructed or placed to resist lateral soil loads or
other imposed loads.
ROOF: The outside top covering designed to provide weather protection and
resistance to design loads. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-219: DEFINITIONS - S:
SERVING UTILITY: Company providing electrical service to the site.
SHELTER: Providing cover or protection to people, animals, or things.
SIGN: A device, descriptive display, or illustration generally relating in its
subject matter to products, persons, accommodations, services or activities on
the premises. However, a "sign" shall not include legal notices or
informational or directional media erected or required by governmental bodies,
nor shall it include residential location indicators.
SITE: A lot or parcel or portion thereof upon which construction is occurring
or is proposed to occur.
SMALL STRUCTURE: Those structures greater than four hundred (400) square feet
of floor area and not exceeding one thousand eighty (1,080) square feet of
floor area. Small structures shall not have living space or sewage disposal and
shall meet the requirements of BCRC
11-104.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The installation or placement of a slab, footing, piles,
blocks, columns, posts, or manufactured or prefabricated structure or similar
construction activity on a site. The definition shall not include site
clearing, excavation, or placement of concrete forms.
STOP WORK ORDER: A written directive to halt work, issued administratively
whenever the planning director or designee finds work being performed contrary
to this title.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor
and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. Measured as the vertical
distance from top to top of two (2) successive tiers of beams or finished floor
surfaces, and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the
top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the
roof rafters.
STRUCTURE: A combination of assembled materials providing shelter, support or
an extension of shelter or support, including, but not limited to, buildings,
signs, towers, tanks, decks, platforms, porches, walls, pools, roofed storage
areas, manufactured buildings, or offices, located above or below ground,
whether constructed, assembled or erected on site or preconstructed and placed
on site. The following are exceptions to the structure definition: (See
subsection
11-104 of this title for process to exempt certain structures not exceeding one
thousand eighty (1,080) square feet of floor area.)
The exceptions below are subject to the land use standards specified in title
12 of this code:
   A.   Accessory buildings or structures that are detached structures used as
tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area
does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
   B.   An addition to an existing residential accessory structure used solely
for storage or agricultural uses such as woodsheds, lean-tos, greenhouses,
general storage, provided the addition:
      1.   Is an addition that has a total floor area not exceeding four
hundred (400) square feet.
      2.   Has no sewage disposal utilities.
      3.   Does not cause a structure excepted by this title to exceed four
hundred (400) square feet.
   C.   Agricultural structures designed or constructed solely for the purpose
of storing or housing hay, grain, poultry, livestock, produce, horticultural
products or agricultural equipment, provided the floor area does not exceed
four hundred (400) square feet. Such structure shall not be inhabited; or a
place of employment excepting structures used for agricultural direct marketing
activities. Such agricultural structures are subject to the land use standards
specified in title 12 of this code.
   D.   Manufactured structures or mobile homes placed temporarily on licensed
sales lots for retail or wholesale sales.
   E.   Motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery used only
for the duration of the event.
   F.   Platforms, walks and driveways not more than thirty inches (30") above
grade and not over any basement or story below. This does not include attached
decks.
   G.   Reroofing not affecting the structural roof framing.
   H.   Row covers, high tunnels, hoop houses, or other membrane covered
structures used in raising of crops to extend the growing season.
   I.   Signs affixed to a building that are not greater than sixty four (64)
square feet.
   J.   Swimming pools not exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet of area
(15-20,000 gallons.).
   K.   Water tanks not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gallons.
   L.   Window replacement or window awnings supported by an exterior wall.
   M.   Yurts, teepees, tents, or other membrane structures without rigid walls
that do not contain a kitchen and plumbing facilities.
   N.   Buildings, construction trailers, equipment and materials used in
conjunction with construction work during the period of construction. Such
facilities shall be removed upon occupancy of the structure unless otherwise
excepted or permitted by this title.
The exceptions below are subject to the land use standards in Title 12;
however, they are not subject to the setback standards specified in title 12
chapter 4 of this code:
   O.   Fences not over eight feet (8') in height measured at grade.
   P.   Retaining walls not over four feet (4') in height measured at grade.
   Q.   Residential propane tanks not exceeding one thousand (1,000) gallons.
SUSPENDED: To stop or discontinue work authorized by building location permit,
for the period of time specified in this title. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014; amd. Ord.
640, 9- -2021; Ord. 683, 1-5-2022)
11-220: DEFINITIONS - T:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-221: DEFINITIONS - U:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-222: DEFINITIONS - V:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-223: DEFINITIONS - W:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-224: DEFINITIONS - X:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-225: DEFINITIONS - Y:
YURT: A circular like tent of felt, canvas, skins or other membranes on a
framework of poles. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
11-226: DEFINITIONS - Z:
None at this time. (Ord. 535, 4-2-2014)
TITLE 12
LAND USE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
Subchapter 1.1 - General Provisions
12-110: Authority
12-111: Purpose
12-112: Interpretation, Relation To Other Ordinances
Subchapter 1.2 - Administration
12-120: Establishment Of Planning Department
12-121: Planning Director
12-122: Planning Commission
12-123: Zoning Commission
12-124: Reserved
12-125: Conduct Of Meetings, Records, Open To Public
12-126: Establishment, Appointment Of Hearing Examiner
12-127: Power And Duties Of Hearing Examiner
12-128: Appeals From Final Decision Of Hearing Examiner
12-129: Conflict Of Interest Prohibited
Subchapter 1.3 - Enforcement
12-130: Enforcement
12-131: Complaints Of Violation
12-132: Violations And Penalties
12-133: Authority, Issuance Of Stop Work Order, Unlawful Continuance
SUBCHAPTER 1.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-110: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code title 67,
chapter 65, and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, as amended or
subsequently codified. This title applies to all unincorporated areas of Bonner
County. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-111: PURPOSE:
The zoning regulations and districts for the unincorporated areas of Bonner
County, as herein established, have been made in accordance with a
comprehensive plan and Idaho Code for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety and general welfare of the people of Bonner County as follows:
   A.   To protect property rights while making accommodations for other
necessary development such as varied types of affordable housing.
   B.   To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to
the people at reasonable cost.
   C.   To ensure that the economy of the state and localities is protected.
   D.   To ensure that the important environmental features of the state and
localities are protected.
   E.   To encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry and mining
lands for production of food, fiber and minerals.
   F.   To encourage urban and urban type development within incorporated
cities.
   G.   To avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land.
   H.   To ensure that the development on land is compatible with the physical
characteristics of the land.
   I.   To protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and
disasters.
   J.   To protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
   K.   To avoid undue water and air pollution.
   L.   To allow local school districts to participate in the community
planning and development process so as to address public school needs and
impacts on an ongoing basis. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-112: INTERPRETATION, RELATION TO OTHER ORDINANCES:
   A.   In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this title,
the requirements shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
   B.   When this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or premises, or requires larger spaces than are imposed by other codes, laws,
resolutions, rules and regulations, or covenants, the provisions of this title
control.
   C.   The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to carry out the
purpose and intent of the zone district as shown on the official zoning maps on
file in the planning department office, this title as adopted, and the Bonner
County comprehensive plan.
   D.   The use of the following words shall apply:
      1.   "Shall" and "must" are mandatory and not discretionary.
      2.   "May" is permissive.
      3.   "Should" refers to a guideline that is encouraged, but not
mandatory. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 1.2 - ADMINISTRATION
12-120: ESTABLISHMENT OF PLANNING DEPARTMENT:
Pursuant to the authority granted at Idaho Code title 31, chapter 8, the board
of county commissioners has created a planning department to assist in the
fulfillment of the duties prescribed by this title and Idaho Code. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-121: PLANNING DIRECTOR:
The board of county commissioners shall designate a planning director, who
shall be charged with administering the provisions of this title. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-122: PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Establishment: The Bonner County Planning Commission is hereby
established as provided for by Idaho Code section 67-6504. This commission
shall be composed of seven (7) members assigned to positions A through G.
   B.   Organization: The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman. This commission shall abide by the provisions of this title, the
Local Land Use Planning Act, and shall also adopt bylaws as required.
   C.   Terms of Office: Positions A, B, and C shall first expire September 30,
2025, and then every three (3) years thereafter. Positions D and E shall expire
September 30, 2024, and every three (3) years thereafter. Positions F and G
shall expire September 30, 2023, and every three (3) years thereafter.
Appointment to complete the term of a vacated position or appointment to a new
term shall be done by motion and order of the Board of Bonner County
Commissioners.
   D.   Jurisdiction: The Planning Commission shall be responsible for
recommending amendments of the Bonner County Comprehensive Plan and land use
ordinances to the Board of Bonner County Commissioners. The Planning Commission
shall not consider amendments which are deemed to be quasi-judicial
proceedings. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 655, 1-12-2022)
12-123: ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Establishment: The Bonner County Zoning Commission is hereby
established as provided for by Idaho Code section 67-6504. This commission
shall be composed of five (5) members assigned to positions A through E.
   B.   Organization: The Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman. This commission shall abide by the provisions of this title, the
Local Land Use Planning Act, and shall also adopt bylaws as required.
   C.   Terms of Office: Position A shall first expire September 30, 2023, and
then every three (3) years thereafter. Positions B and C shall expire September
30, 2024, and every three (3) years thereafter. Positions D and E shall expire
September 30, 2025, and every three (3) years thereafter. Appointment to
complete the term of a vacated position or appointment to a new term shall be
done by motion and order of the Board of Bonner County Commissioners.
   D.   Jurisdiction: The Zoning Commission shall be responsible for holding
quasi-judicial hearings required by this title and Idaho Code for applicant
initiated land use requests. When requested by staff, by a majority of the
Zoning Commission members, or by the Board of Bonner County Commissioners, the
Zoning Commission or Board of Bonner County Commissioners may appoint a
hearings examiner in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6520 upon approval
by the Board of Bonner County Commissioners. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord.
655, 1-12-2022)
12-124: RESERVED:
(Reserved by Ord. 655, 1-12-2022)
12-125: CONDUCT OF MEETINGS, RECORDS, OPEN TO PUBLIC:
   A.   The Planning Commission and Zoning Commission shall adopt written rules
consistent with this title and the laws of the State of Idaho for the
transaction of business of the commission.
   B.   The Planning Commission and Zoning Commission shall maintain and make
open to the public written records of meetings, hearings, resolutions,
findings, studies, permits and actions.
   C.   The written records, transcripts, audio recordings, or other written,
audio or video evidence received or compiled by the Planning Commission and
Zoning Commission in the conduct of its meetings or hearings shall be
automatically incorporated into the record of the Board for the Board's
consideration of appeals or recommendations from the Planning Commission and
Zoning Commission. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-126: ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENT OF HEARING EXAMINER:
The position of hearing examiner is established in accordance with the
provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6520. Hearing examiners shall meet the
minimum qualifications set forth in Idaho Code section 67-6520 and shall be
appointed by the Board by resolution. Hearing examiners shall serve at the
discretion of a majority of the Board. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-127: POWER AND DUTIES OF HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   For any application, the hearing examiner shall provide notice, conduct
public meetings, consider applications and render written final decisions based
on the standards and procedures provided in this title for the Board and Zoning
Commission. The hearing examiner may recommend the Zoning Commission conduct a
public hearing pursuant to the public hearing noticing requirements and
procedures of chapter 2,
subchapter 2.6 of this title, based upon the extent of public comment or other
contested factors in the case which warrant a hearing before the Zoning
Commission. The hearing examiner is authorized to consider the following:
      1.   Subdivisions;
      2.   Variances;
      3.   Conditional use permits, including planned unit developments and
tier III home occupations;
      4.   Special use permits.
   B.   Applications authorized for consideration by a hearing examiner shall
be considered by the Board or Zoning Commission as provided by this title, if
the hearing examiner position is vacant. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 590,
6-12-2019; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-128: APPEALS FROM FINAL DECISION OF HEARING EXAMINER:
Any "affected person", as defined by Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65, may
present an appeal of the final decision of the hearing examiner to the Board.
The appeal is subject to the same procedures and standards as established in
section
12-262 of this title for appeals from final decisions of the zoning commission.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-129: CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED:
The hearing examiner is subject to the same standards regarding conflict of
interest as provided in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65, for governing boards,
commissions and employees. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 1.3 - ENFORCEMENT
12-130: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Planning Director, or designee, shall have the authority to enforce
this title. The Planning Director shall not issue a permit unless the intended
uses of the buildings and land conform in all respects with the provisions of
this title. (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
   B.   The prosecuting attorney may take any criminal action considered
necessary to enjoin a violation of this title. The prosecuting attorney may,
with the consent of the board, bring a civil action considered necessary to
enjoin a violation of this title. Civil remedies may be sought in addition to,
or in lieu of, criminal penalties, including the recovery of any costs, civil
fines or penalties imposed by this title and the filing with the recorder's
office of a notice to title of a zoning violation that has remained unresolved
for forty five (45) days or more after the first notice of violation was sent
by certified mail by Bonner County to the landowner at the address shown on the
county assessor's tax rolls. The notice of violation shall identify the zoning
violation, location and the actions required to resolve the violation. After
the violation has been resolved, the landowner shall pay a fee as set forth in
the official fee schedule established by this title to process and record a
lifting of the notice to title. (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
12-131: COMPLAINTS OF VIOLATION:
When a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. The complaint shall state fully the causes
and basis for the complaint and shall be filed with the planning director. The
planning director has the authority to investigate and take actions on the
complaint as provided in this title. The planning director may also dismiss the
complaint based upon a finding that there is insufficient evidence that a
violation exists. (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
12-132: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Penalties for failure to comply with, or violations of the provisions of this
title shall be as follows: Violation of any of the provisions of this title or
failure to comply with any of its requirements is a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by both. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The landowner,
tenant, subdivider, builder or any other person who commits, participates in,
assists in or maintains a violation, may be found guilty of a separate offense.
Nothing contained in this title shall prevent the board or any other public
official or private citizen from taking lawful action necessary to restrain or
prevent a violation of this title or of Idaho Code. In addition to court
actions, the county may impose and recover as penalties all reasonable costs
incurred in the investigation, abatement and prosecution of the violation.
(Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
12-133: AUTHORITY, ISSUANCE OF STOP WORK ORDER, UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE:
   A.   If the planning director finds any activity regulated by this title
being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this title, the
planning director or designee may issue a stop work order.
   B.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted on the
premises where the activity is occurring or given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner's agent, or to any person performing the work.
Written notice shall also be provided by the planning department by certified
mail to the landowner at the address shown on the county assessor's tax rolls.
On issuance of a stop work order, the cited activity shall immediately cease.
The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions
under which the cited activity will be permitted to resume.
   C.   Any person who continues to work or perform an activity after having
been served with a stop work order, without express written authorization of
the planning director, or designee, shall be subject to the penalties as
prescribed by this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURES
SECTION:
Subchapter 2.1 - Title Amendments, Comprehensive Plan Amendments And Zone
Changes
12-210: Purpose
12-211: General
12-212: Applications, Applicants For Amendment To Zoning Or Comprehensive Plan
Map
12-213: Applications, Applicants For Amendments To This Title
12-214: Procedures For Amendments To This Title
12-215: Applications For Zone Changes And Comprehensive Plan Map Amendments,
Contents
12-216: Evaluation Of Amendment Proposals
12-217: Public Hearings, Notice Of
Subchapter 2.2 - Conditional Use Permits
12-220: Purpose
12-221: General Provisions
12-222: Application, Contents
12-223: Conditional Use Permits, Standards For Review Of Applications,
Procedures
12-224: Public Hearings And Notices
12-225: Approval, Disapproval, Appeal Of Decision
12-226: Conditional Use Permits, Conditions, Expiration, Revocation
Subchapter 2.3 - Variances
12-231: Purpose
12-232: General Provisions
12-233: Application, Contents
12-234: Variances, Standards For Review Of Applications
12-235: Public Hearing And Notices
12-236: Approval, Disapproval; Appeal Of Decision
12-237: Reserved
12-238: Administrative Variances
Subchapter 2.4 - Special Use Permits
12-240: Purpose
12-241: Applicability
12-242: General Provisions
12-243: Duration Of Permit
12-244: Application For Special Use Permit
12-245: Standards For Review Of Special Use Permits
12-246: Conditions May Be Attached, Special Use Permits
12-247: Procedure For Review Of Special Use Permit
Subchapter 2.5 - Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
12-250: Purpose
12-250.1: Districts Permitting Planned Unit Developments
12-251: Planned Unit Development Classification And Minimums
12-252: Uses Permitted Within Planned Unit Developments
12-253.1: Planned Unit Development Application Requirements
12-253.2: Preapplication Meeting
12-253.3: Concurrent Processing Of Planned Unit Development And Subdivision
Applications
12-254: "Large Scale" PUD, General Provisions
12-255: Procedure For Approval Of Planned Unit Developments
12-256: Design Standards For Planned Unit Developments
12-257: Standards For Review Of Applications For Planned Unit Developments
12-258: Expiration And Extension Of Planned Unit Development Approval
Subchapter 2.6 - Abandonments, Appeals, Complaints, Exceptions, Fees,
Modifications, Public Hearings, Application Processing
12-260: Abandonment Of Application
12-261: Administrative Appeals
12-262: Appeals From Final Decision Of Commission/Hearing Examiner
12-263: Reconsideration
12-264: Administrative Exceptions
12-265: Schedule Of Fees
12-266: Modification Of Terms And Conditions Of Permit Approval
12-266.1: Extension Of Expiration Date
12-267: Public Hearings
12-268: Application Process, General Provisions
SUBCHAPTER 2.1 - TITLE AMENDMENTS, COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS AND ZONE
CHANGES
12-210: PURPOSE:
This chapter provides procedures for amending this title (including zoning text
and maps). (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-211: GENERAL:
A request for amendment to the text of this title, the comprehensive plan or to
the zoning map must be accompanied by a written request that addresses:
   A.   The reason for the request.
   B.   The conformity of the proposal to the comprehensive plan.
   C.   The effect of the proposal on adjacent property.
   D.   Any other information considered by the Planning Director or Governing
Body to be necessary for a complete evaluation of the proposal, such as
information regarding utilities, traffic, service connections, natural
resources, unique features of the land or off site features affecting the
proposal. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-
2022)
12-212: APPLICATIONS, APPLICANTS FOR AMENDMENT TO ZONING OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
MAP:
   A.   Any person may initiate action to change the zoning or comprehensive
plan map. (Ord. 559, 1-4-2017)
12-213: APPLICATIONS, APPLICANTS FOR AMENDMENTS TO THIS TITLE:
An amendment to the text of this title or comprehensive plan may be initiated
by any citizen or property owner of Bonner County. A fee shall be collected for
any amendment initiated by a citizen or property owner, as set forth at section
12-265 of this chapter. The amendment shall be considered in accordance with
the procedure specified in Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6511. (Ord. 559,
1-4-2017)
12-214: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDMENTS TO THIS TITLE:
   A.   The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this title
may from time to time be amended, supplemented or repealed in accordance with
Idaho Code. Amendments to the comprehensive plan shall be made in accordance
with the notice and hearing procedures prescribed in Idaho Code section 67-6509
and shall require a noticed hearing before the Planning Commission. Amendments
to an ordinance establishing a zoning district shall be made in accordance with
the notice and hearing procedures prescribed in Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and
67-6511 and shall require a noticed hearing before the Planning Commission. All
other amendments to this title shall require a hearing before the Planning
Commission.
   B.   At least twenty two (22) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed amendment shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction. Notice shall also be made available to other papers, radio and
television stations serving the jurisdiction for use as a public service
announcement. A record of the hearing, the findings made, and actions taken
shall be maintained.
   C.   When a hearing is required before the Planning Commission as prescribed
in this section, the Planning Commission shall produce written findings and
recommendations and transmit them to the Board of County Commissioners within
thirty (30) working days of the date of the hearing. This time limit may be
extended or modified by written consent of the Board of County Commissioners.
Failure of the Planning Commission to issue a decision within the time period
prescribed in this section shall be deemed a denial or a recommendation of
denial. The Board of County Commissioners, prior to taking action on the
amendment, may conduct a public hearing using the same notice and hearing
procedures as the Planning Commission. The Board of County Commissioners shall
not hold a public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing nor take action on
the proposed amendment until recommendations have been received from the
Planning Commission or thirty (30) working days have passed and the Planning
Commission has failed to transmit its findings and recommendations to the
Board. If the Board fails to act within twenty (20) working days of the first
day it could take action, such inaction shall be deemed an approval of the
Planning Commission’s recommendation.
   D.   If the Board of County Commissioners approves an amendment, the
amendment shall then be made a part of this title by passage of an appropriate
ordinance.
   E.   When a hearing is required before the Zoning Commission as prescribed
in this section, the Zoning Commission shall produce written findings and
recommendations and transmit them to the Board of County Commissioners within
thirty (30) working days of the date of the hearing. This time limit may be
extended or modified by written consent of the Board of County Commissioners.
Failure of the Commission to issue a decision within the time period prescribed
in this section shall be deemed a denial or a recommendation of denial. The
Board of County Commissioners, prior to taking action on the amendment, may
conduct a public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the
Planning Commission. The Board of County Commissioners shall not hold a public
hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing nor take action on the proposed
amendment until recommendations have been received from the Zoning Commission
or thirty (30) working days have passed and the Planning Commission has failed
to transmit its findings and recommendations to the Board. If the Board fails
to act within twenty (20) working days of the first day it could take action,
such inaction shall be deemed an approval of the Zoning Commission’s
recommendation. (Ord. 550, 3-1-2016; amd. Ord. 590, 6-12-2019; Ord. 661, 3-18-
2022; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
12-215: APPLICATIONS FOR ZONE CHANGES AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP AMENDMENTS,
CONTENTS:
An applicant for a zone or comprehensive plan map change shall submit the
following:
   A.   A plan of the site, drawn to scale.
   B.   A narrative statement that addresses:
      1.   The effects of elements such as noise, light glare, odors, fumes and
vibrations on adjoining property.
      2.   The compatibility of the proposal with the adjoining land uses.
      3.   The relationship of the proposal to the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Reserved. (Ord. 583, 12-5-2018)
   D.   A legal description of the subject property prepared by an Idaho
licensed surveyor.
   E.   A “vicinity map”, as defined in section 12-822 of this title,
sufficient to show the impact of the proposal commensurate with the scale of
the project.
   F.   Any other information considered by the Planning Director or Governing
Body to be necessary for a complete evaluation of the proposal; such as
information regarding utilities, traffic, service connections, natural
resources, unique features of the land or off site features affecting the
proposal.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
12-216: EVALUATION OF AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
Staff and the Governing Bodies shall review the particular facts and
circumstances of each proposal submitted and shall determine whether there is
adequate evidence that the proposal is not in conflict with the policies of the
comprehensive plan, as found in the adopted Implementation Component. For zone
change proposals, the request shall be evaluated against chapter 12
subchapter 3.2 or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 681,
10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022; Ord. 712, 6-12-2024)
12-217: PUBLIC HEARINGS, NOTICE OF:
Notices and public hearings shall be provided pursuant to the procedural
requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6511. When notice is required to two
hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers of record, in lieu of the
mail notification, three (3) notices in the official newspaper or paper of
general circulation is sufficient; provided, that the third notice appears no
later than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 2.2 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
12-220: PURPOSE:
This subchapter establishes criteria for conditional uses in a zoning district.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-221: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   There are certain land uses that possess unique characteristics
relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public
facilities that each specific use must be considered individually. These uses
are provided for as conditional uses in this subchapter.
   B.   Once a conditional use permit is approved, the terms and conditions of
the conditional use permit become the controlling plan for the use of the
property and may only be changed in accord with section
12-266 of this chapter.
   C.   Conditional use permits issued under this title are valid for the life
of the use at the location for which the permit was issued, unless an
expiration date is specified in the conditional use permit or unless a permit
has been revoked under this title. Conditional use permits shall be deemed to
run with the land to which they are attached, and the terms of the permits
shall not be modified or terminated by a change in ownership of the lands.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-222: APPLICATION, CONTENTS:
An application for a conditional use permit must be submitted to the Planning
Department. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
   B.   Authorized signature of at least one owner of the property for which
the conditional use permit is proposed.
   C.   Legal description of property.
   D.   Applicant's interest in title.
   E.   Description of existing use.
   F.   Zoning district in which property is located.
   G.   Description of proposed conditional use requested.
   H.   A narrative statement that addresses:
      1.   The effects of elements such as noise, glare, odors, fumes and
vibrations on adjoining property.
      2.   The compatibility of the proposal with the adjoining land uses.
      3.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan.
   I.   A plan of the site, drawn to scale, showing location of all existing
and proposed buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and
circulation, undisturbed areas, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service
areas, utilities, signs and yards.
   J.   Reserved. (Ord. 583, 12-5-2018)
   K.   A "vicinity map", as defined in section
12-822 of this title, sufficient to show the impact of the proposal
commensurate with the scale of the project.
   L.   Other information that the Planning Director or Governing Body requires
to determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and requirements
of this title, such as information regarding utilities, traffic, service
connections, natural resources, unique features of the land or off site
features affecting the proposal. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 712, 6-12-
2024)
12-223: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS,
PROCEDURES:
The Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner, except as otherwise provided in this
title, is charged with conducting at least one public hearing on the
conditional use permit application, at which time interested persons shall have
an opportunity to be heard. The Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner shall
review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposal submitted. To
grant a conditional use permit, the Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner must
find that the proposal is not in conflict with the policies of the
comprehensive plan, as found in the adopted Implementation Component, and that
the proposed use will neither create a hazard nor be dangerous to persons on or
adjacent to the property. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022; Ord.
681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022; Ord. 712, 6-12-2024)
12-224: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND NOTICES:
Notices and public hearings shall be provided pursuant to Idaho Code section
67-6512. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners
or purchasers of record, in lieu of the mail notification, three (3) notices in
the official newspaper or paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided,
that the third notice appears no later than ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-225: APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL, APPEAL OF DECISION:
   A.   Following the public hearing, the Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner
shall consider the application and may approve or deny the conditional use
permit.
   B.   If the Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner denies the conditional use
permit, the Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner shall state in writing the
reasons for the decision and shall specify any actions the applicant could take
to obtain approval.
   C.   The final decision of the Zoning Commission or Hearing Examiner on a
conditional use permit may be appealed to the board as set forth at section 12-
262 of this chapter.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022; Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
12-226: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, CONDITIONS, EXPIRATION, REVOCATION:
   A.   Conditional use permits may be approved that meet the standards set
forth in this title for that specific use. Conditional use permits may, in
addition to standards set forth, also stipulate conditions which may include:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      3.   Controlling the duration of development;
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services;
      7.   Specifying time limits that the use will be permitted;
      8.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this title;
      9.   Landscaping requirements;
      10.   Sight restrictions;
      11.   Safeguards to protect adjacent property; and
      12.   Measures to minimize environmental impacts.
   B.   The Zoning Commission or governing body shall specify whether
stipulated conditions are to be met prior to the issuance of the conditional
use permit or are perpetual conditions to be met throughout the life of the
permit.
   C.   Conditional use permit approval shall expire if the permit has not been
issued within two (2) years from the date of approval, or if issued, if the use
has not commenced within two (2) years from the date of issuance. At any time
prior to the expiration date of the conditional use permit, an applicant may
make a written request to the planning director for a single extension of the
conditional use permit for a period up to two (2) years. The Zoning Commission
at any regular meeting, or board at any regular meeting, may consider the
request for extension. The extension request must be approved or denied prior
to the expiration date of the conditional use permit.
   D.   The planning director may present to the Zoning Commission a
recommendation to revoke a conditional use permit on a finding of substantial
evidence that the permit is not in compliance with the terms, conditions or
restrictions of the conditional use permit. Prior to revoking a permit, the
Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing, in accord with the noticing
and procedures set forth in this chapter, to consider the permit revocation,
and may revoke the permit or impose additional conditions or restrictions to
bring the permit into compliance, on a finding that there is substantial
evidence that the terms of the permit approval have been violated.
   E.   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the board or any other
public official or private citizen from taking any lawful action as is
necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or of Idaho Code.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
SUBCHAPTER 2.3 - VARIANCES
12-231: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a mechanism by which the county
may grant relief from the strict application of the provisions of this title
where proposals conform to the standards set forth in this subchapter. (Ord.
559, 1-4-2017)
12-232: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A variance is a modification of the bulk and placement requirements of this
title as to lot or parcel size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side
yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space size, height of buildings, or other
provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of a structure or the
placement of a structure upon a lot or parcel, or the size of the lot or
parcel. (Ord. 559, 1-4-2017)
12-233: APPLICATION, CONTENTS:
An application for a variance must be submitted to the Planning Department. At
a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
   B.   Authorized signature of at least one owner of the property for which
the variance is proposed.
   C.   Legal description of property.
   D.   Applicant’s interest in title.
   E.   Description of existing use.
   F.   Description of proposed variance requested.
   G.   A narrative statement that addresses the standards of section
12-234 of this subchapter.
   H.   A site plan showing all property lines; existing and proposed
structures; and the property size in acres.
   I.   Other information that the Planning Director or Governing Body requires
to determine if the proposed variance meets the intent and requirements of this
title, which may include site specific details or potential impacts of the
proposed variance. (Ord. 559, 1-4-2017; amd. Ord. 712, 6-12-2024)
12-234: VARIANCES, STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS:
The staff, Zoning Commission, hearing examiner and/or Board shall review the
particular facts and circumstances of each proposal submitted. To grant a
variance, the hearing examiner or the Governing Body must find adequate
evidence showing that:
   A.   Conditions apply to the property that do not apply generally to other
properties in the same zone or vicinity, which conditions are a result of lot
size, shape, topography, or other circumstances over which the applicant has no
control.
   B.   Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of
the applicant.
   C.   The granting of the variance is not in conflict with the public
interest in that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity
of the subject parcel or lot. (Ord. 559, 1-4-2017; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-235: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICES:
Notices and public hearings shall be provided pursuant to Idaho Code section
67-6512. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners
or purchasers of record, in lieu of the mail notification, three (3) notices in
the official newspaper or paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided,
that the third notice appears no later than ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. (Ord. 559, 1-4-2017)
12-236: APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL; APPEAL OF DECISION:
   A.   Following the public hearing, the hearing examiner or the Zoning
Commission shall consider the application and shall take action as provided at
subsection
12-267A11 of this chapter.
   B.   The hearing examiner or the Zoning Commission shall state in writing
the reasons for the decision and shall specify any actions that the applicant
could take to obtain approval if the variance is denied.
   C.   In approving an application, the hearing examiner or the Zoning
Commission may require conditions that will secure the objectives of this
title, and may require guarantees in such form as deemed proper under the
circumstances to ensure that such conditions be complied with. Where any such
conditions are violated or not complied with, the approval shall cease to
exist, and the Compliance Officer shall act accordingly.
   D.   The final decision of the hearing examiner or the commission on a
variance may be appealed to the Board as set forth at section
12-262 of this chapter.
   E.   The hearing examiner or the Zoning Commission may not grant a variance
to allow a use not permissible in the zone involved, or any use expressly
prohibited by the terms of this title. The hearing examiner or the Zoning
Commission may recommend that the applicant file for rezoning. (Ord. 559, 1-4-
2017; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-237: RESERVED:
(Ord. 578, 7-11-2018)
12-238: ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES:
   A.   The Director may grant a variance, as an administrative decision, of up
to thirty percent (30%) of a modification of the bulk and placement
requirements of this title as to lot or parcel size, lot coverage, width,
depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space size, height
of buildings, or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of
a structure or the placement of a structure upon a lot or parcel, or the size
of the lot or parcel.
   B.   The applicant shall submit an application for administrative variance
along with the appropriate fee.
   C.   The application shall be processed as follows:
      1.   Application And Administrative Requirements: A site plan and
application shall be submitted for review together with all appropriate fees as
established by the adopted fee schedule. The burden of proof lies upon the
applicant to show whether characteristics of the site conform to the standards
in section
12-234 of this subchapter.
      2.   Area Of City Impact: If the property is located in an area of city
impact, the County shall notify the affected city and allow the required amount
of time for a response.
      3.   Notifications: Upon acceptance of an application, and while in ACI
review, if appropriate, the Director shall provide notification by mail of the
variance request to the owners of parcels within three hundred feet (300') of
the external boundaries of the parcel and shall provide such individuals a
period of twenty one (21) calendar days from the date of the mailing to submit
comments concerning the proposed variance.
      4.   Action On Application: Based on the comments from staff, agency, and
those from affected property owners, the Director shall review the proposed
request and shall either approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny the
application per section
12-234 of this subchapter within seven (7) working days from the end of the
twenty one (21) day comment period. Alternatively, the Director may, at any
time during this review, forward the application to the Zoning Commission for a
public hearing and decision in accordance with the public hearing process in
section 12-267 of this chapter. In considering comments, the Director shall
evaluate whether granting the variance will be consistent with the standards
listed in section 12-234, “Variances, Standards For Review Of Applications”, of
this subchapter. (Ord. 578, 7-11-2018; amd. Ord. 590, 6-12-2019; Ord. 661, 3-
18-2022; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
SUBCHAPTER 2.4 - SPECIAL USE PERMITS
12-240: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to include provisions for special uses,
events and structures that are temporary in nature, but otherwise prohibited
due to their intensive nature; provided, that these uses are carried out with
safeguards to ensure their compatibility with the surrounding uses. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-241: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this subchapter are applicable to all uses, events and
structures of a temporary nature that would otherwise be prohibited under the
terms of the zoning, subdivision and other land use regulations, adopted and in
force in Bonner County, Idaho, except that the provisions of this subchapter do
not apply to:
   A.   Any event at which fewer than four hundred (400) persons are in
attendance or are expected to attend at a single location.
   B.   Uses of land, events and structures which are a part of, or customarily
accessory to, a permitted use or conditional use.
   C.   Events and temporary uses which occur entirely within an existing
structure.
   D.   Structures which are of a temporary nature and associated with the
construction of a permitted use or conditional use. (See also section
12-420 of this title for temporary structures.)
   E.   Uses, events and structures located entirely on lands owned or
controlled by the United States or the State of Idaho. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-242: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Special uses are uses of a temporary nature that would otherwise be
prohibited uses. By their nature, special uses are significantly more intensive
than the permitted uses or conditional uses in the respective zone districts,
but temporary special uses may be carried out with particular safeguards to
ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses and without endangering public
health and safety. Temporary special uses are therefore subject to additional
restrictions, requirements and conditions more stringent than those applying
generally within the zone district.
   B.   Once a special use permit has been approved, the terms and conditions
of that permit shall not be changed, except as set forth at section
12-266 of this chapter.
   C.   Any development or use in violation of the terms and conditions of the
special use permit shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-243: DURATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Special use permits issued under the terms of this chapter shall be
valid for a period specified in the permit, and in the discretion of the Board,
may include site preparation and cleanup or restoration after the event
concludes, the use is discontinued or the structure is removed. On petition by
the permittee, the Board may allow one extension of time for the completion of
the terms of the special use permit. Special use permits shall be deemed to run
with the land to which they are attached, and the terms of these permits shall
not be modified, abrogated or abridged by a change in ownership of the lands,
or other private contracts or agreements. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   B.   A special use permit shall be issued for a single event, use or
structure, or a combination, for a specific period and shall not be renewable
for annual or repeated events, uses or structures, with the following
exceptions:
      1.   Fun runs, cycling events, triathlons, or other similar recreational
and community events may be renewable provided:
         a.   The repeat event is located on the same site.
         b.   The applicant has been issued a special use permit or renewal
within the previous two (2) years.
         c.   There have been no violations of previous permits.
         d.   The applicant submits a renewal application and pays the fee set
forth by the official fee schedule.
         e.   The number of renewals for a repeat event shall not exceed five
(5).
         f.   The number of attendees or expected attendees does not exceed the
original permitted number.
      2.   The Planning Director is authorized to issue the renewal and apply
the conditions of the original permit and other conditions reasonably related
to the conditions of section
12-246 of this subchapter. (Ord. 539, 8-20-2014)
12-244: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
Applications for special use permits shall be made on forms supplied by the
Planning Director and shall include:
   A.   The name of the applicant responsible for conducting the special use
and responsible for compliance with the terms and conditions of the special use
permit. If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, written and
notarized evidence of the permission of the owner to conduct the proposed
special use shall accompany the application.
   B.   A description of the proposed use, including the type of activity,
hours of operation, number of vehicle trips anticipated, duration of the
activity (including site preparation and site restoration or cleanup), size of
structures or nature of structures to be built, and any management or
operations planned to minimize effects of the activity on surrounding
properties.
   C.   A vicinity map depicting the site and the surrounding area, including
all pertinent features such as roads, public facilities, bodies of water and
current land uses.
   D.   A site plan showing the property boundaries, general topography,
building layout, access, parking and any other details that clearly depict the
proposed use.
   E.   The names and addresses of owners of properties located within three
hundred feet (300') of the proposed special use as shown in the records of the
Assessor's Office. If the proposed special use is a part of a larger parcel of
land under the same ownership, the names and addresses of owners of properties
adjoining the larger parcel shall also be included.
   F.   An application fee as set forth at section
12-265 of this chapter. The Board may waive the fee for political subdivisions
or public agencies. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-245: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
The board shall examine all applications for special use permits for compliance
with the following standards:
   A.   The type of temporary use proposed, its general location and the
characteristics of the specific site are compatible with the nature of the
district and will not have material and long term negative effects.
   B.   There is sufficient land area to accommodate the proposed special use,
and that the temporary use and any appurtenant structures are arranged on the
land to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties, and will not
create particular hazards to adjacent properties.
   C.   The design and management of the proposed special use will not pose a
material risk to public health and safety.
   D.   Adequate public services (such as water supply, sewage disposal
facilities, roads, law enforcement, traffic control, fire protection, emergency
medical services, etc.) exist or will be provided to serve the proposed special
use.
   E.   The site plan and accompanying descriptive material for the special use
are sufficiently detailed to provide a clear and unambiguous description of the
nature of the use to be allowed under the terms of the special use permit.
   F.   Measures can and will be taken to mitigate any adverse effects that the
proposed special use may have. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-246: CONDITIONS MAY BE ATTACHED, SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
In addition to the standards for special uses set forth in this subchapter,
conditions may be attached to a special use permit. Conditions may include, but
are not limited to:
   A.   Minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent lands;
   B.   Controlling the sequence and timing of the special use;
   C.   Controlling the duration of the special use;
   D.   Assuring that the special use is maintained properly;
   E.   Designating the exact location and nature of the special use;
   F.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public health and
safety facilities or services;
   G.   Requiring more restrictive standards for structural placement than
those required in the zone district in which the special use is to be
established, and requiring the removal of any temporary structure;
   H.   Requiring mitigation of effects of the proposed special use on public
and emergency service delivery;
   I.   Requiring improvements of the road or transportation systems and/or
requiring traffic control measures serving the use or development for the safe
and efficient movement of vehicles to and from the site;
   J.   Requiring specific measures to prevent erosion, for water quality
protection and/or for revegetation, restoration or reclamation of disturbed
portions of the site;
   K.   Requiring security measures (e.g., fencing, security patrol or limited
access) to protect users of the site or the general public;
   L.   Requiring that the applicant or developer enter into special agreements
with Bonner County to guarantee construction or maintenance of improvements,
ensure that operations are carried out with minimal risk to public health and
safety, or to minimize public or county liability which might result from the
issuance of the special use permit; and/or
   M.   Requiring the applicant or developer to obtain and maintain in force
liability insurance of a general nature or for any particular risk and/or
insuring Bonner County against claims of liability resulting from the issuance
of such special use permit. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-247: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   On receipt of a completed application for a special use permit, the
planning director shall schedule a public hearing before the board for the next
available meeting, allowing time for the requirement for notice and staff and
agency review.
   B.   At a minimum, the planning director shall provide public hearing notice
to adjacent property owners as set forth in subsection
12-244E of this subchapter, notifying them of the public hearing. These letters
shall be sent by U.S. mail, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
hearing and shall include a description of the proposed special use, and the
date, time and place of the public hearing. The planning director shall also
send the public hearing notice to be sent to those public agencies that may be
affected by the proposed special use.
   C.   The planning director shall have notice of the public hearing published
in one issue of the official county newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the date of the public hearing. This notice shall contain a description of
the proposed special use, and the date, time and place of the public hearing.
The planning director shall have the notice of public hearing posted in a
prominent place on the property at least one week prior to the date of the
public hearing.
   D.   The board shall hold a public hearing on the application for a special
use permit. The board shall consider the application, the standards for special
uses in section
12-245 of this subchapter, any comments received, the facts on the record and
may:
      1.   Approve the special use permit, attaching any conditions that the
board considers necessary under the terms of this subchapter;
      2.   Require that specific changes be made to the application before the
special use permit is approved; or
      3.   Deny the special use permit and specify the actions (if any) that
the applicant could take to obtain approval.
   E.   The final decision on any special use permit application shall be in
writing and state: the specific location; event, use or structure; the person
or persons responsible for compliance with the terms of the permit; and any and
all limitations or conditions placed on the special use permit. If the final
decision is to deny the special use permit, the written decision shall also
specify the actions (if any) the applicant could take to obtain approval of the
special use permit.
   F.   The violation of any specific term, limitation or condition of a
special use permit is a violation of this subchapter. Each day each violation
continues is a separate offense.
   G.   Violation of this subchapter is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall carry a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or six (6) months
imprisonment.
   H.   In addition to the criminal penalties above, the county may pursue
civil actions to enjoin further violation, enforce the terms of a special use
permit or recover damages caused by a violation of the terms of a special use
permit. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 2.5 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD)
12-250: PURPOSE:
This subchapter includes provisions that allow flexibility in how development
and uses can be configured and phased on a site. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-250.1: DISTRICTS PERMITTING PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Planned unit developments (PUDs) are permitted in all districts. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
12-251: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CLASSIFICATION AND MINIMUMS:
   A.   A "small scale residential" PUD consisting of only residential and
accessory uses and having six (6) dwelling units or fewer.
   B.   A "small scale mixed use" PUD consisting of a combination of
residential and subordinate commercial uses and having a minimum gross land
area of ten (10) acres.
   C.   A "large scale mixed use" PUD consisting of commercial, industrial,
residential or recreational uses and having a minimum gross land area of twenty
(20) acres.
   D.   A commercial/industrial PUD consisting of primarily commercial and/or
industrial uses, wherein the permitted uses within the PUD shall be the same as
those within the base zone district.
   E.   A "large scale residential" PUD consisting of only residential and
accessory uses and having more than six (6) dwelling units. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-252: USES PERMITTED WITHIN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Permitted uses shall be the same as those within the base zone district, with
the following exceptions:
   A.   Duplexes and multi-family dwellings are permitted in the Recreation,
Rural, Rural Service Center and Alpine Village Districts, provided the
development meets applicable density limits set forth in sections
12-411 and
12-412 of this title.
   B.   Limited commercial and related recreational activities and facilities
which are designed primarily to accommodate the needs of residents within a
"mixed use" PUD described in section
12-251 of this subchapter may be permitted in any district, except for
Industrial. Commercial recreation areas, such as ski resorts, golf courses or
marinas, where permitted or conditionally permitted in applicable districts,
may include related commercial uses to accommodate the general public as well
as residents within the PUD when included and approved as part of the PUD
development plan. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-253.1: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Application for a PUD shall be made with the Bonner County Planning Department.
In addition to the basic information requirements and application forms
provided by the department, a completed application shall include the
following:
   A.   A report showing how the proposed PUD complies with the conditional use
standards of section
12-223 of this chapter.
   B.   Environmental analysis, which shall address the impacts of the
development on the various physical features of the land, including wetlands,
wildlife habitat, vegetation, floodplain and floodways, cultural resources,
water quality and other natural resources. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   C.   Reserved. (Ord. 583, 12-5-2018)
   D.   Preliminary development plan or conceptual land use plan for a "large
scale" PUD of significant size which may be planned in phases for a variety of
land use types over a period of time. The preliminary development plan contents
for a "small scale" or "mixed use" PUD, or for any portion of an approved
"large scale" PUD which is contemplated to be completed or under construction
within two (2) years after approval, shall include the proposed use or uses,
housing densities and arrangements, parking facilities, preliminary subdivision
plan (if applicable), common areas, open spaces and a transportation network
for vehicular and pedestrian circulation. The Planning Director or Governing
Body may require drawings and sketches demonstrating the design characteristics
and physical relationships of various uses and siting conditions in order to
determine the feasibility and desirability of any necessary variation from the
conventional development standards of this title.
   E.   A trip generation and distribution letter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-253.2: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
The developer or developer's representative for a PUD shall meet with the
Planning Director or designee, prior to submitting an application. The purpose
of this meeting is to discuss early and informally with the developer, the
purpose and qualifying provisions of this chapter along with any known
constraints in order to assist the applicant in determining the feasibility of
the proposal. The meeting will familiarize the developer with the comprehensive
plan, this title, sewer and water regulations and general soil information. The
developer shall also consult with the serving utility companies and agencies
regarding electrical power, sewer and water supply prior to submission of the
preliminary development plan. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-253.3: CONCURRENT PROCESSING OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION
APPLICATIONS:
When a PUD includes a subdivision, the processing of the subdivision
application shall take place concurrently with the PUD application. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-254: "LARGE SCALE" PUD, GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   A conditional use permit may be granted for a conceptual land use plan
for a "large scale" PUD, subject to submission of preliminary development plans
as provided in this title. The Zoning Commission shall consider the conceptual
land use plan and shall make its recommendation to the Board, which shall
conduct its own hearing on the plan. If phasing is proposed, a phasing schedule
shall be provided with the application. Subdivisions may be considered
concurrently with the conceptual land use plan or separately after approval of
the conceptual land use plan, pursuant to the provisions of
subchapter 6.4 of this title.
   B.   Development plans submitted as part of an approved "large scale" PUD
shall be in substantial compliance with the approved conceptual land use plan.
Any significant change affecting the original approval of the plan shall
require a public hearing. A change in density or a more intensive use of the
same area constitutes a significant change. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord.
661, 3-18-2022)
12-255: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The procedures of
subchapter 2.2 of this chapter for approval of conditional use permits apply to
consideration and approval of planned unit developments, except as otherwise
provided in this title. The Zoning Commission shall consider the planned unit
development proposal and shall make its recommendation to the board, which
shall conduct its own hearing on the planned unit development. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-256: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Approval of a development plan by the Zoning Commission shall include, but is
not limited to, the following performance standards and requirements, which may
be in addition to and may vary from the minimum standards of this title:
   A.   Common Open Space: At least ten percent (10%) of the gross land area of
a residential PUD shall be reserved as common open space, exclusive of streets,
parking areas, and utility easements and other improvements which would detract
from the function of the "common open space", as defined below. The required
common open space must fall into one or more of the following categories:
      1.   Wildlife habitat or wildlife corridors, as identified by the Idaho
department of fish and game or U.S. fish and wildlife service. These areas
might be stream corridors, waterways subject to artificial high water marks, as
defined, which shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total required
common open space, waterways, wetlands, grasslands, stands of mature timber,
areas with snags, wintering areas, nesting and roosting sites, waterfront areas
and travel corridors between habitat blocks and sources of food and water.
      2.   Areas with native vegetation, including native grassland, unique
vegetative communities as identified by the Idaho conservation data center.
      3.   Recreational areas, including trails, sports courts and wildlife
viewing areas, and other similar recreational uses.
      4.   Historic or culturally significant areas as determined by the Idaho
state historical society.
      5.   Areas within a scenic byway.
      6.   Actively managed pasture, farm or timbered land in the A/F and rural
districts. Accessory agricultural structures are allowed within the common open
space.
   B.   Owners' Association: A PUD shall include a homeowners' association and/
or corporate ownership, which shall be responsible for the development, use and
permanent maintenance of all common activities and facilities.
   C.   Covenants, Articles Of Incorporation: Articles of incorporation for the
homeowners' association or corporate entity governing the PUD shall be recorded
with the final plat of any PUD subdivision or final development plans. The
covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be sufficient to enforce
development requirements and responsibilities of the homeowners' association
and/or ownership.
   D.   Development Density: The unit density of a PUD containing residential
uses (dwelling units/acre) shall not exceed the density of the zone district in
which it is located, except for density bonuses as provided in the following
tables:
   TABLE 2-1
   DENSITY BONUS FOR COMMON OPEN SPACE
   (Numbers in parentheses refer to additional standards located below the
table.)
                            Maximum Percentage Increase In Approved Building
Amount Of Common Open Space Lots (1)
(Percent Of Site) (2)       A/F-10, R-5 (3) A/F-20 And R-10 Districts
                                            S, AV, C, REC And RSC Districts (4)
                            Maximum Percentage Increase In Approved Building
Amount Of Common Open Space Lots (1)
(Percent Of Site) (2)       A/F-10, R-5 (3) A/F-20 And R-10 Districts
                                            S, AV, C, REC And RSC Districts (4)
10 percent - 19 percent     0 percent       0 percent
20 percent - 29 percent     10 percent
30 percent - 39 percent     20 percent      Bonus percentage increase equal to
40 percent - 49 percent     30 percent      percentage of common open space.
50 percent - 79 percent     40 percent
80 percent or more          50 percent
 
Standards:
   1.    To qualify for the full bonus percentages herein, the common open
space must comply with applicable requirements of subsection A of this section.
   2.    Common open space percentages may be rounded off to the nearest whole
percentage.
   3.    Planned unit development subdivisions shall not exceed 150 percent of
the density allowed by the underlying zoning district through provision of
common open space percentages and other density bonus actions listed in
table 2-2 below. For example, an applicant with 40 acres in the R-5 district
[normally allowed a maximum of 8 lots] may qualify for up to 12 lots via common
open space and other bonus actions.
   4.    Planned unit development subdivisions shall not exceed 200 percent of
the density allowed by the underlying zoning district through provision of
common open space percentages and other density bonus actions listed in
table 2-2 below. For example, an applicant with 40 acres in the R-5 district
[normally allowed a maximum of 8 lots] may qualify for up to 16 lots via common
open space and other bonus actions.
   TABLE 2-2
    DENSITY BONUS FOR OTHER ACTIONS
 
Density Bonus Action                    Maximum Percentage Increase In Approved
                                        Building Lots
1. Provide subdivision residents with
usable access to adjacent lakes,
streams or public lands. The access     5 percent
must meet the minimum trail/pathway
design standards specified in section
12-625 of this title.
2. Provide general public with usable
access to common open space, adjacent
lakes, streams or public lands. (Note:
This option is in lieu of, not in       15 percent
addition to, action 1.) The access must
meet the minimum trail/pathway design
standards specified in section
12-625 of this title.
3. Provide a sidewalk or pathway system 5 percent if open only to subdivision
that connects each lot in the           residents.
subdivision per the design standards in  
section                                 15 percent if open to the general
12-625 of this title.                   public.
4. Provide other public amenities. The
board may approve bonus lots for other
improvements and amenities, both on and
off site, where the applicant can
successfully demonstrate that the
proposed improvements/amenities benefit Up to 25 percent
the public. See subsections E and F of
this section for examples and
requirements. Improvements required to
mitigate impacts shall not be used to
earn bonus lots.
5. Bonus for urban sewer (where not
required to achieve given density)      25 percent
(i.e.,suburban using "urban sewer" to
get to smaller acres).
 
   E.   Public Amenities: Below are public amenities that can be provided to
obtain a density bonus. All are subject to approval by the board:
      1.   Construct recreational improvements that are available for the use
by the general public. Improvements may include, but are not limited to, play
fields, picnic shelters, children play areas and indoor recreational
facilities. Applicants must successfully demonstrate that the improvements are
safe, accessible and desirable to the general public.
      2.   Construct public facilities such as schools, fire stations or
libraries. To qualify, the land and/or facilities must be accepted by the
applicable public agency. The land itself set aside for such public use shall
be considered as common open space for the purposes of obtaining a density
bonus.
      3.   Pave roadways (where they are not required to be paved).
      4.   Provide environmental improvements as certified by wetlands, plant
or other biologists having expert knowledge of the specific environmental
feature. An example could be replacement of nonnative vegetation with native
vegetation in common open space areas. Such improvements are particularly
desirable in and around wetland areas and designated critical wildlife habitat.
      5.   Provide off site road improvements (above and beyond what is
required by board for subdivision approval).
The applicant shall include a cost estimate for the proposed public amenity
improvements prepared by a professional construction estimator, registered
general contractor, engineer, architect or landscape architect shall be
submitted with the application. The cost estimate shall be limited to physical
improvements, labor and utility costs associated with the proposed public
amenity feature.
   F.   Requirements For Public Amenities: To qualify for a density bonus, the
proposed public amenity must meet the following requirements:
      1.   Applicants must successfully demonstrate how the improvements
benefit the public.
      2.   The percentage of density bonus shall be commensurate with the cost
of the applicable improvements per the following scale:
Cost of proposed improvements = $Y
Density bonus = Extra lot or lots* valued at the equivalent of two (2) times
the cost of proposed improvements (2 x Y) up to a maximum density bonus of
twenty five percent (25%).
*The average value of lots in the proposed subdivision as determined by a state
licensed appraiser at the time the application is submitted. The appraised
value shall take into account the average size of proposed lots, proposed
physical improvements (including proposed amenities), and locational
attributes.
For example, if the applicant proposes off site road improvements costing an
estimated fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the applicant is then eligible
for a bonus lot or lots equaling up to one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) in assessed value. If a state licensed appraiser concludes that
the average market value for one of the proposed cluster lots is fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00), then the applicant qualifies for up to two (2) additional
lots (provided the extra lots do not exceed 25 percent of the total density of
the subdivision).
   G.   Design Standards: Minimum development standards set forth in this title
may be increased or decreased sufficient to accomplish design objectives in the
utilization of natural or created amenities (i.e., topographic features,
seasonal recreational uses, etc.), provided the development meets the intent of
the standards. PUD subdivisions shall comply with the conservation subdivision
provisions of section
12-633 of this title.
   H.   Buffering, Clustering: Residential PUDs shall provide for the
clustering of dwelling units. Clustered lots shall be accessed by interior road
systems. To the maximum extent possible, cluster lots shall be located so that
common open space provides a buffer between the cluster lots and adjacent
properties and/or right of way. When this is not possible, the development
shall be designed to provide at a minimum one of the following:
      1.   Cluster lots that abut surrounding properties or right of way shall
be at least seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum lot size standard for the
subject parcel.
      2.   Cluster lots that abut surrounding properties or rights of way shall
be separated from adjacent properties or rights of way by a minimum buffer
strip of one hundred feet (100'). At a minimum, proposed or existing
landscaping and vegetation within the buffer strip shall be of sufficient size
and type to provide a buffer of vegetation six feet (6') in height and fifty
percent (50%) opaque year round within three (3) years of planting. New
landscaping materials shall consist of a combination of native trees and
shrubs, as provided in
appendix B of this title. Variations to these standards may be permitted where
the applicant can demonstrate that unique topographic conditions provide
sufficient buffering, such as intervening waterways, ridges or ravines, or
other land features. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord. 661,
3-18-2022)
12-257: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The staff, Zoning Commission and/or board shall review the particular facts and
circumstances of each planned unit development proposal. To approve a planned
unit development proposal, the Zoning Commission and/or board must find
adequate evidence showing that the proposal has met the following:
   A.   The planned unit development is in accord with the Bonner County
comprehensive plan.
   B.   The proposed planned unit development or the first phase of it can be
substantially completed within two (2) years from the date of approval.
   C.   Each individual development phase can exist as an independent unit
meeting the minimum standards set forth in this subchapter.
   D.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
gather anticipated traffic and will not generate traffic in amounts that will
overload the street network outside the planned unit development. Connections
to public transportation systems shall also be considered.
   E.   Any residential development will constitute a residential environment
of sustained desirability and stability and will be in harmony with the
character of the surrounding neighborhood and community.
   F.   Any proposed commercial or industrial development will constitute an
efficient well organized development, with adequate provisions for access and
storage, and it will not adversely affect adjacent or surrounding development.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-258: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL:
   A.   Preliminary Subdivision PUD: Conditional use approval for a preliminary
subdivision PUD shall expire two (2) years from the date of approval if the
final plat has not been approved and recorded.
   B.   PUD Final Development Plan: Conditional use approval for a PUD final
development plan other than a subdivision shall expire two (2) years from the
date of approval if building permits have not been issued and/or construction
begun on a substantial portion of the project, as determined by the board of
county commissioners.
   C.   Large Scale PUD: Conditional use approval for a conceptual "large
scale" PUD shall expire four (4) years from the date of approval if no
improvements have started in accordance with subdivision and/or development
plan approval requirements. The developer is responsible for keeping the county
informed of progress made during the approval period.
   D.   Extension: An extension of time request not to exceed two (2) years may
be granted by the board of county commissioners. The request shall be made in
writing prior to the expiration date and shall state the reasons why the
extension is needed and how the developer intends to progress with the project.
If it is found that the intent of the PUD approval is merely for speculation
purposes, the extension shall not be granted. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 2.6 - ABANDONMENTS, APPEALS, COMPLAINTS, EXCEPTIONS, FEES,
MODIFICATIONS, PUBLIC HEARINGS, APPLICATION PROCESSING
12-260: ABANDONMENT OF APPLICATION:
An application that has been filed under the terms of this title which has
received a notice of incompleteness from the planning department and has
remained incomplete for one hundred twenty (120) days minimum may be considered
abandoned by the planning department if:
   A.   The planning department has sent by certified mail a written notice to
the applicant, stating that the application is incomplete and will be
considered abandoned if not determined complete by the planning department
within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice; and
   B.   The application remains incomplete either because the applicant fails
to respond by thirty (30) days or fails to provide the required information to
complete the application by thirty (30) days. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-261: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   A.   Any determination made by the Planning Director in the administration
of the provisions of this title may be appealed to the Board by paying the
required fee and notifying the Planning Director in writing of the intent to
appeal within ten (10) working days from the date of the determination. Within
ten (10) working days of receipt of an appeal, the Planning Director shall
schedule a meeting with the Board to hear the appeal and shall provide written
notice to the appellant of the time and place of the meeting. The Planning
Director and appellant shall be provided an opportunity to present the relevant
issues to the Board at that meeting. The appellant bears the burden of proof
and may be responsible for costs incurred for producing such proof, including
engineering or surveying documents or other evidence. The Board's decision
shall be final, and further recourse of the appellant shall be as provided by
Idaho Code. If no appeal to the Board is filed, the Planning Director's
decision shall be deemed final. (Ord. 551, 3-9-2016)
   B.   An administrative appeal shall not be granted if it would function as a
grant of special privilege or provide an exception to the regulations contained
within this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-262: APPEALS FROM FINAL DECISION OF COMMISSION/HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Presentation Of Appeal: Any “affected person”, as defined by Idaho Code
title 67, chapter 65, may appeal to the Board any final decision by the Zoning
Commission/hearing examiner.
   B.   Filing Time Limit; Fee: Any affected person may file an appeal of the
final decision of the Zoning Commission/hearing examiner with the Planning
Director within twenty eight (28) days after the final written decision of the
Zoning Commission/hearing examiner has been issued. The appellant shall pay the
fee required by this title upon filing the appeal. An appeal shall not be
considered to be filed until such fee has been paid. Failure to file the appeal
within the time limits shall cause automatic dismissal of the appeal.
   C.   Notice Of Appeal Contents: The notice of appeal shall be detailed in
writing and shall provide the grounds for the appeal. The grounds for appeal
shall be that the decision of the commission or hearing examiner was at a
minimum one of the following:
      1.   In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
      2.   In excess of the statutory authority of the commission or hearing
examiner;
      3.   Made upon unlawful procedure;
      4.   Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion; or
      5.   Not supported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole.
   D.   Procedures For Consideration Of Appeal:
      1.   Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the appeal, the Board shall
conduct a public hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner
using the same standards, as if the Board had original jurisdiction to hear the
application.
      2.   Upon consideration, the Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the
decision of the Zoning Commission/hearing examiner, after compliance with
applicable procedural standards.
      3.   The decision of the Board shall be final, and any further recourse
shall be as provided by law.
   E.   Applicability: The appeal process shall be coordinated with
administration of land use ordinances. The procedures for appeal set forth
herein shall be applied in a manner which is consistent with the zoning,
subdivision and related land use ordinances of Bonner County. (Ord. 559, 1-4-
2017; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
12-263: RECONSIDERATION:
   A.   Reconsideration: Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial
review of the Board's final decision must first file with the Board a motion
for reconsideration of the Board's decision, specifying deficiencies in the
decision within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, along with the
applicable fee. A failure to seek reconsideration is also a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
   B.   Initial Decision: The Board may consider the reconsideration motion as
scheduled on an open business meeting agenda and determine whether to grant or
deny the request. If the Board grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a
hearing before the Board will be scheduled to address the specific deficiencies
identified by the applicant or affected person and to allow interested persons
to have an opportunity to be heard. If the Board denies the request for
reconsideration, it shall promptly notify the parties in writing.
   C.   Public Notice On Hearing: Notice of the public hearing on the
reconsideration, identifying the specific deficiencies alleged in the
reconsideration request, will be provided as follows, including:
      1.   Notice To Agencies And Political Subdivisions: At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing, the Director shall send notice to all
political subdivisions providing services with the planning jurisdiction,
including school districts and the manager or person in charge of the local
public airport.
      2.   Legal Notice: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, the Director shall publish a notice of the time and place in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation in the County.
      3.   Radius Notice: Will be provided in the same manner as originally
provided on the application.
   D.   Decision: Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the Board may
affirm, reverse or modify its prior decision and shall provide a written
decision to the applicant and the affected person(s) within sixty (60) days of
receipt of the request for reconsideration. If the Board fails to timely
decide, the original decision of the Board will stand. (Ord. 573, 10-25-2017)
12-264: ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS:
An administrative exception, not to exceed one foot (1') of any dimensional
requirements applicable to the waterfront setbacks and ten percent (10%) of any
dimensional requirement applicable to front, side, rear and flanking street
setbacks, and a five percent (5%) exception to subdivision design depth to
width standards, or parcel/lot size may be granted by administrative action of
the Planning Director without public notice and without public hearing. (Ord.
578, 7-11-2018)
12-265: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
   A.   By resolution, the Board shall establish an official fee schedule for
land use applications and permits governed under this title.
   B.   Whenever an application, review or public hearing is required by this
title, the person or persons requesting the hearing or review shall pay the fee
established in the official fee schedule.
   C.   All fees collected shall be nonrefundable unless an application is
withdrawn prior to the Planning Department's determination that the application
is complete, in which case one-half (1/2) of the fee will be refunded.
   D.   Until all required fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. No permit or action
shall become effective until all fees have been paid.
   E.   The Planning or Zoning Commission may initiate action on any change in
the Comprehensive Plan, zoning district or this title without a fee, in
accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509.
   F.   The Board may waive all or part of any fees for political subdivisions
or public agencies.
   G.   A copy of the official fee schedule shall be maintained by the Planning
Department and shall be available for public inspection during normal business
hours. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-266: MODIFICATION OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT APPROVAL:
   A.   The terms and conditions of the approval of any permit authorized or
required in this title may be modified only by the Planning Director, Zoning
Commission and/or Board as established in this section. This section applies to
modifications of approved permits, including, but not limited to, conditional
use permits, special use permits, variances, preliminary plats, final plats,
lot line adjustments and planned unit developments.
   B.   Application for a modification of terms and conditions of approval
shall be made to the Planning Department, on forms provided by the department,
and accompanied by the fee specified in section
12-265 of this subchapter.
   C.   A public hearing shall be scheduled and notice provided in accordance
with the requirements for the original permit issuance.
   D.   The Planning Director, Zoning Commission and/or Board shall consider
the proposed modification in accordance with the requirements for the original
permit application and shall confine the review to the proposed modification.
   E.   The Planning Director, Zoning Commission and/or Board shall render a
decision in writing on the proposed modification within five (5) working days
after consideration of the proposal, and the decision shall conform to the
procedures, standards and requirements pertaining to the original permit. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-266.1: EXTENSION OF EXPIRATION DATE:
   A.   All land use approvals listed at subsection
12-266A of this chapter and surety agreements authorized by section
12-644 of this title may be granted one additional time extension not to exceed
two (2) years, provided:
      1.   Bonner County has granted the applicant a single time extension:
         a.   That expires after the effective date of this subsection.
         b.   That expired in 2010.
      2.   A written request for the additional time extension is made to the
planning department prior to the expiration of the first time extension.
Project time extensions that expired in 2010 may still be considered for the
additional extension if the request is submitted by December 31, 2011.
      3.   The required fee is paid.
   B.   The time extension request shall be considered by the governing body
authorized to grant time extensions for the given project, as identified in
this title.
   C.   Approval of the time extension will automatically modify the original
permit to allow the additional time for completion of conditions of approval.
No additional hearing shall be required. (Ord. 520, 12-8-2010)
12-267: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Public hearings required by this title shall be conducted as follows:
   A.   The public hearing shall proceed in the following order:
      1.   The chairperson shall announce that the public hearing is opened,
and state the purpose and subject of the hearing.
      2.   The chairperson shall ask if any members of the board or Planning or
Zoning Commission wish to declare a conflict of interest in the matter to be
considered, and excuse members who do so from further participation in the
hearing in their official capacity.
      3.   The chairperson shall ask the staff to present its report on the
proposal being considered. The staff report and presentation shall include a
summary of the proposal, the sections of this title related to the processing
of the proposal, a summary of the written testimony, and responses thereto,
submitted up to the time of the hearing, and a recommendation including
conditions, findings and conclusions.
      4.   Following the staff report, the chairperson shall ask for a
statement from the person (and/or a designated representative) who has
requested action on the proposal.
      5.   Following the statement, the chairperson shall entertain questions
from members of the Planning or Zoning Commission or the board, for the staff
or for the applicant regarding the location and nature of the proposal.
      6.   The chairperson shall then entertain statements from the public. Any
testimony given shall specifically address the proposal's compliance or lack of
compliance with the requirements of this title, requirements of Idaho Code,
applicable statutes or regulations, or the Bonner County comprehensive plan.
After having been recognized by the chairperson, members of the public shall
state for the record their name and place of residence prior to making their
statement. Members of the public may be permitted to speak for three (3)
minutes, or as otherwise determined by the chairperson. Questions or comments
made by the recognized member of the public shall be directed to the
chairperson. The chairperson shall not entertain irrelevant statements, and
shall not entertain statements that are inflammatory, personally attacking or
derogatory toward any board or Planning or Zoning Commission member, staff
member, elected official, member of the public or business. Any unrecognized
comments or disruptive behavior will be grounds for removal from the hearing by
the chairperson and may subject the person or persons being removed to criminal
prosecution according to law. The chairperson may direct staff to respond to
any questions raised.
      7.   When all statements by members of the public have been given, the
chairperson shall call for discussion among the Planning or Zoning Commission
or board. The chairperson will entertain any questions by members of the
Planning or Zoning Commission, or the board, to be directed to any person
present, including staff members, in order to clarify statements or elicit
further information that commission or board members feel is necessary to
evaluate the application.
      8.   Following any questions, the Chairperson shall afford the applicant
or a designated representative an opportunity to present rebuttal to any
statements or to clarify his or her own statement. New statements, the
introduction of new information, or new exhibits shall not be permitted at this
time.
      9.   After the applicant's rebuttal and clarifications have been given,
the Chairperson shall announce that the hearing is closed to further testimony.
      10.   The Chairperson shall then call for discussion among the Planning
or Zoning Commission or Board members. As a part of this discussion, members
may direct questions to planning staff members.
      11.   At the close of the discussion, the Chairperson shall entertain any
motions relevant to the proposal under consideration. Motions may include, but
are not limited to:
         a.   Motions for recommendation, approval or denial as appropriate;
         b.   Motions to continue the public hearing to a future certain date,
pending the receipt of additional information or the modification of the
proposal;
         c.   Motions to reopen the public testimony portion of the public
hearing, if new information has been introduced or become available; or
         d.   Motions to close the public hearing and/or continue discussion on
the proposal until a future certain date.
   B.   The following procedures may be used at the option of the Chairperson
and are intended for use at public hearings where large numbers of persons are
expected to testify or where several public hearings are on the agenda:
      1.   The Chairperson may impose a reasonable time limit on statements
from the applicant, the public or persons representing groups.
      2.   The Chairperson may request that persons wishing to testify register
their intention to do so with the Secretary. The Chairperson will then use the
register to call on persons to present their statements.
      3.   The Chairperson may extend the period for written statements to be
accepted for the hearing record to a future certain date. The applicant may
request an equivalent time for rebuttal, which shall be limited to a future
certain date. During such an extension of time, the public hearing remains
open.
   C.   Written statements, plans, drawings and similar materials offered in
support of statements at a public hearing are part of the hearing record, and
shall be marked with an exhibit number and shall be retained by the County.
Written statements shall be submitted to the Planning Department record no
later than seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. Written statements not
exceeding one standard letter sized, single spaced page may be submitted at the
public hearing. The Chair may request the document be read into the record. All
written statements shall include the name, signature and address of the person
submitting the document. The Chair may rule as inadmissible any written
document that fails to meet these standards. Nothing contained herein prohibits
the Chair or Governing Body from extending the written comment period as
provided by this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 520, 12-8-2010; Ord.
590, 6-12-2019; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-268: APPLICATION PROCESS, GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Applications submitted for action under the provisions of this title shall be
processed as follows:
   A.   All applications shall be submitted with their required fees to the
Planning Department.
   B.   The Planning Department shall have thirty (30) days to examine the
application to determine its completeness, based on the requirements provided
in this title for each type of application. The Board, by resolution, may
extend the thirty (30) day time period when extenuating circumstances merit an
extension.
   C.   The Planning Director shall inform the applicant in writing if the
application is incomplete and specify the items or information necessary to
complete the application. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   D.   When the Planning Director has determined the application is complete
and in compliance with this title, the Planning Director shall send copies of
the application to public agencies and entities that may be affected by the
proposal, including, but not limited to, the Health District, fire districts,
irrigation or drainage districts, sewer and water districts, school districts,
solid waste and transportation agencies and fish and wildlife agencies. The
notice shall be sent at least twenty two (22) days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. 590, 6-12-2019)
   E.   Applications for permits within an Area of City Impact shall be noticed
according to the agreements set forth for the individual community.
   F.   Reserved. (Ord. 582, 12-5-2018)
   G.   Any permit application which relates to a public school facility or
public emergency facility shall receive priority consideration and shall be
reviewed at the earliest reasonable time, regardless of the timing of its
submission, relative to other applications.
   H.   The Governing Body may consider related permits concurrently at a
single public hearing for the convenience of the applicants and the public.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   I.   When the Governing Body has made a final decision on an application,
the Planning Director shall provide notice to applicants of the final decision
in writing within five (5) working days of the date of the decision. (Ord. 590,
6-12-2019)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USES
SECTION:
12-300: Purposes
Subchapter 3.1 - Zoning Map And Interpretation
12-310: Official Zoning District Map
12-311: Adoption Of Official Zoning Map, Certification, Amendments To Be Shown
12-312: Replacement Of Official Zoning Map, Certification
12-314: Application Of District Or Zone Regulations
12-315: Rules For Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries
Subchapter 3.2 - Zoning Districts Established
12-320.1: Zoning Districts And Map Designation, Purpose
12-320.2: Zoning Districts And Map Designations Established
12-321: Forestry District
12-322: Agricultural/Forestry District
12-323: Rural District
12-324: Suburban District
12-325: Commercial District
12-326: Industrial District
12-327: Rural Service Center District
12-328: Recreation District
12-329: Alpine Village District
Subchapter 3.3 - Use Provisions
12-330: Use Tables Described
12-331: Interpretation Of Use Tables
12-332: Residential Use Table
12-333: Commercial Use Table
12-334: Industrial Use Table
12-335: Public Use Table
12-336: Resource Based Use Table
12-337: Accessory Use Table
12-338: Reserved
12-339: Classification Of New Uses Within Zone Districts
Subchapter 3.4 - Nonconforming Uses And Structures
12-340: Intent
12-341: General Provisions For Nonconforming Uses And Structures
12-342: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
12-343: Nonconforming Uses Of Lands
12-344: Nonconforming Structures
12-345: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures And Premises In Combination
12-346: Repairs And Maintenance
12-300: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are to:
   A.   Establish districts compatible with the goals, objectives and policies
of the comprehensive plan, wherein compatible uses of land may be located and
grouped to create, protect or maintain a quality environment for the citizens
of Bonner County.
   B.   Acknowledge the values of agricultural and timber lands.
   C.   Protect water quality and wildlife resources.
   D.   Provides areas for economic growth.
   E.   Encourage affordable housing.
   F.   Focus growth in areas where adequate public and private services can be
provided.
   G.   To limit development in potentially hazardous areas.
   H.   To protect and stabilize land values.
   I.   To retain the rural character of Bonner County. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 3.1 - ZONING MAP AND INTERPRETATION
12-310: OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
   A.   The official zoning district map shall be made available in an
electronic format for the public to view. The official map shall be updated on
a continuous basis as zone changes are approved by the board and upon
publication. The official, electronic zone map shall be made available for
public review during the Bonner County Planning Department’s normal business
hours. Changes to the official zone map shall be listed in an electronic format
on the official zoning map. One or more physical reproductions of the official
zoning map shall be located in office of the Bonner County Planning Department.
Any reproductions of the official zoning map shall be true and correct
reproductions of the official zoning map to the greatest extent possible (with
the exception of signatures), but any such reproductions shall not be
considered official. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 680, 10-12-2022)
12-311: ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP, CERTIFICATION, AMENDMENTS TO BE SHOWN:
   A.   Official Zoning District Map: The county is divided into zones or
districts, as shown on the official zoning district map, which, with all
explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this title. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of
the chairperson of the board, attested by the county clerk:
      This is to certify that this is the official zoning district map referred
to in section
12-311  of the Bonner County Revised Code, of Bonner County, Idaho.
   B.   Amendments: If, in accordance with the provisions of this title,
changes are made in district or zone boundaries, or other matter portrayed on
the official zoning district map, changes shall be entered on the official
zoning district map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
board, with the entry on the official zoning district map specifying the file
number, ordinance number, and effective date. Amendments to the zoning map are
to become effective immediately upon publication.
   C.   Conformance with Procedures: No changes of any nature shall be made in
the official zoning district map or matter shown thereon except in conformity
with the procedures set forth in this title. Any unauthorized change of
whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this
title and punishable under sections
12-132 and
12-133 of this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 680, 10-12-2022)
12-312: REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP, CERTIFICATION:
   A.   If the official zoning district map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the board may by resolution adopt a new official zoning district map
which shall supersede the prior official zoning district map. The new official
zoning district map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the
prior official zoning district map, but no correction shall have the effect of
amending the original official zoning district map or any subsequent amendment
thereof. The new official zoning district map shall be identified by the
signature of chairperson of the board, and shall state:
      This is to certify that this official zoning district map supersedes and
replaces the official zoning district map adopted (date of adoption of map
being replaced) as part of title 12, Bonner County Revised Code of Bonner
County, Idaho.
   B.   Unless the prior official zoning district map has been lost or totally
destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or
amendment. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 680, 10-12-2022)
12-314: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT OR ZONE REGULATIONS:
   A.   The regulations set by this title within each district or zone shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land use.
   B.   No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and
no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, subject to
provisions of
subchapter 3.4 of this chapter, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered, except in conformity with all of the regulations
specified for the district or zone in which it is located. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-315: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones or districts as shown on
the official zoning district map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following those lines.
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following city limits.
   D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
   E.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow those shorelines and legally established meander lines. In the event of
change in the shoreline, boundaries shall be construed as moving with the
actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow those centerlines.
   F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of features
indicated in subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning district map shall
be determined by the scale of the map.
   G.   Boundaries indicated as following section or township lines shall be
construed as following those section or township lines.
   H.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning district map, or in other
circumstances not covered by subsections A through G of this section, the board
shall interpret the district or zone boundaries.
   I.   Where a district or zone boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of passage of this section, the board may permit,
as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of
the lot not to exceed fifty feet (50') beyond the district or zone line into
the remaining portion of the lot. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 3.2 - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
12-320.1: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP DESIGNATION, PURPOSE:
The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in the
following sections shall be used to guide the application of the zones and
designations to all lands in unincorporated Bonner County. The purpose
statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use
regulations within the zones and designations, and any changes to the range of
permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-320.2: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP DESIGNATIONS ESTABLISHED:
In accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code and the objectives set forth in
this code, all land in the unincorporated areas of Bonner County is hereby
classified according to the following zoning designations and zoning map
symbols, which shall be applied as shown on the official zoning district map:
   TABLE 3-1
   ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP DESIGNATIONS
Zoning Designation Map Symbol
Zoning Designation    Map Symbol
Forestry              F
Agricultural/forestry A/F-10, A/F-20
                      (10 or 20 acre minimum lot sizes)
Rural                 R-5, R-10
                      (5 or 10 acre minimum lot sizes)
Suburban              S
Commercial            C
Industrial            I
Rural service center  RSC
Recreation            REC
Alpine village        AV
 
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-321: FORESTRY DISTRICT:
   A.   The forestry district is established to preserve the forest land base;
to conserve and protect the long term productivity of forest lands; and to
restrict uses unrelated to or incompatible with forestry. These purposes are
accomplished by:
      1.   Applying the F zone to large contiguous areas where a combination of
site, soil and climatic characteristics make it possible to sustain timber
growth and harvests over time.
      2.   Limiting residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
to those uses that are compatible with forestry, to minimize the potential
hazards of damage from fire, pollution and land use conflicts.
      3.   Providing for compatible outdoor recreation uses and for
conservation and protection of municipal watersheds and fish and wildlife
habitats.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated as remote ag/forest
land in the comprehensive plan. The remote agricultural/forest land is located
on mountaintops and remote areas of the county where few or no access roads
have been constructed. Included in these areas are most of the state and
federal lands, which are managed for forest production or recreation. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-322: AGRICULTURAL/FORESTRY DISTRICT:
   A.   The agricultural/forestry district is established to provide for
agricultural and forestry pursuits, including livestock production, forestry,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and necessary accessory uses for
treating, storing and processing agricultural products. The purpose of the A/
F district is to preserve, protect and maintain areas that are rural in
character and the integrity of the forest/woodland areas where viable
agricultural pursuits can be feasible and to avoid fragmentation of forests and
farms. These purposes are accomplished by:
      1.   Establishing residential density limits and conservation development
standards to retain areas sized for efficient farming.
      2.   Allowing for uses related to agricultural production and limiting
nonagricultural uses to those compatible with agriculture, or requiring close
proximity for the support of agriculture.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated by the
comprehensive plan as follows:
      1.   A/F-20 in all areas designated as prime ag/forest land in the
comprehensive plan. The A/F-20 zone is also appropriate in areas designated ag/
forest land in the comprehensive plan that also feature:
         a.   Prime agricultural soils.
         b.   Are characterized by agricultural or forestry uses.
         c.   Areas where one or more of the following apply: limited services;
characterized by slopes steeper than thirty percent (30%); where access may be
absent or limited to substandard road systems or where large tracts of land may
be devoted to ag/forest production.
      2.   A/F-10 in areas designated as ag/forest land in the comprehensive
plan that do not feature prime agricultural soils, but where agricultural and
forestry pursuits remain viable. These areas may be within or adjacent to areas
of city impact or where lands are afforded fire protection, access to standard
roads and other services. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-323: RURAL DISTRICT:
   A.   The rural district is established to allow low density residential uses
that are compatible with rural pursuits. The purpose can be accomplished by:
      1.   Limiting residential densities and permitted uses to those that are
compatible with rural character and nearby resource production districts and
sites and can be adequately supported by rural service levels.
      2.   Allowing small scale farming and forestry activities, and tourism
and recreation uses that can be supported by rural service levels and are
compatible with rural character.
      3.   Encouraging conservation development configurations that create
permanent open space or farming areas, protect sensitive environmental
features, reduce infrastructure costs and/or enhance recreational
opportunities.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated by the
comprehensive plan as follows:
      1.   R-10 in areas designated as rural residential in the comprehensive
plan that meet one or more of the following criteria:
         a.   Characterized by slopes that are steeper than thirty percent
(30%).
         b.   Located within critical wildlife habitat as identified by
federal, state or local agencies.
         c.   Contain prime agricultural soils.
         d.   Served by a network of public and/or private roadways that
generally do not meet applicable roadway standards set forth in title 2 (public
roads) of this code or
appendix A (private roads) of this title or are absent.
         e.   Within the floodway.
         f.   Contain limited access to public services.
      2.   R-5 in areas designated rural residential in the comprehensive plan
that are already developed at or near the one dwelling unit per five (5) acre
density and/or do not meet the criteria for R-10 above. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-324: SUBURBAN DISTRICT:
   A.   The suburban district is established to promote the development of
residential uses located on the edges of the incorporated cities or other
developed communities or areas, where urban sewer and water services are either
available or have the potential to become available in the near future by
reason of their inclusion in service districts, city service areas, or are
adjacent to those areas or areas of city impact. Access to primary
transportation routes and a system of hard surfaced roads are expected. The
purpose can be accomplished by:
      1.   Providing for single-family detached dwelling units and other
compatible housing forms, with a variety of densities in locations appropriate
for urban densities.
      2.   Allowing only those accessory and complementary nonresidential uses
that are compatible with urban residential communities.
      3.   Establishing density designations to facilitate advanced areawide
planning for public facilities and services, and to protect environmentally
sensitive sites from over development.
      4.   Encouraging conservation development configurations that create
permanent open space, protect sensitive environmental features, reduce
infrastructure costs and/or enhance recreational opportunities.
      5.   Requiring conservation development configurations in areas where all
urban services are not available to provide the opportunity in the future to
subdivide the land at urban densities.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated by the
comprehensive plan as transition, urban growth area, resort community or
suburban growth area in the comprehensive plan where a network of hard surfaced
roads provides good access to primary transportation routes or potential public
transportation systems. Urban services may not be available immediately, but
are capable of being extended or constructed in the area. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-325: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   The commercial district is established to promote a range of commercial
uses to serve the needs of the immediate area, surrounding rural communities
and visitors without adversely affecting adjacent residential neighborhoods.
The commercial district is also intended to provide opportunities for a variety
of affordable housing types that are within walking distance of commercial
services. Intensive large scale commercial development is not appropriate due
to the limited density of surrounding unincorporated areas. Access to primary
transportation routes and a system of hard surfaced roads are expected and
consideration is given to the potential public transportation access. These
purposes are accomplished by:
      1.   Providing for a wide range of small to medium scaled retail,
professional, governmental and personal service uses.
      2.   Allowing for mixed use buildings (housing over office or retail) and
a range of housing types, including cottage housing, townhouses, apartments and
mobile home parks where sufficient services are provided.
      3.   Allowing for light industrial uses where activities are conducted
primarily indoors and impacts to adjacent uses can be mitigated.
      4.   Excluding commercial uses with extensive outdoor storage.
      5.   Excluding large scale commercial uses that would be more effectively
located in incorporated cities.
      6.   Applying simple design standards that enhance pedestrian access and
improve the character of the area.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated as neighborhood
commercial, urban growth area or transition by the comprehensive plan and
community plans and that are served at the time of development by adequate
sewage disposal services, water supply, roads and other needed public
facilities and services. Expansion of existing commercial districts or the
creation of new commercial districts may be considered only if the expansion
will not negatively impact the safety and function of a state highway or other
roadway. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-326: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   The industrial district is established to promote the development of
areas for manufacturing, processing, fabrication and wholesale sales, research
and testing operations, limited retail sales and warehousing. It is also a
purpose of this zone to protect the industrial land base for industrial
economic development and employment opportunities. Due to the intensity of land
use, these areas require primary transportation routes, urbanlike water and
sewer services, fire and police services and consideration given to the
potential public transportation access. These purposes are accomplished by:
      1.   Providing for a wide range of industrial and manufacturing uses.
      2.   Establishing appropriate development standards and public review
procedures for industrial activities with the greatest potential for adverse
impacts.
      3.   Limiting residential, institutional, office and other nonindustrial
uses to those that are accessory to industrial activities.
      4.   Allowing limited commercial uses that complement industrial
activities.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated by the
comprehensive plan as transition which are served at the time of development by
adequate sewage disposal services, water supply, roads and other needed public
facilities and services. Expansion of existing industrial districts or the
creation of new industrial districts may be considered only if the expansion
will not negatively impact the safety and function of a state highway or other
roadway. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   C.   The Planning or Zoning Commission and board of county commissioners may
add specific conditions to require compatibility with surrounding uses and to
assure compliance with the intent of the industrial district, this title, and
the health and safety of the public. To assure conditions are met, the county
shall require the execution of a written commitment concerning the use or
development of the subject parcel. This commitment shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder. The commitment shall take effect on the adoption
of the amendment to the zoning map. The commitment shall be binding on the
owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner, and each person acquiring an
interest in the parcel. A commitment may be modified following the procedures
for modification provided within this title and the approval of the board. The
commitment may be terminated and the zoning designation reversed on the failure
of the landowner/operator to abide by the terms of the agreement, following
notice to the landowner/operator by certified mail of the violations and after
a reasonable time, as determined by the governing board, has been given to
abate the violation. No such reversal of zoning may occur without appropriate
notice and public hearing as set forth in Idaho Code and this code for zoning
district amendments and proof beyond a reasonable doubt that a violation
remains after attempts to abate have been exhausted. If the board reverses the
zoning designation after a hearing, the board decision shall be final and
further recourse shall be as provided by Idaho Code. (Ord. 551, 3-9-2016; amd.
Ord. 661, 3-18-2022; Ord. 580, 10-12-2022)
12-327: RURAL SERVICE CENTER DISTRICT:
   A.   The rural service center district is established to promote the
development of local commercial services in small communities to meet the needs
of rural residents as well as limited tourist commercial services and limited
light industrial uses consistent with the maintenance of the rural character of
the area. The rural service center district is also intended to provide
opportunities for a variety of affordable housing types that are within walking
distance of commercial services. These purposes are accomplished by:
      1.   Providing for a range of small scale retail and rural service uses.
      2.   Allowing for mixed use buildings (housing over office or retail) and
a range of housing types, including detached single-family dwelling units,
cottage housing, townhouses, apartments and mobile home parks where sufficient
services are provided.
      3.   Allowing for light industrial uses where activities are conducted
primarily indoors and impacts to adjacent uses are mitigated.
      4.   Excluding commercial uses with extensive outdoor storage.
      5.   Excluding large scale commercial uses that would be more effectively
located in incorporated cities.
      6.   Applying simple design standards that enhance pedestrian access and
improve the character of the area. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated as neighborhood
commercial, resort community or transition by the comprehensive plan and
community plans and that are served at the time of development by adequate
sewage disposal services, water supply, roads and other needed public
facilities and services. Expansion of existing rural service center districts
or the creation of new rural service center districts may be considered only if
the expansion will not negatively impact the safety and function of a state
highway or other roadway. (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
12-328: RECREATION DISTRICT:
   A.   The recreation district is established to provide a wide range of
recreational uses in areas where if access is by road rather than solely by
waterways, the road shall be located within a recorded easement or public right
of way, except where subject to the terms of an approved special use permit or
a state or federal agency, adequate water and sewer services and fire services.
Consideration shall also be given to access to potential public transportation
systems. The recreation district is intended to provide for a range of housing
types and uses that are accessory and complementary to recreational and
residential uses. These purposes are accomplished by:
      1.   Allowing for a range of housing types provided adequate services are
available.
      2.   Providing for commercial and private resorts which contain
provisions for a range of recreational activities.
      3.   Excluding uses that are not compatible with the desired recreational
character of the area.
      4.   Encouraging conservation development configurations that create
permanent open space, protect sensitive environmental features, reduce
infrastructure costs and/or enhance recreational opportunities.
      5.   Applying simple design standards that enhance the recreational
opportunities and character of the area.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated as transition,
neighborhood commercial, urban growth area and resort community with the
following conditions:
      1.   Land is physically suitable to accommodate a broad range of
residential and recreational uses.
      2.   Sites are served by adequate sewage disposal service, water supply,
roads and other needed public facilities and services. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-329: ALPINE VILLAGE DISTRICT:
   A.   The Alpine Village District is established to accommodate recreational
development in high elevation communities while recognizing the unique and
challenging features of mountain communities. The Alpine Village District is
intended to provide for a range of housing types and uses that are accessory
and complementary to recreational and residential uses. These purposes are
accomplished by:
      1.   Allowing for a range of housing types.
      2.   Providing for commercial and private resorts which include a range
of recreational activities.
      3.   Excluding uses that are not compatible with the desired
recreational/residential character of the area.
      4.   Applying development standards that address the unique environmental
needs of high elevation communities.
   B.   Use of this zone is appropriate in areas designated as alpine community
by the comprehensive plan. These are areas of the County generally greater than
three thousand feet (3,000') in elevation that support and complement mountain
recreational activities. Consideration within this district should also be
given to potential public and community transportation systems. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 3.3 - USE PROVISIONS
12-330: USE TABLES DESCRIBED:
In the use tables in this subchapter, land use classifications are listed on
the vertical axis and zoning districts are shown on the horizontal axis.
   A.   If no symbol appears in the box at the intersection of the column and
the row, the use is not allowed in that district.
   B.   If the symbol "P" appears in the box at the intersection of the column
and row, the use is permitted subject to general requirements for the use and
the zoning district.
   C.   If the symbol "C" appears in the box at the intersection of the column
and the row, the use is permitted subject to the conditional use provisions
specified in chapter 2,
subchapter 2.2 of this title and to general requirements for the use and the
zoning district.
   D.   Standards associated with particular uses are identified by numbers in
parentheses. Standards are listed below the tables. Standards listed in the
"use" column (far left column in each table) apply to the applicable use in
each district that the use is permitted or conditionally permitted. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-331: INTERPRETATION OF USE TABLES:
   A.   In the case of a question as to the inclusion or exclusion of a
particular proposed use in a particular use category, the Planning Director
shall have the authority to make the final determination based on the
characteristics of the operation of the proposed use and the Planning
Director's interpretation of the standard land use coding manuals, as provided
in section
12-339 of this subchapter.
   B.   In the case of a conflict between the general description and the use
table, the table shall prevail. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-332: RESIDENTIAL USE TABLE:
TABLE 3-2
RESIDENTIAL USE TABLE
Use Zoning District
    F A/F R S C I RSC REC AV
Use                     Zoning District
                        F A/F   R     S     C               I RSC   REC   AV
Accessory building      P P     P     P     P               P P     P     P
Caretaker's residence   P P     P           P               P P
(1)
Cottage housing (2),      C (4) C (4) C     C (5), (7)        C     C     C
(3)
Duplex (2)                P     P     P     P (5), (7)        P     C     C
Dwelling, multi-family                C (4) C (5), (6), (7)   C (6) C (6) C (6)
Dwelling, single-
family. Refer to
sections
12-411 and              P P     P     P     P (5), (7)        P     P     P
12-412 of this title
for applicable density
standards
Dwelling unit,          P P     P     P     P (5)             P     P
accessory (8)
Farm labor housing (11) P P     P
Mobile home park (10)                 C     C (5)             C
Dwelling unit,
Recreational vehicles   P P     P     P     P                 P     P     P
(9)
Townhouse (2)                         P     C (5), (7)        C     C (6) C (6)
Vacation rentals (12)     P     P     P                       P     P     P
 
Standards:
   (1)    Must be living quarters within the structure of a permitted use.
Caretaker must be a bona fide employee of the property ownership and/or
management.
   (2)    Refer to section
12-411,
table 4-1 and section
12-412,
table 4-2 of this title, for applicable density standards for residential uses.
For the F, A/F and Rural Districts, the required acreage for a duplex shall be
double the site area minimum for the respective zoning district. For the S, C,
RSC, REC and AV, the required acreage for a duplex shall be 15,000 square feet
where all urban services are provided, 1 acre where urban sewer is provided,
and 21/2 acres elsewhere.
   (3)    Refer to section
12-480 of this title for cottage housing provisions/standards.
   (4)    Use only permitted in conjunction with a conservation subdivision,
provided such subdivision complies with the density standards of the applicable
district (see section
12-411,
table 4-1 and section
12-412,
table 4-2 of this title) and the use is authorized on the plat.
   (5)    Ground floor residential uses are prohibited within 100 feet of a
State highway or designated arterial.
   (6)    Multi-family dwellings with a minimum of 12,000 square feet of lot
area for the first unit, plus 3,000 square feet for each additional unit;
provided, that all urban services are available.
   (7)    See section
12-627 of this title for standards related to subdivisions intended for
residential uses in the Commercial District.
   (8)    Refer to section
12-490 of this title for accessory dwelling unit provisions/standards. One (1)
accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot or parcel without respect to
density. This does not apply to parcels/lots that have explicit restrictions on
the number of dwellings.
   (9)    Building Location Permit regulations do not apply to non-commercial
temporary, intermittent or occasional use of recreational vehicle. When a
recreational vehicle is used in the same manner as a single family dwelling or
an accessory dwelling unit, such use is limited to a maximum of 2 recreational
vehicle dwelling units per parcel, and the conditions of BCRC 12-496 apply.
   (10)    See section
12-485 of this title for mobile home park standards.
   (11)    Farm labor housing: Caretaker must be a bona fide employee of the
property ownership and/or management. The total allowable number of dwelling
units does not apply to temporary or seasonal farm labor housing, such as a
bunkhouse where only sleeping quarters are provided for farmworkers.
   (12)   Refer to section
12-484 of this title for standards of vacation rentals.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord. 581, 10-24-2018; Ord. 598,
1-22-2020; Ord. 607, 7-22-2020; Ord. 707, 3-13-2024)
12-333: COMMERCIAL USE TABLE:
    TABLE 3-3
   COMMERCIAL USE TABLE
Use Zoning District
    F A/F R S C I RSC REC AV
Use            Zoning District
               F      A/F     R       S      C      I      RSC    REC    AV
Accessory      P      P       P       P      P      P      P      P      P
building
Adult                                        C
entertainment
Agri-education        C (36)  C (36)  C (36)
Animal
establishments        C (3)   C (3)          C             C      C
(1), (2)
Animal
shelters (2),         C       C              C      C
(4)
Art,
performing
arts and              C (2)   C (2)          P      P      C      C      C
recording
studios
Bed and
breakfast             C       C       C      C             C      C      C
establishments
(2), (5), (6)
Boat storage                                 P      P      C (33) C (33)
Convalescent                          C      P             C
center
Equipment
sales and      C (31) C (31)  C (31)         P      P      P
service
Farmers'       P (35) P (35)  P (35)  P (35) P      P      P      P (35) P (35)
market
Golf courses,
athletic
facilities            C (3),  C (3)   C      P                    C      C
(e.g., tennis         (9)
clubs, etc.)
(7), (8)
Gun clubs and
rifle ranges   C (2)  C (2)   C (2)
(10), (11),
(12)
Hardware                                     P (24) P (24) P (26)
stores
Home
occupation I   P      P       P       P      P             P      P      P
(14)
Home                  P (2),  P (2),
occupation II         (14)    (14)    P (14) P             P (14) P (14) P (14)
(14)
Home
occupation III        C (2)   C (2)   C      P             P      C      C
(14)
Hostel (2),           C                      P             C      C      C
(5), (32)
Hotels/motels                                P             C      C (15) C (15)
Indoor
recreational
uses and
amusement                                    P             C      C (15) C (15)
places and
associated
concessions
Laundromats,                                 P      P      P      P (15) P (15)
showers
Nurseries and
daycare
centers,              C (2)   C (2)   C      P             C      C      C
child/adult
(16)
Outdoor
advertising
structures
Outdoor
recreational
uses and
amusement                                    C                    C      C
places (11),
(17), (18),
(19)
Outdoor sales                                C             C
(17), (18)
Professional
offices,
service                                      P             P
facilities and
public offices
Racetracks
(3), (10),            C       C
(20), (34)
Recreational
facilities     C (2)  C (2)   C (2)   C      P             P      C      C
(8), (17)
Recreational
vehicle parks/                        C      C                    C      C
campgrounds
(8), (21)
Rental
warehouses/                                  P      P      C      C
ministorage
(17), (33)
Repair
services, boat        C (31)  C (31)         P      P      P      C (17)
and motor,
minor
Resorts,
commercial                                   C             C      C      C
(3), (22)
Resorts,
private (3),                                 C             C      C      C
(23)
Restaurants                                  P      P      P      C (15) C (15)
Retail sales                                 P (24) P (25) P      C (15) C (15)
Retail sales,
automobile,
boat,
recreational                                 P      P      C
vehicles and/
or mobile
homes
Retail sales
of food, gas                                 P      P (25) P (26) C (15) C (15)
and sundries
Retreats (27)         C (2)   C (2)                        C      C      C
Roadside              P (28)  P (28)
stands
Storage of
materials not
in connection
with a
permitted use
Taverns, bars
and similar                                  P      P      C      C (15) C (15)
drinking
establishments
Temporary real
estate sales                          P (29)                      P (15) P (15)
office
structures
Theaters,
outdoor (10),                 C (3)          C             C      P (15) P (15)
(19), (30)
Vehicle sales
and service,
mechanical                                   P      P      P
repair shops,
car washes
Wholesale                                    C      P
sales
 
Standards:
   (1)    All animals, other than livestock, shall be housed in permanent
structures which can be physically enclosed during nighttime hours. All
buildings and fenced running areas will be a minimum of 300 feet from any
existing dwelling other than that of the owner. The operator of such a use will
maintain adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a nuisance.
   (2)    Where access to the site is by road, the road shall be located within
a recorded easement or public right of way, and constructed to provide adequate
emergency vehicle access (including, but not limited to, fire, medical, and law
enforcement), except where subject to the terms of an approved special use
permit issued by a state or federal agency.
   (3)    Where access to the site is by road, the road shall be located within
a recorded easement or public right of way, and constructed to the appropriate
standard set forth in title 2 of this code or
appendix A of this title, except where subject to the terms of an approved
special use permit issued by a state or federal agency.
   (4)    Adequate daily food, water, veterinary care, ventilation, sanitation
and shelter shall be provided for the animals. Facilities shall be designed to
provide for isolation and quarantine of any animals exhibiting disease
symptoms. The operator shall maintain identification and death records and
shall permit a minimum of 1 inspection annually.
   (5)    1 on premises sign, not in excess of 6 square feet, shall be
permitted when included as part of the conditional use permit application.
   (6)    A bed and breakfast shall be a detached single-family dwelling,
occupied and operated by the owner or a resident manager, where 5 or fewer
rooms are available for rent for a period not to exceed 2 weeks per guest,
where meals are served from a central kitchen only to overnight guests.
Guestrooms shall not have separate outside entrances as the primary method of
entrance and exit. Liquor shall not be available for sale by the drink within
the establishment. Food service facilities, water supply and wastewater
disposal, and accessory uses, such as pools, shall conform to regulations set
by the state of Idaho. Health and safety requirements shall conform to the
adopted uniform codes based upon the occupancy and type of construction.
   (7)    In addition to the golf course or athletic facility, no commercial
uses will be permitted except those related to the sale or rental of equipment
associated, or food or beverage sales.
   (8)    Adequate water supplies for drinking and fire suppression, as well as
approval of sewage disposal sites and methods by the Panhandle health district
and/or the state of Idaho, must be demonstrated as appropriate.
   (9)    Use not permitted in the A/F-20 district.
   (10)    All facilities shall be designed and located with full consideration
to the safety factors involved with such a use and to minimize the noise,
smoke, dust and other nuisance factors to nearby land uses.
   (11)    Sufficient off street parking for patrons shall be provided.
   (12)    Gun clubs and rifle ranges shall have a minimum area of 5 acres.
Target areas shall be at least 600 feet from any existing dwelling, except that
of the owner or caretaker.
   (13)    Reserved.
   (14)    Use subject to the applicable home occupation permit per standards
in section
12-489 of this title.
   (15)    Permitted only in conjunction with an approved resort or as part of
a planned unit development.
   (16)    As defined in Idaho Code, except where used as a subordinate part of
a permitted use.
   (17)    Sufficient land area is required to accommodate the proposed use,
and the use and any appurtenant structures shall be so arranged on the land as
to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties. The use shall not
create particular hazards to adjacent properties.
   (18)    Specified conditions with respect to emissions of noise, light,
glare, smoke, odor, dust, particulate matters, vibrations or hours of operation
may be prescribed differently from those required in a given district, as to be
compatible with other applicable state and federal standards.
   (19)    For drive-in theaters, the site shall provide for adequate screening
from adjacent land uses using a sight obscuring fence, plus a strip of type A
landscaping at least 20 feet wide along the applicable property line.
   (20)    Racetracks shall have a minimum area of 20 acres and shall be a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any suburban district.
   (21)    Refer to Section
12-497 of this Title for RV Parks/Campground standards. Site requirements for
RV parks include at least 25 percent tree canopy coverage and a maximum of 25
percent impervious surface.
   (22)    Commercial resorts on sites meeting the minimum lot size of the
applicable zoning district, but no less than 1 acre. Resorts may include
facilities for food and beverage sales, rented seasonal living units, retail
sales of equipment, supplies or services in conjunction with a resort,
campgrounds and recreation vehicle parks.
   (23)    Private resorts on sites meeting the minimum lot size of the
applicable zoning district, but no less than 1 acre. Resorts shall contain
provisions for outdoor recreation uses, which may include areas for group
meetings, boating, camping, swimming, skiing, golfing, shooting.
   (24)    Individual retail or hardware stores shall have a maximum floor area
of 40,000 square feet or less.
   (25)    Uses are limited to 2,000 square feet of floor area on each
property, except for the hardware stores in the industrial district, as noted
in standard (24) of this table.
   (26)    Food or retail stores shall have a maximum floor area of 10,000
square feet or less. Commercial malls that feature more than 1 food or retail
store shall have a maximum floor area of 25,000 square feet.
   (27)    Meals, recreation and housing may be provided for the participants
during the period of the retreat or program only. Retreats shall not be used by
the general public for meals or overnight accommodations. Accommodations may
include a lodge, dormitory, sleeping cabins without kitchen facilities, tents
or other similar housing. Kitchen and dining facilities may be located in a
single, centrally located building. Where access to the site is by road, the
road shall be located within a recorded easement or public right of way
constructed to provide adequate emergency vehicle access (including, but not
limited to, fire, medical, and law enforcement). Demonstration of adequate
sewer and water provisions and fire protection are required. The applicant
shall also demonstrate there is sufficient area to accommodate the retreat and
any appurtenant structures so as to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding
properties and will not create hazards on adjoining properties. At minimum, the
property shall meet the minimum lot size requirement of the applicable
district.
   (28)    Of not more than 300 square feet for the sale of agricultural
products produced on the premises.
   (29)    Temporary real estate sales office for the lots within the
applicable development are allowed, provided they do not exceed 2 years.
   (30)    A traffic plan is required describing, at minimum, the method of
ingress and egress to the site, traffic circulation within the site, and on
premises parking and loading areas.
   (31)    Limited to tier III home occupation and subject to the standards of
section
12-489 of this title.
   (32)    Housing shall be owner/manager supervised and may consist of
dormitory style, separate or family sleeping quarters. Food service facilities,
water supply and wastewater disposal, and accessory uses, such as pools, shall
conform to regulations set by the state of Idaho. Health and safety
requirements shall conform to the adopted uniform codes based upon the
occupancy and type of construction. Hostels in the A/F district shall be
associated with low intensity recreational or natural amenities, similar to
recreational facilities.
   (33)    Maximum square footage for ministorage, boat storage, and rental
warehouse facilities on a single lot or parcel shall be 10,000 square feet for
the rural service center and recreation districts. The maximum square footage
for ministorage, boat storage, and rental warehouses in the commercial and
industrial districts shall be unlimited.
   (34)    Adequate fire and emergency medical services shall be provided
during racetrack events, to the satisfaction of Bonner County.
   (35)    Farmers' markets may also be established in existing churches,
schools, community centers or similar public or private community facilities.
   (36)    At least 2 acres of the site must be actively farmed/ranched,
producing products or crops to be used in the agri-education school. School
shall be clearly incidental to farm/ranch operation. Meals sold as part of the
school are limited to foods primarily produced or grown on site. Associated
lodging facilities shall conform to the standards of section
12-483 of this title, with exceptions to subsection
12-483C of this title limiting the lodging to only those attending, teaching or
staffing at the school and allowing central lodging. (See section
12-493, "Agricultural Direct Marketing Activities", in this title for daytime
classes, tours or other temporary educational opportunities.)
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 521, 3-2-2011; Ord. 538, 6-26-2014; Ord. 540,
10-22-2014; Ord. 547, 7-6-2015; Ord. 549, 12-9-2015; Ord. 594, 12-18-2019; Ord.
650, 11-10-2021; Ord. 707, 3-13-2024; Ord. 727, 7-31-2025)
12-334: INDUSTRIAL USE TABLE:
   TABLE 3-4
   INDUSTRIAL USE TABLE
Use Zoning District
    F A/F R S C I RSC REC AV
Use                             Zoning District
                                F A/F   R     S C            I     RSC   REC AV
Accessory building              P P     P     P P            P     P     P   P
Electronics: electrical and
related parts; electrical                       C (12), (13) P (2)
appliances, motors and devices,
electrical and mechanical
Food and dairy products
processing and manufacturing      C     C     C C (2)        P (2) C
including frozen foods greater
than 2,000 square feet (15)
Furniture manufacturing and                     P (12), (13) P (2)
upholstering
Industrial and manufacturing,
fabricating or processing of                                 P (2)
products (1)
Industrial, light                               P (3)        P     P (3)
Instruments: scientific and
precision; medical and dental;                  C (12), (13) P (2)
timing and measuring
Junkyards/wrecking yards (5),                                C
(6)
Laboratories: dental, medical,                  C (12), (13) P (2)
and optical
Machine shop                                    C            P (2) C
Manufacturing of explosives (7)                              C
Meat processing greater than      C     C       C (2)        P (2) C
2,000 square feet (14)
Pharmaceuticals: cosmetics,
drugs, perfumes, toiletries and                 C (12), (13) P (2)
soap (not including refining or
rendering of oils or fats)
Sawmills, shingle or planing
mills, woodworking plants (8),  C C (4) C (4)                P
(9)
Slaughterhouses (8), (10), (11)   C (4) C (4)                C
Warehouse storage                                            P
 
Standards:
   (1)    Fabrication or assembly of products, wholesale distribution
facilities, such as warehouses, bulk plants, etc., not used for agricultural
purposes.
   (2)    Uses must meet the following criteria:
      a.    Carried on in such a manner as to be protected from fire and
explosions.
      b.    Emits no obnoxious odors.
      c.    Exhaust no waste or dust.
      d.    Discharge no treated or untreated industrial waste.
      e.    Carry on any operation that would produce heat, light or glare
perceptible from any property line of the industrial site.
   (3)    Use must be wholly contained within a single building having less
than 10,000 square feet. Buildings larger than 10,000 square feet are subject
to a conditional use permit in the Commercial District.
   (4)    Where access to the site is by road, the road shall be located within
a recorded easement or public right-of-way, and constructed to the appropriate
standard set forth in title 2 of this Code or
appendix A of this title.
   (5)    The site shall provide for adequate screening by using a sight
obscuring fence and a strip of type A landscaping at least 20 feet wide around
the perimeter of the site.
   (6)    No materials, parts, automobiles or junk will be visible from any
public right-of-way. A performance bond or developer's agreement may be
required for assurance of compliance with the provisions of this conditional
use.
   (7)    Manufacturing of explosives shall have a minimum area of 10 acres and
shall be at least 1,000 feet from any residential district or residential use.
The use shall be subject to approval of the local fire officials and all other
applicable agencies. Facilities will not be approved if not located in a fire
district. The use shall meet all other local, State and Federal requirements.
   (8)    All facilities shall be designed and located with full consideration
to the safety factors involved with such a use and to minimize the noise,
smoke, dust and other nuisance factors to nearby land uses.
   (9)    All sawmill, shingle or planing mill, or woodworking plant facilities
must meet air quality standards applicable at the time of issuance of this
permit. All facilities must make provision for fire protection; facilities must
also meet the requirements and be approved by the appropriate fire district.
Facilities will not be approved if fire protection is not provided.
   (10)    Off street parking for all patrons shall be provided.
   (11)    Slaughterhouse shall have a minimum area of 5 acres and all
facilities shall be at least 600 feet from any existing dwelling other than the
owner's.
   (12)    In conjunction with a retail storefront.
   (13)    Square footage limit for manufacturing in the Commercial Zone shall
be limited to 1,000 square feet or 10 percent of the commercial use, whichever
is greater.
   (14)    Meat processing operations less than 2,000 square feet or as a home
occupation is permitted if it meets the requirements of a home occupation. The
home occupation meat processing shall be a minimum 200 feet from any existing
dwelling other than the owner's.
   (15)    Food and dairy products processing and manufacturing including
frozen foods less than 2,000 square feet or as a home occupation is permitted
if it meets the requirements of a home occupation.
(Ord. 577, 5-23-2018)
12-335: PUBLIC USE TABLE:
   TABLE 3-5
   PUBLIC USE TABLE
Use Zoning District
    F A/F R S C I RSC REC AV
Use                                    Zoning District
                                       F     A/F   R     S C I      RSC REC AV
Airports (1), (2) (airstrip)                 C (3) C (3)     C          C
Cemeteries (4)                               C (3) C (3) C
Churches, grange halls, public or            C (3) C (3) C P P      C   C   C
private community facilities
Communication towers                   C (3) C (3) C (3) C C C      C   C   C
Docks and marinas, community, upland                       C            C
accommodations (5), (6), (7)
Heliports (8)                                C     C     C C C          C   C
Hospitals and clinics (9)                                C P P (10) P   C   C
Park                                   P     P     P     P P P      P   P   P
Public utility facility (6), (11)      C     C (3) C (3) C C C      C   C   C
Sanitary landfills (12), (13)                C (3) C (3)
Schools, public and private (9)              C (3) C (3) C C        C   C   C
Service center facilities                                  P P      P
Solid waste collection facilities (12) C     C (3) C (3) C C C      C   C   C
 
Standards:
   (1)    All facilities shall be designed and located with full consideration
to the safety factors involved with such a use and to the proximity of
residential and adjacent land uses, including the reduction of nuisance factors
such as noise, smoke and dust.
   (2)    Airports shall have a minimum area of 20 acres. The facilities must
be located at least 2,000 feet from any Suburban District. Storage of flammable
liquids, fuel, gases or combustible materials shall meet all local, State and
Federal codes.
   (3)    Where access to the site is by road, the road shall be located within
a recorded easement or public right-of-way, and constructed to the appropriate
standard set forth in title 2 of this Code or
appendix A of this title, except where subject to the terms of an approved
special use permit issued by a State or Federal agency.
   (4)    Cemeteries shall have a minimum area of 15 acres and shall be at
least 500 feet from any existing dwelling, except the dwelling of the owner or
employee. No graves shall be located within 30 feet of any public right-of-way.
Buildings shall be located no less than 100 feet from property lines. The
cemetery shall not be approved if it is of such size, shape or location as to
adversely affect the residential development of the existing neighborhood. The
cemetery shall be provided with perpetual care for maintenance of the grounds
and landscaping.
   (5)    Sufficient land area is required to accommodate the proposed use, and
the use and any appurtenant structures shall be so arranged on the land as to
minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties. The use shall not
create particular hazards to adjacent properties.
   (6)    Specified conditions with respect to emissions of noise, light,
glare, smoke, odor, dust, particulate matter, vibrations or hours of operation
may be prescribed differently from those required in a given district, as to be
compatible with other applicable State and Federal standards.
   (7)    A traffic plan is required describing, at minimum, the method of
ingress and egress to the site, traffic circulation within the site, and on
premises parking and loading/launching areas.
   (8)    The granting of approval of a heliport shall be based on the design
of the unit, which will meet all local, State and Federal requirements for such
use, and will be subject to the approval of the Federal Aviation
Administration. Heliports will be located in areas where effects from the
noise, vibration, dust or light will not adversely affect adjoining properties,
and where the safety of adjoining residents and the public is not endangered.
Storage of fuel will meet all local, State and Federal Fire Codes. No flammable
liquids, fuel, gases or other combustible materials will be stored below the
surface of any lake, river, stream or water body.
   (9)    Adequate water supplies for drinking and fire suppression, as well as
approval of sewage disposal sites and methods by the Panhandle Health District
and/or the State of Idaho, must be demonstrated as appropriate.
   (10)    Clinics are permitted in the Industrial District, but hospitals are
prohibited.
   (11)    The area of land covered by buildings shall not exceed 35 percent of
the total lot area. The site area shall be sufficient to accommodate the
facility and required parking, setbacks, landscaping, walkways and other
applicable development standards. The public utility facility lot or parcel is
not required to meet the minimum lot/parcel size of the zoning district in
which it is located. In considering applications, the Planning or Zoning
Commission shall consider the public convenience and necessity of the facility
and any adverse effect that the facility will have upon properties in the
vicinity, and may require such reasonable restrictions, or conditions of
development; or protective improvements as to uphold the purpose and intent of
this title and the comprehensive plan. A sewage management agreement shall be
approved and executed prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit for
subsurface sewage disposal systems serving 10 or more residential dwelling
units or designed with a capacity of 2,500 gallons or more per day.
   (12)    The site will provide for adequate screening from adjacent sensitive
land uses using a sight obscuring fence, landscaping and/or other approved
treatment.
   (13)    Sanitary landfills shall adhere to the following conditions: a) have
a minimum area of 10 acres; b) conform to standards prescribed by the
appropriate State and local health authorities; c) conform to time limits for
daily operation, as defined by the Board; d) provide a bond, for privately
owned sites, to ensure compliance with the provisions of the zoning approval;
e) provide for a paved street to the facility; f) be supervised during the
hours of operations; g) provide for dust control measures that will limit the
site's nuisance factor; and h) provide a suitable guarantee will be provided to
assure compliance with the zoning and health regulations and also to guarantee
adequate rehabilitation of the site.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-336: RESOURCE BASED USE TABLE:
   TABLE 3-6
   RESOURCE BASED USE TABLE
Use Zoning District
    F A/F R S C I RSC REC AV
Use            Zoning District
               F     A/F   R     S              C     I     RSC   REC    AV
Accessory      P     P     P     P              P     P     P     P      P
building
Agricultural
direct
marketing            P     P     P (17)                     P
activities
(14)
Agriculture    P     P     P     P (11), (12),  P (1) P (1) P (1) P (1)  P (1)
                                 (13)
Batch plant -
asphalt and/or                                        P
concrete (4),
(21), (22)
Confined
animal feeding       C
operation
Expanded
seasonal
harvest              C     C                                C
festivities
(16)
Fur farms,           C     C
commercial (2)
Keeping of     P     P     P     P (13)                           P (9)
equine animals
Mining, stone
quarries,
gravel pits,   C (5) C (5) C (5)                      C           C (10) C (10)
and stone
mills (3), (4)
Open pit (23)                                         P
Rock crushing  C (5) C (5) C (5)                      C
operations
Seasonal
harvest              P     P                                P
festivities
(15)
Value added
agricultural         C     C     C (19)
processing
(18)
Water bottling
works at the
source;
wineries,
breweries and
distilleries   C     C     C                                             C
subordinate
and accessory
to farming
(3), (4), (5),
(7), (8), (20)
 
Standards:
   (1)    Includes growing and harvesting of crops only. All other agricultural
uses are prohibited, except where otherwise noted in this title.
   (2)    Commercial fur farms shall have a minimum area of 10 acres. All
animals and runs will be housed in permanent buildings not less than 100 feet
from any dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner. The operator of such a
use will maintain adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a
nuisance.
   (3)    Sufficient land area is required to accommodate the proposed use, and
the use and any appurtenant structures shall be so arranged on the land as to
minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties. The use shall not
create particular hazards to adjacent properties.
   (4)    Specified conditions with respect to emissions of noise, light,
glare, smoke, odor, dust, particulate matter, vibrations or hours of operation
may be prescribed differently from those required in a given district, as to be
compatible with other applicable State and Federal standards.
   (5)    Where access to the site is by road, the road shall be located within
a recorded easement or public right-of-way, and constructed to the appropriate
standard set forth in title 2 of this Code or
appendix A of this title.
   (6)    Temporary rock crushing operations located outside of city impact
areas within an existing or approved gravel pit.
   (7)    1 on premises sign, not in excess of 32 square feet, which may be
lighted from the exterior, shall be permitted when included as part of the
conditional use permit application.
   (8)    A traffic plan is required describing, at minimum, the method of
ingress and egress to the site, traffic circulation within the site and on
premises parking and loading areas.
   (9)    The keeping of equine animals for noncommercial uses and associated
nonresidential accessory structures, on property having an area of 3 acres or
more is permitted, provided that animal care and waste management meet all
applicable State and health district regulations and provided that the number
of animals not exceed 2 equine animals on 3 acres and 1 additional equine
animal for each additional acre up to a maximum number of 10 equine animals.
The keeping of equine animals for noncommercial purposes on property having an
area of not less than 1 acre and not more than 3 acres and associated
nonresidential accessory structures may be conditionally permitted, provided
that animal care and waste management meet all applicable State and health
district regulations and the number of equine animals does not exceed 2.
   (10)    Mining and rock crushing activities shall be temporary, and shall be
limited in lifetime and scope by conditions established by the Zoning
Commission.
   (11)    Includes growing and harvesting of crops. Other agricultural uses
are limited, as specifically provided by this title.
   (12)    The keeping of chickens and rabbits are permitted, subject to the
following standards:
      a.    Roosters are prohibited.
      b.    Up to 10 chickens, rabbits or combination thereof may be kept on
lots/parcels of less than 1 acre, provided all enclosures and coops are set
back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines and from any residences other
than the owner/renter.
      c.    Up to 30 chickens, rabbits or combination thereof may be kept on
lots/parcels between 1 and 3 acres, provided all enclosures and coops are set
back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines and from any residences other
than the owner/renter.
      d.    Up to 50 chickens, rabbits or combination thereof may be kept on
lots/parcels greater than 3 acres, provided all enclosures and coops are set
back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines and from any residences other
than the owner/renter.
      e.    All chickens or rabbits shall be kept in a predator resistant
enclosure during daytime hours and shall be enclosed in a predator resistant,
covered coop or enclosure during nighttime hours.
      f.   Animal care and waste management practices shall meet all applicable
State and health district standards.
      g.    Chickens or rabbits shall be kept on the same lot/parcel as the
landowner/renter or on an adjacent lot or parcel to owner/renter.
   (13)    The keeping of bees, livestock, farm animals and domestic fowl
(turkeys, ducks and geese), are permitted, subject to the following standards:
      a.    The lot or parcel shall contain a minimum of 3 acres.
      b.    Animals shall be limited to 2 animal units for the first 3 acres of
fenced, pastureland, forestland or enclosure associated with the agricultural
use and 1 additional animal unit per acre thereafter. Total animal units shall
not exceed 20 animal units no matter the acreage. (See animal unit chart in
chapter 8 of this title.)
      c.    Beekeeping operations shall be registered with the State Department
of Agriculture.
      d.    Confined feeding areas, cages, pastureland or enclosures shall be
constructed and maintained to keep the animals contained. Feeding areas, cages,
pastureland or enclosures may be placed up to the property line but shall not
be closer than 40 feet from any residence other than the owner or renter. Hives
shall be a minimum of 25 feet from all property lines and any residences other
than the owner or renter.
      e.    Animals shall be kept on the same lot/parcel as the landowner/
renter or an adjacent lot/parcel to the owner/renter.
      f.    Animal care and waste management shall meet all applicable State
and health district regulations. Waste shall not be stockpiled or composted
within 50 feet of any property line or any residence other than the owner or
renter.
      g.    Keeping of swine, unneutered male goats, guinea fowl, peafowl,
ostrich, emu, buffalo, yak, and beefalo is prohibited. Exception: 1 potbellied
pig is permitted.
   (14)    Subject to standards contained in section
12-493 of this title.
   (15)    Subject to standards contained in section
12-494 of this title.
   (16)    Subject to section
12-495 of this title.
   (17)    In the Suburban Zoning District, a minimum of 5 acres is required
for agricultural direct marketing activities.
   (18)    Shall meet all applicable local, State, and Federal regulations. At
least 2 acres of primary ingredient used in processing shall be grown on site.
   (19)    A minimum of 5 acres is required in the Suburban District. Use shall
be contained within building not exceeding 10,000 square feet of floor area.
   (20)    At least 0.5 acre of primary beverage ingredient used in distilling
or brewing shall be grown on site. Winery, brewery or distillery shall be
clearly subordinate to agricultural operation. All structures associated with
the beverage operation shall be a minimum of 75 feet from property lines. Sales
are limited to fermented or distilled beverages produced on site and limited
food sales. Sales of bottle openers, glasses or other such promotional items
identifying the site are permitted. Hours of operation and maximum occupancy
may be limited by the conditional use permit.
   (21)   Batch plant operations shall be located outside of city impact areas.
The emissions control system(s) on such batch plants shall be of "Best
Available Control technology" (BACT) as generally accepted under relevant
industry standards, within five (5) years prior to application.
   (22)    Reserved.
   (23)    An open pit, also known as a sand box, is an area where material
(usually soil, gravel or sand) has been dug for use at another location. Open
pits shall be in conjunction with and close to major construction projects and
shall be limited in lifetime and scope by conditions established by the Zoning
Commission.
(Ord. 577, 5-23-2018; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-337: ACCESSORY USE TABLE:
   TABLE 3-7
   ACCESSORY USE TABLE
 
Use                                                    Zoning District
                                                       F A/F R S C I RSC REC AV
Accessory solar, geothermal facilities and ground-     P P   P P P P P   P   P
source heat pump
Apparatus needed for the operation of active or
passive solar energy systems or other alternate energy
systems, including but not limited to, overhangs,      P P   P P P P P   P   P
movable insulating walls and roofs, attached or
detached solar collectors, reflectors and piping
Employee housing as an integral part of the commercial P P   P P P P P   P   P
operation (1), (2)
Incidental services for employees on a site occupied               P
by a permitted or conditional use
Watchman's or caretaker's living quarters only when
incidental to and on the same site as a permitted or   P P   P P P P P   P   P
conditional use (2)
 
Standards:
   (1)    Employee housing as part of an integral part of the commercial
operation shall be onsite housing and shall meet all the required standards and
permits of the requested type of housing, i.e., subdivision, RV park or
condominium.
   (2)    Watchman or caretaker living quarters shall be limited to 1 unit per
lot/parcel.
(Ord. 577, 5-23-2018)
12-338: RESERVED:
(Ord. 577, 5-23-2018)
12-339: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW USES WITHIN ZONE DISTRICTS:
It is recognized that new unanticipated types of land uses will be proposed in
Bonner County. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, when a
use is proposed that is not listed as a prohibited, permitted or conditional
use in a zone district, the Planning Director shall make a determination that:
   A.   The use falls within the same standard classification pursuant to the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual" or the North American Industry
Classification System, as amended, modified or superseded, as a listed
permitted or conditional use in a current zone district and that it may be
processed in the same fashion as the listed use; or
   B.   The use does not fall within the same standard classification pursuant
to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" or the North American
Industry Classification System, as amended, modified or superseded, as a listed
permitted or conditional use in a particular zone district, and thus is a
prohibited use in that district; or
   C.   The use is unique in nature and an amendment to this title is necessary
in order to allow for its placement within the appropriate zone district. (Ord.
577, 5-23-2018)
SUBCHAPTER 3.4 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
12-340: INTENT:
Within the district or zone established by this title or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist:
   A.   Lots;
   B.   Structures;
   C.   Uses of land and structures; and
   D.   Characteristics of uses which were lawful before this title was passed
or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this title or future amendment. It is the intent of this title to
permit these nonconformities to continue as required by law. It is further the
intent of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded
or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district or zone. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-341: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, a nonconforming use or
structure may be continued but may not be extended or altered, unless necessary
to comply with a lawful requirement and unless the use or structure is a less
intensive use than the permitted uses in the zone (such as a residence in a
conforming residential zone which has been rezoned to industrial). Exceptions:
      1.   The accumulated expansion by up to ten percent (10%) of a
commercial, industrial or public use, set forth in BCRC
12-333 and
table 3-3,
12-334 and
table 3-4,
12-335 and
table 3-5, or structure in any zoning district that was established prior to
November 18, 2008, and that has been in use continuously since November 18,
2008, is permitted, provided no additional land area is being acquired for the
expansion.
      2.   The accumulated expansion of such use identified in subsection A1 of
this section by more than ten percent (10%), but no more than fifty percent
(50%) is conditionally permitted, provided no additional land area is being
acquired for the expansion.
      3.   For natural material resource-based uses, operating under an
approved Idaho Department of Lands Reclamation plan, and set forth in BCRC
12-336 and
table 3-6, nonconforming uses may be expanded within the parcel boundaries
existing at/on November 18, 2008. For the complete development of the material
resources of the State or any other necessary means to their complete
development, or any other use necessary to the complete development of the
material resources of the State.
   B.   The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure for
which a building location permit or building permit or zoning permit has been
granted at the time of passage of this chapter shall not be deemed an
enlargement or expansion of a nonconforming use. A nonconforming structure
which conforms with respect to use may be altered or expanded if the alteration
or expansion does not cause the structure to deviate further from the standards
of this title.
   C.   If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of two (2) years or
more, further use of the property shall conform to this title. For "surface
mines", as defined in section
12-813 of this title, it shall be concluded that the operator has permanently
ceased surface mining operations as to a given affected land if no "minerals",
as defined in section
12-813 of this title, have been removed from the mine in question for a period
of three (3) years or more. Discontinued nonconforming uses are also governed
by the standards of Idaho Code section 67-6538, as it may be amended or
retitled from time to time. If a nonconforming use has been discontinued for
two (2) or more years, the County may require a written declaration of intent
from the landowner, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6538.
   D.   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall require any change in the
plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a
building location permit or building permit has been issued by the county prior
to the adoption of this section, provided the structure has been completed and
in use within two (2) years from the time the permit is issued. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008; amd. Ord. 524, 1-11-2012; Ord. 672, 3-18-2022)
12-342: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   The minimum site area requirements will apply in all districts, except
that these regulations shall not prohibit permitted uses on a lot of record
(i.e., lots divided prior to the date of this section). All structures will
meet minimum setback requirements as provided in this title.
   B.   In any district or zone in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
section, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title.
This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements
for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district or
zone; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying
to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district or zone in which such lot is located. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   C.   Any conforming or legally nonconforming parcel or lot reduced or
further reduced in size below the zoning district minimums by a government
action for the purpose of acquiring public rights of way shall be considered
legally nonconforming. (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
12-343: NONCONFORMING USES OF LANDS:
Nonconforming uses of land may be continued so long as they remain otherwise
lawful, provided:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this section, except where otherwise noted in this
subchapter.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this section. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-344: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason
of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot,
or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way
which increases its nonconformity. Any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity.
   B.   A nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure
destroyed by any means may be reconstructed so long as the reconstruction does
not increase its nonconformity and reconstruction occurs within two (2) years
of its destruction.
   C.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district or
zone in which it is located after it is moved.
   D.   No nonconforming portion of a structure may be enlarged or altered in
any way which increases its bulk (such as lot area, open space, yards, lot
coverage, height, impervious surface ratios and floor area ratios). (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-345: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION:
If a lawful use involving individual structures exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title that would not be allowed in the district
or zone under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in
the district or zone in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district or zone in which it
is located.
   B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
structure which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time
of adoption or amendment of this section, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
   C.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structure and premises may be considered by the Zoning Commission
for a change to another nonconforming use through the conditional use permit
process provided by this title, provided the Zoning Commission shall find that
the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district or
zone than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning
Commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this title.
   D.   Any existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in
the district or zone in which it is located that is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district or zone, and
the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   E.   When an existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title
in the district or zone in which it is located fails to be used for the
nonconforming use for two (2) years (except where government action impedes
access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district or zone in which it is located.
   F.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. "Destruction", for the purpose of this
subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of the replacement value at time of destruction.
   G.   Any nonconforming use or structure and use in combination that is
damaged or destroyed by an involuntary event such as fire, explosion, collapse
or similar catastrophe may be repaired or reconstructed and the nonconforming
use restored, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   A building permit or building location permit has been issued,
reconstruction has commenced and the use has resumed within two (2) years of
the qualifying event.
      2.   The nonconformity shall not be enlarged, increased or intensified.
      3.   The reconstruction shall meet all applicable floodplain regulations
of this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 524, 1-11-2012; Ord. 661, 3-18-
2022)
12-346: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
If a nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure, containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district or zone in which it is located. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-400: Purpose
Subchapter 4.1 - Density And Dimensional Standards
12-410: Interpretation Of Tables
12-411: Density And Dimensional Standards; Forestry, Agricultural/Forestry And
Rural Zones
12-412: Density And Dimensional Standards; Suburban, Commercial, Industrial,
Rural Service Center, Recreation And Alpine Village Zones
Subchapter 4.2 - General Standards
12-420: General Standards
12-421: Performance Standards For All Uses
Subchapter 4.3 - Parking Standards
12-430: Purpose
12-431: Parking Standards
12-432: Minimum Off Street Parking Requirements
12-433: Parking Lot Pathway Standards
12-434: Parking Lot Landscaping Standards
Subchapter 4.4 - Sign Standards
12-440: Purpose
12-441: General Standards
12-442: Illumination Standards
12-443: Sign Standards For Nonresidential Uses In Commercial, Industrial,
Recreation, Alpine Village, And Rural Service Center Zone Districts
Subchapter 4.5 - Design Standards
12-450: Purpose
12-451: Applicability
12-452: Site And Building Plans
12-453: Standards
12-454: Completion Of Required Improvements
Subchapter 4.6 - Landscaping And Screening Standards
12-460: Purpose
12-461: Applicability
12-462: Landscaping Plan Required
12-463: Landscaping Standards And Guidelines
12-464: Landscaping Types
12-465: Buffer Requirements
12-466: Maintenance
12-467: Completion Of Required Improvements
Subchapter 4.7 - Standards For Development In The Alpine Village District
12-470: Purpose
12-471: Standards
Subchapters 4.8 And 4.9 - Standards For Specific Uses
12-480: Cottage Housing
12-481: Confined Animal Feeding Operations
12-482: Mining
12-483: Art, Performing Arts And Recording Studios
12-484: Vacation Rentals
12-485: Mobile Home Parks
12-486: Standards For Rental Warehouses, Ministorage, Boat Storage
12-487: Provisions For Unique Land Uses
12-488: Communication Towers
12-489: Home Occupations I, II, And III
12-490: Accessory Dwelling Units
12-491: Adult Entertainment Uses
12-492: Racetracks
12-493: Agricultural Direct Marketing Activities
12-494: Seasonal Harvest Festivities
12-495: Expanded Seasonal Harvest Festivities
12-496: Recreational Vehicles
12-497: RV Parks/Campgrounds
12-400: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish basic development standards
consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 4.1 - DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
12-410: INTERPRETATION OF TABLES:
   A.   Sections
12-411 and
12-412 of this chapter contain general density and dimension standards for the
various zones and limitations specific to a particular zone. The minimum
setbacks shall apply to all structures, as defined in section
12-819 of this title, except as otherwise noted. Additional rules, exceptions
and methodologies are set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   B.   The density and dimension tables are arranged in a matrix format on two
(2) separate tables and are delineated into two (2) zoning district groupings
for ease of use:
      1.   Forestry, agricultural/forestry, rural.
      2.   Suburban, commercial, industrial, rural service center, recreation,
alpine village.
   C.   Development standards are listed down the left side of both matrices,
and the zones are listed at the top. The matrix cells contain the minimum
dimensional requirements of the zone. A blank box indicates that there are no
specific requirements related to the applicable standard. Specific requirements
or exceptions associated with particular standards are identified by numbers in
parentheses. Such requirements or exceptions are listed below the table.
Requirements or exceptions listed in the "standard" column (far left column in
each table) shall apply to the standard in each zoning district referenced in
the table. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-411: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS; FORESTRY, AGRICULTURAL/FORESTRY AND
RURAL ZONES:
   TABLE 4-1
   DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Standard Zoning District
         F A/F-20 A/F-10 R-10 R-5
Standard                 Zoning District
                         F          A/F-20     A/F-10     R-10       R-5
Minimum lot sizes        40 (4)     20 (5)     10 (6)     10 (6)     5 (7)
(acres) (1), (2)
Maximum residential      1 dwelling unit per minimum lot sizes (3), (8)
density
Minimum street setback   25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet
(9), (10), (13)
Minimum property line    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet
setback (11), (12), (13)
On premises sign
property line or street  25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet
setback
Maximum lot coverage     35 percent 35 percent 35 percent 35 percent 35 percent
 
Requirements Or Exceptions:
   (1)   Building lots in conservation subdivisions can be smaller than the
minimum lot size for each zone. See chapter 6,
subchapter 6.3 of this title for more details.
   (2)   For the purposes of subdividing or adjusting lots or parcel lines:
Gross acreage may include rights of way within the boundaries of the land being
subdivided or where right of way has been dedicated within the subject aliquot
division of a section of land. Acreages may be rounded off per the following:
4.95 acres and larger shall be considered 5 acres; 9.95 acres and larger shall
be considered 10 acres; 19.95 acres and larger shall be considered 20 acres;
39.95 acres and larger shall be considered 40 acres.
   (3)   Density may be increased via conservation subdivision provisions set
forth in section
12-637 of this title for properties in the A/F and R zones.
   (4)   Or 1/16 aliquot division of the section minimum site area.
   (5)   Or 1/32 aliquot division of the section minimum site area.
   (6)   Or 1/64 aliquot division of the section minimum site area.
   (7)   Or 1/128 aliquot division of the section minimum site area.
   (8)   Dwellings, not to exceed a total of 3 single family dwellings, may be
permitted on a single lot or parcel of land; providing, that the lot or parcel
is large enough to comply with the density requirements of the zone. The
maximum density of dwellings on a single lot or parcel of land shall be
calculated using only non-submerged land. For example, 3 single family
dwellings may be permitted on a 15 acre lot or parcel in the Rural 5 (R-5)
district. Exceptions:
      a.   The total allowable number of dwellings does not apply to temporary
or seasonal farm labor housing, such as a bunkhouse where only sleeping
quarters are provided for farmworkers.
      b.   Additional single family dwellings may be allowed on lot in a
conservation subdivision or PUD, provided the subdivision or development plan
complies with the density requirements of the district and where the single
family dwellings are authorized on the plat, if applicable.
   (9)    From Street as defined in BCRC
12-819.
   (10)   Utility structures not exceeding 30 square feet, such as well houses
may be permitted within the required street setback, when necessary per
applicable utility company or property owner.
   (11)   For legal nonconforming lots or parcels the following setback
exceptions may be applied, provided snow storage and stormwater are
accommodated on the subject site:
      a.   The minimum property line setback may be reduced to 5 feet for lots/
parcels of less than one (1) acre.
      b.   The minimum property line setback may be reduced to 10 feet for
lots/parcels larger than 1 acre but less than 5 acres.
   (12)   Setback requirements per this subchapter do not exempt land owners
from deeded restrictions or confirm landowners are not building in recorded or
prescriptive ingress/egress boundaries. Nothing in this Title shall be
construed to relieve an applicant from complying with deeded restrictions,
prescriptive easements or legally binding easement boundaries.
   (13)   The minimum property line setbacks for agricultural buildings and
other nonresidential structures shall be at least 40 feet, the minimum setback
requirements may be reduced to 50 percent of the requirement if acceptable
landscaping or screening, approved by the planning director, is provided. Such
screening shall be masonry or solid fence between 4 feet and 8 feet in height,
maintained in safe condition and free of all advertising or other signs on the
residential side of lot or parcel. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or
fence shall consist of a strip of land not less than 20 feet in width, planted
with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less than 4
feet in height at the time of planting. The setback may be reduced to 25 feet
from property line or a street. The minimum property line setbacks for
agricultural buildings used solely for growing and harvesting crops shall be 5
feet. The minimum street setback for row covers, hoop houses or other membrane
covered, season extending structures may be reduced to 15 feet, provided they
are not on permanent foundations.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord. 516, 6-9-2010; Ord. 520,
12-8-2010; Ord. 538, 6-26-2014; Ord. 606, 7-14-2020; Ord. 700, 10-11-2023; Ord.
714, 7-24-2024)
12-412: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS; SUBURBAN, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
RURAL SERVICE CENTER, RECREATION AND ALPINE VILLAGE ZONES:
   TABLE 4-2
   DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Standard Zoning District
         S C I RSC REC AV
Standard    Zoning District
            S          C          I          RSC        REC         AV
Minimum lot
size where  10,000     See        See        12,000     12,000      12,000
all urban   square     standard   standard   square     square feet square feet
services    feet (1),  (3)        (3)        feet (1),  (1), (2)    (1), (2)
are         (2)                              (2)
available
Urban water 1 acre (4) 1 acre     1 acre     1 acre     1 acre (4)  1 acre (4)
only (19)
Urban sewer 20,000     20,000     20,000     20,000     20,000      20,000
only        square     square     square     square     square feet square feet
            feet (4)   feet       feet       feet       (4)         (4)
Community
LSAS and    1 acre (4) 1 acre     1 acre     1 acre     1 acre (4)  1 acre (4)
urban water
(19), (20)
Community
drainfield
and         1 acre (4) 1 acre     1 acre     1 acre     1 acre (4)  1 acre (4)
individual
well (19),
(20)
Minimum lot
size where
urban sewer 21/2 acres                                  21/2 acres  21/2 acres
and water   (2), (4),  21/2 acres 21/2 acres 21/2 acres (2), (4),   (2), (4),
services    (5)        (2), (5)   (5)        (2), (5)   (5)         (5)
are not
available
(1)
Maximum
residential 1 dwelling unit per minimum lot size (2), (6)
density (if
applicable)
Minimum
street                 25 feet               25 feet    25 feet
setback     25 feet    (10)       25 feet    (10)       (10)        (11)
(7), (8),
(9)
Minimum
property
line        5 feet     5 feet     5 feet     5 feet     5 feet      15 feet
setback                                                             (16)
(12), (15),
(18)
On premises
sign
property
line or     25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet    25 feet     25 feet
street
setback
(7), (17)
Maxium lot  35 percent 35 percent 50 percent 35 percent 35 percent  35 percent
coverage
 
Requirements Or Exceptions:
   (1)    Cluster lots in a conservation subdivision can be smaller than the
minimum lot size for each zone.
   (2)    Density may be increased via conservation subdivision bonus
provisions set forth in section
12-637 in this title.
   (3)    Residential density for the C district shall be determined the same
as for the minimum standards of the S district.
   (4)    Clustering lots via a conservation subdivision is encouraged to allow
for the opportunity to develop at greater density if and when urban services
become available. See section
12-636 of this title for more details.
   (5)    Or 1/256 aliquot division of the section minimum site area.
   (6)   Dwellings, not to exceed a total of 3 single family dwellings may be
permitted on a single lot or parcel of land; providing, that the lot or parcel
is large enough to comply with the density requirements of the zone. The
maximum density of dwellings on a single lot or parcel of land shall be
calculated using only non-submerged land. For example, 3 single family
dwellings may be permitted on a 30,000 square foot lot or parcel with all urban
services in the Suburban district. Exceptions:
      a.   The total allowable number of dwellings does not apply to temporary
or seasonal farm labor housing, such as a bunkhouse where only sleeping
quarters are provided for farmworkers.
      b.   Additional single family dwellings may be allowed on a lot in a
conservation subdivision, provided the subdivision complies with the density
requirements of the district and where the single family dwellings are
authorized on the plat.
   (7)    From Street as defined in BCRC
12-819. 
   (8)    Utility structures not exceeding 30 square feet such as well houses
may be permitted within the required property line or street setback, when
necessary per applicable utility company or property owner.
   (9)    Street setback exceptions:
      a.   Street setbacks may be reduced where approved and indicated on the
final plat of a conservation subdivision or PUD.
      b.   First-floor porches and decks, open and unenclosed on three sides,
and attached to the Dwelling Unit, may project up to 8 feet into the street
setback.
   (10)   The minimum street setbacks may be reduced to 0 for buildings
containing ground floor commercial uses facing the street, provided the
following conditions are met:
      a.   A 12 foot wide sidewalk with street trees between the street and
walkway is provided.
      b.   The street facade contains transparent windows and doors along at
least 50 percent of the facade 3 feet and 8 feet above the sidewalk grade.
      c.   There is a public building entrance off of the sidewalk.
      d.   Street facade features weather protection at least 5 feet in width
along at least 50 percent of the facade. Said weather protection could be a
building overhang, permanent canopy or awning, or fabric awning, and must be at
least 8 feet above the grade of the sidewalk.
      e.   Building location does not conflict with county or state roadway
plans.
   (11)   Structures shall be set back at least 35 feet from the centerline of
a paved road, but not closer than 5 feet setback from the property line
fronting the right of way.
   (12)   Minimum property line setbacks shall be increased to 20 feet where
abutting land in the A/F district.
   (13)    Property line setbacks are 5 feet for detached, residential
accessory buildings or structures, except where abutting land in the A/
F district.
   (14)    The minimum property line setbacks for detached, residential
accessory buildings shall be 5 feet.
   (15)    Property line setbacks may be reduced to 0 (only for lots internal
to a subdivision) where indicated on the final plat of a conservation
subdivision.
   (16)    Structures, including roof overhangs, shall not take up more than 60
percent of lot street frontage.
   (17)    Signs mounted on buildings are subject to all setback requirements
contained in this subchapter.
   (18)    The minimum property line setbacks for agricultural buildings and
shall be 20 feet.
   (19)   New lots created through any land division process shall include the
sanitary restriction lift.
   (20)   Community LSAS or community drain field shall be located on a common
lot or tract of land. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord. 538,
6-26-2014; Ord. 606, 7-14-2020; Ord. 615, 11-18-2020; Ord. 700, 10-11-2023;
Ord. 714, 7-24-2024)
SUBCHAPTER 4.2 - GENERAL STANDARDS
12-420: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Buildings, Structures: No building or other structure shall hereafter
be erected or altered:
      1.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families than permitted
by the standards of this title;
      2.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area than permitted by the
standards of this title; (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
      3.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the
provisions of this title.
   B.   Areas Not Included In Requirements: No part of a yard, or other open
space, or off street parking or loading space required about or in connection
with any building for the purpose of complying with this title, shall be
included as part of a yard, open space or off street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building.
   C.   Yard Reductions: No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this
section shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall
meet at least the minimum requirements.
   D.   Structure To Have Access: Every building hereafter erected or moved
shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved
private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide
safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off
street parking.
   E.   Fences, Walls And Hedges: Notwithstanding other provisions of this
title, fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, unless
otherwise restricted by provisions of this title.
   F.   Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: Any automobile body which is
not properly and currently licensed, and is not in operating condition or has
not been used for a period of six (6) months or more, whether left on public or
private property, and which is offensive to the sight of the community or
neighborhood, or to persons passing by on a public thoroughfare, will be
considered a public nuisance.
   G.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, construction trailers,
equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work only may be
permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress,
but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the
completion date of the project shall require a building location permit or
building permit authorized by the planning director.
   H.   Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted
to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
      1.   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the
zoning regulations for new structures in that district.
      2.   The lot meets density requirements for the applicable district as
stated in section
12-411,
table 4-1 or section
12-412,
table 4-2 of this chapter.
      3.   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
ordinances.
   I.   Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and
ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets bounded
by the right of way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along
said street right of way lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   J.   Projections: All architectural projections such as canopies, eaves,
balconies, platforms, decks, carports, covered patios, and similar
architectural projections shall be considered parts of the building to which
attached and shall not project into any required setback except as otherwise
provided by this title. (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
12-421: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL USES:
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises,
except that any use permitted by this title may be undertaken and maintained if
acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce dangerous and objectionable
conditions to acceptable limits as established by the following performance
requirements:
   A.   Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or
explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential fire danger
involved as specified in the international fire code as adopted by the state of
Idaho. (See also section
12-487 of this chapter.)
   B.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful
radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
   C.   Noise: "Objectionable noise", as defined in this subsection, which is
due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Air
raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt
from the requirement. "Objectionable noise" is defined as:
      1.   Residential land use resulting in greater than sixty (60) decibels
at the property line of the lot or parcel developed with the residential land
use.
      2.   Commercial land use resulting in greater than sixty five (65)
decibels at the property line of the lot or parcel developed with the
commercial land use.
      3.   Industrial land use resulting in greater than seventy (70) decibels
at the property line of the lot or parcel developed with the industrial land
use.
   D.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without
the use of vibration detection instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
   E.   Air Pollution: Any use must be operated and maintained in conformance
with the minimum air pollution control standards and regulations established by
the health authority.
   F.   Reserved.
   G.   Water Pollution: Any use must be operated and maintained to conformance
with the minimum water pollution control standards and regulations established
by the health authority.
   H.   Enforcement Provisions: The planning director, prior to giving zoning
approval, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the
manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and
in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits
and tolerances.
   I.   Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of
the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards
Institute, New York; the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington,
D.C.; the United States bureau of mines; and the health authority. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 4.3 - PARKING STANDARDS
12-430: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide adequate parking spaces for uses.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-431: PARKING STANDARDS:
   A.   Requirements: Parking spaces required shall be exclusive of drives and
access lanes and each space will be provided with adequate ingress and egress.
   B.   Size Of Parking Spaces: Parking spaces shall be no less than two
hundred (200) square feet in area.
   C.   Unspecified Uses: Parking for unspecified uses shall be determined by
the planning director. Requirements for such unspecified uses shall be based on
the requirements for the most comparable use pursuant to the "Standard
Industrial Classification Manual" or the North American industry classification
system, as amended, modified or superseded.
   D.   Handicapped Parking: Handicapped parking shall be provided consistent
with the Americans with disabilities act, where applicable.
   E.   Cooperative Off Street Parking: Any two (2) or more uses may establish
cooperative off street parking where it can be established to the satisfaction
of the planning director that the hours of traffic generation on the part of
the different land uses are at nonoverlapping times of the day based on hours
of operation. In that case, the off street parking provisions for each can be
credited to the same off street parking areas provided cooperatively. All
shared parking and mutual easements shall be recorded and a copy provided to
the planning department.
   F.   Gross Area Determination: In determining the gross area required for an
off street parking lot requiring a specified number of parking spaces,
including driveways and aisles, two hundred fifty (250) square feet per parking
space shall be used. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-432: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   For the purposes of defining off street parking, the floor area shall
exclude areas devoted exclusively to circulation or service, such as storage,
restrooms, corridors, hallways, entries, stairways, elevators, equipment/
utility rooms, kitchens not to be occupied by clientele, and other areas for
utility purposes not connected with general conduct of business for which
office or sales space is provided.
   B.   Off street parking areas shall contain the minimum number of parking
spaces stipulated in
table 4-3 following, plus adequate stopping or parking areas for service
vehicles, as specified in subsection C of this section. Standards associated
with a particular use are identified by numbers in parentheses. Standards are
listed below the table. A use that is similar to any of the below referenced
uses shall adhere to the minimum parking requirements for the referenced use or
uses. The planning director shall determine the minimum parking requirements
for service vehicles and for a use that is not referenced in this section based
on the most comparable use pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual" or the North American industry classification system, as amended,
modified or superseded.
   TABLE 4-3
   MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Use Minimum Requirement Proximity Of Parking Spaces
Use                        Minimum Requirement        Proximity Of Parking
                                                      Spaces
Residential Uses:
Residential, single-family 2 spaces/dwelling unit     On the same lot as the
(1)                                                   dwelling unit
Residential, multi-family   
(1)                                                   Within 300 feet of the
Studio                     1 space/dwelling unit      principal use
1 bedroom                  1.5 spaces/dwelling unit
2 or more bedrooms         2 spaces/dwelling unit
Mobile home parks          1 space/homesite           Within 200 feet of the
                                                      homesite
                                                      Located on the same
Cottage housing (2)        1.5 spaces/dwelling unit   property as the cottage
                                                      development
Commercial Uses:
Convalescent center (3)    1 space/4 beds AND         Within 500 feet of the
                           1 space/day shift employee principal use
Bed and breakfast          2 spaces plus               
                           1 space/room for rent
Financial institutions     3 spaces/1,000 square feet  
                           floor area
Hotels, motels, RV sites   1.25 spaces/unit           Within 500 feet of the
(3)                                                   principal use
Racetrack                  1 space/3 seats (4)         
Restaurants                8 spaces/1,000 square feet  
Retail (3)                 1 space/250 gross square   Within 500 feet of the
                           feet floor area            principal use
                           1 space/4 fixed seats AND
                           1 space/100 square feet of Within 500 feet of the
Theaters (3)               gross floor area without   principal use
                           fixed seats for assembly
                           purposes
Wholesale sales or service 1 space/200 gross square   Within 500 feet of the
(3)                        feet floor area            principal use
Industrial Uses:
                           1 space/1,000 gross square
Industrial or              feet floor area OR         Within 800 feet of the
institutional (3)          1/2 space/employee,        principal use
                           whichever is greater
Warehouse                  1 space/5,000 gross square Within 800 feet of the
                           feet floor area            principal use
Public Uses:
Assembly buildings (e.g.,  1 space/100 gross square   Within 500 feet of the
community halls) (3)       feet floor area            principal use
                           1 space/4 fixed seats AND
Churches, synagogues and   1 space/50 square feet of
temples                    gross floor area without    
                           seats for assembly
                           purposes
Community docks and        0.5 space/boat slip (5)     
marinas
Golf courses (excluding    4 spaces/tee AND           Within 500 feet of the
clubhouses) (3)            1 space/tee for driving    principal use
                           ranges
Hospitals (3)              1 space/2 beds AND         Within 500 feet of the
                           1 space/employee           principal use
Schools (daycare,          1 space/10 students AND    Within 500 feet of the
preschool and              1 space/employee or        principal use
kindergarten) (3)          teacher
                           1 space/5 students AND     Within 500 feet of the
Schools (elementary) (3)   1 space/employee or        principal use
                           teacher
Schools (secondary and     1 space/3 students AND     Within 500 feet of the
vocational) (3)            1 space/employee or        principal use
                           teacher
 
Standards:
   1.    Vehicles, to include automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats or
campers that are to be parked or stored for a period exceeding 48 hours, shall
be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve. The subject
vehicles must be outside of the required front yard.
   2.    Parking for cottage housing shall be: a) screened from public streets
and adjacent residential uses by landscaping or architectural screening; b)
located in clusters of not more than 5 adjoining spaces; c) prohibited in
required minimum front and interior side yards; and d) a pitched roof design is
required for all detached parking structures.
   3.    Industrial, institutional and commercial uses shall be provided with
off street loading spaces, exclusive of access areas, of not less than 12 feet
in width. Loading spaces shall not project into public rights of way or setback
areas.
   4.    Parking to be provided with a security type fence and a suitable dust
prevention type of road surfacing.
   5.    25 percent of parking spaces arranged as tandem spaces not less than
10 feet by 40 feet.
   C.   Commercial uses will be provided with off street loading spaces,
exclusive of access areas, of not less than twelve feet (12') in width. Loading
spaces shall not project into public rights of way or setback areas. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-433: PARKING LOT PATHWAY STANDARDS:
See subsection
12-453C of this chapter for applicable parking lot pathway standards. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-434: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
See
subchapter 4.6 of this chapter for applicable parking lot landscaping
standards. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 4.4 - SIGN STANDARDS
12-440: PURPOSE:
   A.   To encourage signage that is both clear and of appropriate scale for
the project.
   B.   To encourage quality signage that contributes to the character of the
area. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-441: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   All signs erected, altered or maintained pursuant to this title will
comply with the regulations herein, except for political signs or posters,
traffic control signs and directional signs maintained by government entities.
   B.   No sign or advertising structure shall be attached, installed or
erected as to affect in any manner an emergency access, fire escape, door or
window.
   C.   All signs shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or
corporation responsible for maintaining the sign. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   D.   Signs shall be limited in subject matter to products, an object, a
place, persons, institutions, businesses, services or activities occurring on
the premises, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. With the
permission of the property owner, off premises, temporary event signs or
banners are permitted in all zoning districts, for up to a maximum of thirty
(30) days total during one calendar year, in connection with a single temporary
event. (Ord. 538, 6-26-2014)
   E.   Freestanding signs, building mounted signs, or combination thereof, in
an aggregate size not to exceed ninety six (96) square feet in area, shall be
allowed, provided no individual sign exceeds sixty four (64) square feet in
area. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-442: ILLUMINATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Illuminated signs or lighting devices shall not be placed in such a
manner as to permit beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed
upon a public thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk or navigable water.
   B.   All internally illuminated signs are prohibited, except for neon signs,
dark opaque signs where light only shines through the individual letters, and
logos no more than ten (10) square feet in size.
   C.   Externally illuminated signs that are downwardly directed are
encouraged.
   D.   All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection
and operation of electrically illuminated signs or advertising structures shall
be in accordance with the provisions of all electrical codes established by the
state of Idaho. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-443: SIGN STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
RECREATION, ALPINE VILLAGE, AND RURAL SERVICE CENTER ZONE DISTRICTS:
   A.   Not more than two (2) signs may be installed to identify a business,
service, product, person, accommodation or activity. Businesses located on
street corners may use up to three (3) signs.
   B.   
Table 4-4 of this section provides dimensional standards for freestanding
signs.
   TABLE 4-4
   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS
 
                      Type Of Frontage Road
                      State Highway With     All Other State
                      Speed Limit Posted 55  Highways        All Other Roads
                      Miles Per Hour Or More
Maximum height,       10 feet                8 feet          8 feet
measured at grade
Maximum area          64 square feet         50 square feet  40 square feet
Minimum separation of
freestanding signs
along a street        150 feet               150 feet        100 feet
(includes neighboring
property)
                      1 square foot of landscaping around base per sign area
                      per each 0.5 square foot of sign area (see
Landscaping           subchapter 4.6 of this chapter for other applicable
                      landscaping standards). A rock or masonry base or
                      other natural landscape materials may be substituted
                      as approved by the planning director.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1283.gif]
 
   C.   Building mounted signs shall not project above the eaves line or
parapet wall of the building to which it is affixed.
   D.   Moving, rotating or flashing signs, or parts thereof, are prohibited,
with the exception of time and temperature displays.
   E.   Portable or sandwich board signs are prohibited.
   F.   Should any sign not comply with regulations, or be unsafe to property
or persons, the owner shall, upon receipt of notice from the planning director,
conform with regulations, put the sign in safe and secure condition or remove
the sign at once. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 4.5 - DESIGN STANDARDS
12-450: PURPOSE:
   A.   To preserve and enhance the rural character and natural resource
amenities of the county.
   B.   To encourage clustered development and discourage sprawl and strip
development.
   C.   To enhance the character of commercial and multi-family areas.
   D.   To provide an integrated community transportation system wherever
possible.
   E.   To develop a system of bike and pedestrian pathways as commercial areas
of the county develop.
   F.   To preserve rural dark skies by reducing nighttime glare and light
pollution. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-451: APPLICABILITY:
The standards in section
12-453 of this chapter shall apply to all new development in the commercial,
industrial where commercial uses and services are proposed, and rural service
center districts and all other commercial, multi-family, public and industrial
development in other zoning districts unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 512, 1-6-
2010)
12-452: SITE AND BUILDING PLANS:
The applicant shall submit site and building plans through the applicable
permit process detailed as necessary to demonstrate how the standards in
section
12-453 of this chapter have been met. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-453: STANDARDS:
   A.   Sidewalk/Pathway Standards: Provide a sidewalk or pathway paralleling
or nearly paralleling the street along the front edge of the property for all
new developments and any building addition where the value of the addition
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the existing
structure and/or site improvements as determined by the Bonner County
assessor's office over any five (5) year time period. The sidewalk/pathway may
be built within the public right of way (where authorized by the applicable
agency) or on private property and shall be at least six feet (6') in width
(except where greater widths are specifically set forth in the Bonner County
trails plan). Where the sidewalk/pathway is provided on private property, an
easement at least fifteen feet (15') in width allowing for public access is
encouraged. For subdivisions in applicable zoning districts, the easement shall
be noted on the plat, and the sidewalk/pathway constructed prior to final plat
approval. The sidewalk/pathway shall be constructed with an all weather surface
per specifications in the Bonner County trails plan or as approved by the
planning director. The planning director may grant an exception to the above
requirement if the following criteria are met, as determined by the planning
director:
      1.   Adjacent property or properties along the applicable street frontage
are not zoned for commercial uses.
      2.   For sites with multiple buildings fronting the street, a pathway
along the street linking the two (2) buildings shall be required, but trail
connections to the adjacent properties will not be required where subsection A1
of this section is applicable.
      3.   Sites at the end of dead end road where pedestrian connections
beyond the road are not possible or desirable.
For all exceptions above, except subsection A3 of this section, the development
shall be positioned in a way that allows for trail construction along the front
edge of the property (or within the right of way adjacent to the front property
line) in the future.
   B.   Pedestrian Connections: Provide walkways connecting all on site
commercial and multi-family buildings with each other and the street for all
new developments and any building additions where the value of the additions
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the existing
structure and/or site improvements as determined by the Bonner County
assessor's office over any five (5) year time period. For other additions or
improvements, pathways shall be provided to connect any new structures with
existing structures, as determined by the planning director. Buildings/uses
where little or no pedestrian traffic is anticipated may be exempted from this
requirement. Walkways must be clearly delineated from vehicular access and
other areas by curbs, landscaping, or other elements as approved by the
planning director. Walkways shall be at least four feet (4') in width or wider
where greater pedestrian activity is anticipated. The pathways shall be
constructed with an all weather surface.
   C.   Parking Lot Pathways: Large new or expansion of existing developments
must provide specially marked or paved walkways through parking lots.
Specifically, walkways should be provided every four (4) rows and a maximum
distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be maintained between paths.
Parking lots less than one hundred fifty feet (150') wide or long are exempt
from this requirement. Pathways must be at least five feet (5') in width and
constructed with an all weather surface. The pathway must be separated from
vehicular traffic by an elevation change, change in surface material or color,
or other treatments as approved by the planning director. Where possible, the
pathways shall be aligned to connect with major building entries or other
destinations. The pathways shall conform to the minimum Americans with
disabilities act (ADA) requirements as established by the federal government.
   D.   Parking Location Guidelines: New developments are encouraged to locate
parking areas to the side or rear of buildings. For large sites (more than 2
acres), developments are encouraged to limit parking areas to no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the lot frontage (other areas may be buildings and/or
open space). Developments that meet these guidelines qualify for all of the
following:
      1.   Landscaping buffers between any parking lot and a street may be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) in width.
      2.   Minimum front yard requirements may be reduced by fifty percent
(50%).
      3.   Setbacks for freestanding signs may be reduced to five feet (5').
   E.   Main Building Entry Standards For Commercial Uses: Weather protection
at least four feet (4') deep shall be provided over all building entries.
Accessory building entrances, service only entrances and secondary residence
entrances are exempted from this requirement. Building entry standards are
strongly recommended for industrial uses.
FIGURE 4.2
ILLUSTRATING DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR
COMMERCIAL AND MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1285.gif]
 
   F.   Lighting Standards:
      1.   Lighting shall be directed downward to the intended area to be
lighted. All exterior lighting fixtures shall incorporate cutoff shields to
prevent spillover into residential areas. Broadcast lighting fixtures that
project lighting outward rather than downward are discouraged. Outdoor lighting
shall be arranged so that the light is directed downward and away from
adjoining properties. Temporary high intensity construction lights should be
oriented so as to reduce or eliminate glare onto adjoining properties.
      2.   Freestanding light fixtures shall be limited to fourteen feet (14')
in height.
      3.   Vehicular roadway and highway lighting shall be subject to the
county requirements.
      4.   Mercury vapor light fixtures are prohibited.
      5.   When using decorative miniature lighting strings, bulbs larger than
eleven (11) watts each shall not be used. Low wattage, light emitting diode
devices and other lighting that reduces electrical use is encouraged.
      6.   Backlit awnings are prohibited.
The above lighting standards are encouraged for single- family uses in all
zones.
   G.   Blank Wall Treatment Standards: Untreated "blank walls", as defined in
section
12-802 of this title, adjacent to a street or customer/resident parking areas
are prohibited. The intent is to add visual character of commercial and multi-
family areas and add visual interest. Proposed methods to treat blank walls
shall be submitted at the time of building location permit or building permit
and shall include one or more of the following:
      1.   Transparent windows or doors.
      2.   Display windows.
      3.   Landscaped bed at least five feet (5') wide in front of the wall
with planting materials sufficient to obscure at least fifty percent (50%) of
the wall surface within three (3) years.
      4.   A vertical trellis in front of the wall with climbing vines or other
plant materials. The trellis must be of sufficient size to enable plant
materials to cover at least fifty percent (50%) of the wall surface within
three (3) years.
      5.   Special architectural design features and/or use of materials that
add visual interest and mitigates the visual impact of a blank wall. Developers
are encouraged to incorporate landscaping elements in front of portions of the
wall.
      6.   Other methods that add visual interest and mitigate the visual
impact of a blank wall as approved by the planning director.
For blank walls that are longer than one hundred feet (100'), a combination of
treatments are encouraged to add visual interest to commercial and multi-family
areas.
FIGURE 4.3
BLANK WALL AND EXAMPLE BLANK WALL TREATMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1287.gif]
 
   H.   Maximum Building Width: For all building facades adjacent to a street
or customer/resident parking areas, the maximum building width shall be one
hundred twenty feet (120'). The planning director may grant exceptions to the
maximum building width, provided the building design complies with the
following options:
      1.   The building features vertical building modulation so that it
reduces the perceived scale of the building or makes it appear that it is two
(2) separate buildings. To achieve this, the depth of vertical modulation must
be at least twenty feet (20') and the width of the vertical modulation must be
at least thirty feet (30'). Two (2) examples of how this is achieved is
illustrated in
figure 4-4 of this section.
      2.   Other treatments that successfully reduce the perceived scale of the
building or make it appear that it is two (2) separate buildings as per the
planning director. Examples include articulation techniques (repeating window
patterns, changes in building materials or architectural detailing, or roofline
modulation) that break the scale of the building down into components that are
less than one hundred twenty feet (120') in width.
FIGURE 4-4
MAXIMUM FACADE WIDTH STANDARDS AND EXCEPTIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1289.gif]
 
   I.   Recreational Space For Multi-Family Developments: Multi-family
developments featuring more than four (4) dwelling units shall provide at least
two hundred fifty (250) square feet of on site recreational space per dwelling
unit. Examples of on site recreational space include landscaped courtyards,
centralized lawn areas that can be used for informal recreational activities,
common or private decks or balconies, or children's play areas. Such space
shall be located, designed and maintained per the following:
      1.   Space shall be placed in a dedicated recreation tract or area if
developed in conjunction with a planned unit development or subdivision.
      2.   Space shall be maintained by the landowner, homeowners' association,
or other incorporated organization or private organization formed to provide
long term care of the recreational space.
      3.   Space shall be centrally located in an area that is visible from two
(2) or more of the proposed dwelling units.
      4.   Space contains physical conditions that allow for active and passive
recreation. For example, slopes should generally be less than five percent
(5%), soils and hydrological conditions should be compatible with desired
active and passive recreational activities.
      5.   Space shall have no dimension less than thirty feet (30') except for
trail segments and balconies.
      6.   Balconies and private decks may qualify for up to fifty percent
(50%) of the required recreational space.
      7.   Required setback areas shall not be counted as on site recreational
space unless the planning director finds that the design of the space will be
usable for active and/or passive recreational activities.
      8.   Space shall feature landscaping and other amenities to make the area
usable for active and/or passive recreational activities.
      9.   Large developments are encouraged to provide a range of activities
that accommodate a range of age groups.
Exceptions: Developments in the alpine village district shall be exempted from
these requirements. Also, developments in conservation subdivisions, where
indicated on the final plat, may use common open space to meet these
requirements where the applicant can successfully demonstrate that the design
of the common open space will meet the recreational needs of residents.
   J.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage of commercial and industrial
materials:
      1.   Will be screened from view from any existing adjoining residence or
residential zoned area, whether or not such property is separated by an alley
or street per landscaping standards in
subchapter 4.6 of this chapter.
      2.   Will not be located in any front yard setback.
   K.   Solid Waste, Recycling Collection Areas: All solid waste and recycling
collection areas for commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses:
      1.   Shall be located to minimize visibility from the public and adjacent
nonindustrial uses. Service elements should generally be concentrated and
located where they are designed for easy access by service vehicles and for
convenient access by tenants.
      2.   When visible from a street or resident/customer parking area, the
receptacles shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or
fence of at least six feet (6') in height, or within an enclosed building.
Screen fences should be made of masonry, ornamental metal or wood, or some
combination of the three (3). The use of chainlink, plastic or wire fencing is
prohibited.
      3.   Shall be animalproofed. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-454: COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
Completion of required improvements per section
12-453 of this subchapter shall be required prior to occupancy. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 4.6 - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
12-460: PURPOSE:
   A.   To reduce the visual impacts of parking and storage areas on the street
and adjacent properties.
   B.   To enhance the character of commercial and multi-family areas.
   C.   To provide visual screens and barriers as a transition between
differing land uses.
   D.   To promote the use of native and drought tolerant species appropriate
for the region.
   E.   To provide increased areas for permeable surfaces to allow for
infiltration of surface water into groundwater resources, reduce the quantity
of stormwater discharge and improve the quality of stormwater discharge. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-461: APPLICABILITY:
The standards in this subchapter shall apply to all new development in the
commercial, industrial and rural service center districts and all other
commercial, multi-family, public and industrial development in other districts
unless otherwise noted. For remodels or additions, the standards in this
subchapter shall apply where the value of the additions equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the existing structure and/or site
improvements as determined by the Bonner County assessor's office over any five
(5) year time period. For other additions or remodels, the landscaping
standards shall only apply to the specific areas being improved. For instance,
if a commercial use is adding additional parking, the new parking area must
feature landscaping per the standards in this subchapter. (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
12-462: LANDSCAPING PLAN REQUIRED:
A landscape plan shall be submitted with all new development requiring a
building location permit, or building permit or conditional use permit. Such
landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and include the following information:
   A.   Boundaries and dimensions of the site.
   B.   Identification of all species and locations of existing trees that are
to be retained.
   C.   Location and identification of all proposed plantings.
   D.   Location and design of areas to be landscaped, buffered and maintained.
   E.   Type, location and design of proposed irrigation.
   F.   Plant list or schedules with common name, quantity, spacing and size of
all proposed landscape material at the time of planting.
   G.   Location and description of other landscaping improvements, such as
earth berms, furniture, fences, lights and paved areas.
   H.   Methods of protecting existing vegetation during construction.
   I.   Planting/maintenance schedule. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-463: LANDSCAPING STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES:
   A.   Applicants are encouraged to integrate the existing on site trees and
native vegetation (if applicable) into the design of the site. Retention of the
existing on site trees and native vegetation is preferred over new landscaped
areas. Where existing trees or other native plant materials are proposed to be
retained, the landscape professional should provide supplemental plantings in
the area where needed or provide confirmation that existing vegetation meets or
exceeds objectives stated in section
12-460 in this chapter. Xeriscaping, or designs for drought tolerant vegetation
and low water usage, are encouraged.
   B.   Planting areas should be a mix of evergreen and deciduous shrubs whose
height and width will be proportionate to the area being planted, except where
otherwise noted in this subchapter.
   C.   Trees, shrubs, ground covers and/or grasses that are native to northern
Idaho and are appropriate to the conditions of the site are preferred.
Appendix B of this title provides a list of native plants and their landscape
uses. Nonnative plants may be considered, provided they are appropriate to the
region and not invasive.
   D.   Landscape plans shall demonstrate that the vegetation will not visually
block lines of sight for vehicles or pedestrians or obscure businesses with
landscape material that will be too large for the site at maturity.
   E.   Ground cover material should cover seventy percent (70%) of the soil in
one growing season or seventy percent (70%) of the soil in three (3) years if
mulch is applied until the ground cover fills the designated area. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-464: LANDSCAPING TYPES:
   A.   Type A: Landscape type A (evergreen screen) standards:
      1.   For landscaping strips ten feet (10') to fifteen feet (15') wide,
trees, shrubs and ground covers per the standards below to result in a total
covering of the landscape strip:
         a.   At least one row of evergreen trees, minimum six feet (6') in
height and fifteen feet (15') maximum separation.
         b.   Permitted evergreen tree species are those with the ability to
develop a minimum branching width of eight feet (8') within five (5) years.
         c.   Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per twenty (20) square feet of
landscaped area. Shrubs shall have a minimum container size of two (2) gallons
at the time of installation and have a mature height between three feet (3')
and four feet (4').
         d.   Ground cover.
      2.   For landscaping strips wider than fifteen feet (15'), trees, shrubs
and ground covers per the standards below to result in a total covering of the
landscape strip:
         a.   A minimum of one evergreen tree at least six feet (6') in height
for every two hundred twenty five (225) square feet arranged in a manner to
obstruct views into the property.
         b.   Permitted evergreen tree species are those with the ability to
develop a minimum branching width of eight feet (8') within five (5) years.
         c.   Shrubs and ground cover as required in subsection A1 of this
section.
FIGURE 4-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1291.gif]
 
   B.   Type B: Landscape type B (mixed buffer) standards:
      1.   For landscaping strips less than fifteen feet (15') wide, trees,
shrubs and ground covers per the standards below to result in a total covering
of the landscape strip:
         a.   Informal groupings of evergreen (minimum 6 feet in height) and/or
deciduous. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum two inch (2") caliper as measured
four feet (4') from the root ball at the time of planting. At least fifty
percent (50%) of the trees must be evergreen. Trees to be spaced at an average
of twenty feet (20') on center, but may be grouped in asymmetrical
arrangements.
         b.   Permitted tree species are those with the ability to develop a
minimum branching width of eight feet (8') within five (5) years.
         c.   Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per twenty (20) square feet of
landscaped area. Shrubs shall have a minimum container size of two (2) gallons
at the time of installation and have a mature height between three feet (3')
and four feet (4').
         d.   Ground cover.
      2.   For landscaping strips wider than fifteen feet (15'), trees, shrubs
and ground covers per the standards below to result in a total covering of the
landscape strip:
         a.   At least one tree sized per subsection B1 of this section per
three hundred (300) square feet of landscaped area. At least fifty percent
(50%) of the trees must be evergreen.
         b.   Tree species, shrubs and ground cover as required in subsection
B1 of this section.
FIGURE 4-6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1293.gif]
 
   C.   Type C: Landscape type C (see through buffer) standards:
      1.   For landscaping strips five feet (5') to twenty feet (20') wide:
         a.   Trees at twenty feet (20') on center on average. Trees may be
clustered to allow greater visibility into the site, where desired by the
applicant. Trees shall be a minimum two inch (2") caliper as measured four feet
(4') from the root ball at the time of planting.
         b.   Permitted tree species are those that reach a mature height of at
least thirty five feet (35').
         c.   Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per twenty (20) square feet of
landscaped area. Shrubs shall have a minimum container size of two (2) gallons
at the time of installation and have a mature height between three feet (3')
and four feet (4').
         d.   Ground cover.
      2.   For landscaping strips wider than twenty feet (20'):
         a.   At least one tree per three hundred (300) square feet of
landscaped area or twenty foot (20') separation (on average). Place trees to
create a canopy in desired locations without obstructing necessary view
corridors.
         b.   Tree species, shrubs and ground cover as required in subsection
C1 of this section.
FIGURE 4-7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1295.gif]
 
   D.   Type D: Landscape type D (naturalistic buffer) standards:
      1.   Landscaping shall consist of trees, shrubs and ground covers that
are native to northern Idaho and are appropriate to the conditions of the site.
Species shall be on the plant list found in
appendix B of this title.
      2.   Arrangement of plants shall be asymmetrical and plant material shall
be sufficient in quantity to cover the soil in one growing season.
      3.   Minimum twenty feet (20') in width if used as a screen or required
front yard treatment.
FIGURE 4-8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1297.gif]
 
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-465: BUFFER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Developments shall conform to the landscaping buffer requirements in
table 4-5 of this section, where applicable. Where conditions feature more than
one landscaping type in the second column, applicants have the option of
choosing any of the landscaping types, unless otherwise directed through the
PUD or conditional use permit. Additional standards associated with particular
buffers are identified by numbers in parentheses. Such standards are listed
below the table.
   TABLE 4-5
   BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
 
Site Condition                Landscaping Types Buffer Width
Parking area adjacent to a                      25 feet adjacent to a state
street (includes auto, RV and C                 highway
mobile home dealers)                            15 feet adjacent to all other
                                                roads
Parking area along side or
rear property lines (includes A, B or D (1)     10 feet
auto, RV and mobile home
dealers)
                                                20 feet along perimeter of
Outdoor storage of equipment  A, B (2) or D (2) site, except 10 feet in
or materials                                    industrial district side and
                                                rear yards
Multi-family uses             A, B or D (2)     10 feet along the side and rear
                                                perimeter of site
 
Standards:
   1.    20 feet if type D.
   2.    30 feet along perimeter of site if type B or D, except 20 feet in
industrial district.
   B.   Exceptions to landscaping buffer requirements in
table 4-5:
      1.   See subsection
12-263A in this subchapter regarding the preference to preserve existing native
vegetation, where applicable.
      2.   The planning director may allow exceptions to the width and type of
landscaping buffer requirements where it can be successfully demonstrated by
the landowner or landowner's design professional that the buffer is not needed
for privacy to and from current or future adjacent uses due to unique natural
conditions on the site. This can include slopes, rock outcroppings or existing
native vegetation.
      3.   The planning director may reduce the required width and type of
landscaping buffer requirements where they would block desirable views from
residential units, as evidenced by photographs, drawings, topographic detail or
other proof and such reduction in buffering does not adversely impact the
adjoining properties. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-466: MAINTENANCE:
All required landscaping shall be permanently maintained in a healthy growing
condition by the property owner or the property owner's designee. The property
owner shall remove and, if required to meet the standards of this subchapter,
shall replace any unhealthy or dead plant material immediately or as the
planting season permits. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-467: COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
Completion of required improvements specified in this subchapter shall be
required prior to occupancy. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 4.7 - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE ALPINE VILLAGE DISTRICT
12-470: PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide measures to accommodate snowfall in high elevation
communities.
   B.   To provide measures to minimize erosion and surface slippage. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-471: STANDARDS:
   A.   Plans for retaining wall taller than four feet (4') shall bear the
stamp of a structural engineer and shall be submitted at the time of building
location or building permit.
   B.   Applicants for building location permits or building permits shall
submit a snow management plan to the satisfaction of the agency having
jurisdiction over the public or private travelways.
   C.   Applicants for all building location permits or building permits shall
submit a grading, stormwater and erosion control plan, containing the minimum
requirements of chapter 7,
subchapter 7.2 of this title. In addition to the requirements for stormwater
management plans, the following shall be addressed in the plan:
      1.   Water resulting from snowmelt on the site.
      2.   Plans to reclaim disturbed ground with native plants having soil
holding properties.
   D.   Parking requirements for residential uses shall be two (2) off street
spaces per dwelling unit, or one space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area (living space), whichever is more.
   E.   Driveways that do not have a snowmelt system are limited to an eight
percent (8%) maximum grade so that they are usable during winter months. All
portions of driveways that extend into public rights of way shall be paved and
include swales or other treatments acceptable to the agency having jurisdiction
over the public or private travelways to protect roadways from excessive water
runoff and accumulations. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTERS 4.8 AND 4.9 - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
12-480: COTTAGE HOUSING:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   To provide a housing type that responds to changing household sizes,
ages and interests.
      2.   To create an efficient layout of dwelling units that reduces the
development footprint and infrastructure costs.
      3.   To ensure that the overall size, including bulk and mass of cottage
structures and cottage housing developments, remains smaller and incurs less
visual impact than standard sized single-family dwellings.
      4.   To provide centrally located and functional common open space that
fosters a sense of community and a sense of openness in cottage housing
developments.
      5.   To provide private area around the individual dwellings to enable
diversity in landscape design and foster a sense of ownership.
      6.   To ensure minimal visual impact from vehicular use and storage areas
for residents of the cottage housing development as well as adjacent
properties.
      7.   To maintain a single-family character along public streets.
   B.   Cottage Development Procedural Options: Cottage development applicants
have four (4) procedural options for obtaining approval:
      1.   Applicants intending to retain ownership of all of the units may use
the planned unit development process per
subchapter 2.5 of this title to allow the development of four (4) or more
cottages on a single (or multiple) property.
      2.   Applicants intending to record a condominium plat can use the
planned unit development process per
subchapter 2.5 of this title and the requirements for condominium projects in
subchapter 6.7 of this title.
      3.   Applicants intending to subdivide the individual lots must use the
conservation subdivision process and standards set forth in this title.
      4.   The owner or owners of multiple lot or parcels may reconfigure their
properties through one of the processes above to create a cottage development.
   C.   Cottage Development Approval: The applicants must demonstrate
compliance with all standards in this section. For example, an applicant
seeking to create a speculative cottage housing subdivision must demonstrate
how the site is designed to accommodate cottage units and open spaces
consistent with the standards prescribed herein. The final plats, condominium
plans or development plans, thus, shall include building envelopes, building
design and other standards pursuant to approval of the particular application.
   D.   Permit Applicants To Comply: Building location permit or building
permit applicants for cottage housing unit as approved per subsections B and C
of this section shall comply with the requirements in this section.
   E.   Density Bonus: Due to the reduced size of individual cottages, two (2)
cottages are permitted for every one dwelling unit. For example, for a property
large enough to allow three (3) dwelling units, six (6) individual cottages are
allowed, subject to the standards set forth in this section.
   F.   Dimensional Standards: The dimensional standards for cottage housing
shall be pursuant to
table 4-6 below:
   TABLE 4-6
   COTTAGE HOUSING DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Standard Requirement
Standard                                Requirement
Maximum gross floor area                1,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
Maximum gross floor area/ground or main 900 square feet per dwelling unit.
floor
                                        600 square feet per dwelling unit in
                                        the rural district and 400 square feet
Minimum common open space               per dwelling unit in all other
                                        districts (see subsection G of this
                                        section).
Minimum private open space              200 square feet per dwelling unit (see
                                        subsection H of this section).
Maximum building height for cottages    25 feet subject to all parts of the
with minimum roof slope of 6:12         roof above 18 feet shall be pitched.
                                        Same as other residential development
                                        in applicable zoning districts, except
Minimum front, side and rear yards      for the rural district, where cottage
                                        dwelling units must be at least 100
                                        feet from any property adjacent to the
                                        parent tract.
Minimum distance separating structures  10 feet
(including accessory structures)
Maximum building height for cottages
without roof slope of 6:12 and all      18 feet
accessory structures
                                        Developments shall contain a minimum of
                                        4 and a maximum of 12 dwellings located
Clustering groups                       in a cluster group to encourage a sense
                                        of community among the residents. A
                                        development site may contain more than
                                        one group of cottage clusters.
 
FIGURE 4-9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1299.gif]
   G.   Common Open Space Requirements:
      1.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the cottages in a cottage housing
development shall abut the required common open space.
      2.   At least two (2) sides of the required common open space shall be
abutted by cottages.
      3.   An entrance, preferably the main entrance of cottages, shall face
the required common open space.
      4.   Cottage facades facing the required common open space or common
pathway shall feature a roofed porch at least sixty (60) square feet in size
with a minimum dimension of six feet (6') on any side.
      5.   Cottages shall be within sixty feet (60') walking distance of the
required common open space, as measured from the closest architectural
projection.
      6.   The common open space shall be sized large enough to include an area
with a dimension of no less than thirty feet by thirty feet (30' x 30')
completely inside it (see
figure 4-9 for example). For example, a twenty foot (20') wide pathway corridor
would not be wide enough to meet the size requirements.
      7.   Required common open space shall be maintained by the homeowners'
association or other incorporated or private entity formed to ensure long term
maintenance of the open space.
   H.   Private Open Space Requirements: Private open space shall be adjacent
to each dwelling unit and for the exclusive use of the cottage residents. The
private open space shall:
      1.   Be usable (not on a steep slope).
      2.   Be oriented toward the common open space as much as possible.
      3.   Have no dimension less than ten feet (10').
   I.   Garages: Shared garages and parking areas are encouraged. Attached
private garages are acceptable if they do not conflict with the development's
ability to meet all other standards specified in this section (notably the
common open space requirements above).
   J.   Communal Buildings: Communal buildings intended for social,
recreational or other use by the residents of the development are acceptable.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-481: CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Minimum area: Forty (40) acres.
   B.   Confined animal feeding operations (CAFO), shall be conducted so as to
minimize the effects of light, glare, noise, vectors, pests, smoke, odor and
dust upon adjacent properties and the surrounding transportation and
circulation system.
   C.   The specific provisions of this section control when other portions of
this code are inconsistent with provisions of this section. Any action by
Bonner County pursuant to this section does not ensure that the applicant is in
compliance with any other provisions of applicable local, state and/or federal
laws, rules and/or regulations. The provisions of this section are minimum
standards, and any more restrictive standards required by other applicable
local, state and/or federal laws, rules and/or regulations must be complied
with.
   D.   Any and all livestock operations are subject to the following
requirements:
      1.   A waste distribution plan for all waste from a livestock operation.
Discharge of waste from a property owned or controlled by any livestock
operator is prohibited. This applies to any livestock operation, regardless of
size or type. Animal waste products, including sprinkled waste, shall not leave
the property of the operator, unless the operator has agreed with another party
through a recorded agreement or easement to disperse animal waste products on
that person's property. Liquid waste treatment lagoon, separators and holding
ponds and such dispersal shall meet all local, state and federal guidelines.
      2.   Animal waste shall not be applied to frozen ground.
      3.   Animal waste may be surface applied not closer than three hundred
feet (300') from any river, stream, lake, wetland or other bodies of water.
      4.   A comprehensive nutrient management plan, prepared by a certified
nutrient management planner, which generally analyzes the effect of the
proposed CAFO on surface and subsurface waters. The analysis shall also include
and identify, at a minimum, the following: climatic, hydrogeologic and soil
characteristics; watershed delineation; a map showing the location of all
private and community domestic water wells, irrigation wells, existing
monitoring wells and existing injection wells as documented by the Idaho
department of water resources (IDWR), or other sources which are within a one
mile radius of the proposed CAFO; the location of existing patterns of surface
drainage; the depth to groundwater and a potentiometric map for the uppermost
and regional aquifer; direction of water flows; estimates and sources of
recharge to the uppermost aquifer; characterization of the relationship between
the groundwater and adjacent surfaces waters; and a summary of local surface
and subsurface water quality including microorganisms, nutrients and
pharmaceuticals and organic compounds.
      5.   Odor management and vector and pest control plans which shall
utilize current best management practices.
      6.   A waste system design for solid and liquid waste approved by the
appropriate state agency regulating solid and liquid waste.
      7.   Water right information including one of the following: evidence
that a valid water right exists to supply adequate water for the operation of
the proposed CAFO; or a copy of an application for a permit to appropriate
water that has been filed with IDWR, which if approved, will supply adequate
water for operation of the proposed CAFO; or a copy of an application to change
the point of diversion, place, period and nature of use of an existing water
right that has been filed with IDWR, which if approved, will supply adequate
water for the operation of the proposed CAFO.
      8.   Waste storage on property not a part of the CAFO, i.e., leased or
rented property, is required to follow setbacks stated in subsection E of this
section.
   E.   Required setbacks for a CAFO:
      1.   All structures and animal confinement areas shall be a minimum of
one hundred feet (100') from any public or private right of way or easement or
lot line.
      2.   All potable water wells shall be a minimum of three hundred feet
(300') from any liquid or solid waste storage facility and a minimum of fifty
feet (50') from all animal confinement areas.
      3.   Animal confinement areas shall be one thousand feet (1,000') from
any residence not associated with the CAFO if the residence is in existence or
under construction at the time the CAFO application is filed. All CAFO corrals
or feed yards shall be one thousand feet (1,000') away from the artificial or
natural high water mark of any public body of water, canal, lateral or ditch,
which might return to any public body of water.
      4.   Liquid waste treatment lagoons, separators, holding ponds, liquid
and/or solid waste storage facilities shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50')
away from the artificial or natural high water mark of any canal, lateral or
ditch which might return to any public body of water, and three hundred feet
(300') from any CAFO property line. Composting of animal waste shall be a
minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from any residence not associated with
the CAFO. It shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any highway district
right of way and fifty feet (50') minimum from the water's edge of any canal,
lateral or ditch, and fifty feet (50') from any adjoining neighbor's property
line.
      5.   Animal confinement areas, liquid waste treatment lagoons,
separators, liquid and/or solid waste storage facilities, and feed storage
areas (excluding dry hay and straw storage), shall be a minimum of one thousand
feet (1,000') from the boundary between the agricultural/forestry or rural zone
district and any other zone district.
      6.   No animal confinement area, liquid waste treatment lagoon, holding
pond, waste storage area or composting area shall be located within the
boundary of a 100-year flood zone.
      7.   All distance requirements noted in subsections E1 through E6 of this
section shall apply equally to new CAFO construction or new residence
construction. For example, subsection E3 of this section requires animal
confinement areas to be a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from existing
residences. This requirement also means that new residences (construction begun
after permit application for a CAFO) must be located a minimum of one thousand
feet (1,000') from the animal confinement areas shown on the CAFO site plan as
approved by Bonner County.
   F.   A stormwater management and erosion control plan shall be prepared and
submitted concurrently with the application for conditional use permit pursuant
to the requirements of
subchapter 7.2 of this title.
   G.   Final approval of a CAFO shall reside with the board of county
commissioners who shall hold at least one public hearing affording the public
an opportunity to comment on each proposed CAFO site. Any "affected person", as
defined by Idaho Code section 67-6520, may provide comment. The board may
reject a site regardless of the approval or rejection of the site by a state
agency.
   H.   Notice of public hearing to consider a CAFO application shall be made
in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6512, with the exception that notices
shall be mailed to all property owners within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
external boundaries of the land being considered.
   I.   Pastured animals are not considered to be a confined animal feeding
operation and, therefore, they do not need a permit, nor are they regulated as
to the number of animals that an owner can have on his property, except as
otherwise specifically regulated by this title. "Pasture" is defined as land
where crops, vegetation or forage growth are sustained in the normal growing
season. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-482: MINING:
   A.   A reclamation plan approval by the Idaho department of lands shall be
applied for, and a copy of the application shall accompany the application for
the conditional use permit. Temporary and permanent landscaping and safety
fencing shall be provided around all excavations in urban areas. A site plan
for the entire parcel shall be submitted with the application identifying the
location of any pits, stockpiles, hauling roads, processing facilities,
equipment or material storage, fencing, screening and any other pertinent
features. A reclamation plan shall also be submitted showing the condition and
topography of the land after material and structures have been removed. A
grading/stormwater management plan shall be prepared and submitted concurrently
with the application for conditional use permit pursuant to the requirements of
subchapter 7.2 of this title.
   B.   The mined area shall not be located closer to the nearest property line
or public right of way than a horizontal distance equal to one and one-half
(11/2) times the vertical depth of the mined area at any given point, except
that steeper slopes may be permitted where certified by an Idaho licensed
engineer. In no instance shall the actual mined area extend to within sixty
feet (60') of the nearest property line or public right of way. Drainage from
areas disturbed by surface mining shall be filtered, treated and contained on
site.
   C.   The landowner (applicant) shall apply dust abatement (magnesium
chloride or other suppressants acceptable to Bonner County) to the private,
nonpaved easement and the haulage road on a yearly and/or as needed basis, at
no cost to Bonner County.
   D.   No debris from the mining operation shall be placed or tracked onto the
public rights of way by vehicles used for the operation, to the satisfaction of
the transportation agency having jurisdiction over the adjacent roadways.
   E.   Fugitive dust shall be controlled by the applicant at all times to the
satisfaction of the Idaho department of environmental quality and consistent
with the approved fugitive dust control plan.
   F.   The applicant shall comply with all requirements of the reclamation
plan approved by the Idaho department of lands.
   G.   All retail sales of materials on the site are prohibited.
   H.   The signs on the site shall comply with the standards of
subchapter 4.4 of this title.
   I.   The applicant shall install and maintain hazard fencing and signing to
warn of the mining danger, to the satisfaction of the Bonner County Planning
Department.
   J.   The applicant shall maintain or restore vegetative buffering of the
site, where feasible. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-483: ART, PERFORMING ARTS AND RECORDING STUDIOS:
   A.   The site shall contain sufficient land area to accommodate the proposed
use. The use and any appurtenant structures shall be arranged as to minimize
any adverse impacts, including noise, dust or other nuisance factors, to
adjacent properties.
   B.   Where access to the site is by road, the road shall meet minimum
private road standards set forth in
appendix A of this title.
   C.   Associated lodging facilities are permitted only for those artists and
their technical staff members who are actively engaged in recording or
production, provided they are available for a period not to exceed two (2)
weeks. Such lodging facilities must be in a detached single-family structure
containing no more than five (5) rooms and two thousand (2,000) square feet of
floor area. Sites within the Commercial, Industrial, and Rural Service Center
Districts are exempt from this requirement.
   D.   Adequate water supplies for fire suppression, as determined by the
applicable Fire District Chief or agency providing fire protection, shall be
provided.
   E.   Accessory uses, such as pools and spas, shall conform to regulations
set by the State of Idaho.
   F.   Food service facilities shall conform to regulations set by the State
of Idaho.
   G.   Health and safety requirements shall conform with adopted codes based
upon the occupancy and type of construction.
   H.   Liquor shall not be available for sale by the drink within the
establishment.
   I.   Sufficient off street parking for artists and their technical staff
members shall be provided. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord.
607, 7-22-2020)
12-484: VACATION RENTALS:
   A.   Intent: To provide a process for the use of vacation rentals in Bonner
County to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare, to protect
the character of residential areas ensuring compatibility with surrounding
residential uses that will not materially alter the neighborhoods in which they
are located.
   B.   Vacation Rental Permit Procedures: A vacation rental permit approval by
the Planning Director is subject to the procedures set forth in this section.
      1.   Vacation Rental Permit Procedures: No structure, dwelling or
dwelling unit or portion thereof shall be used as a vacation rental until an
application for a vacation rental permit has been reviewed and approved by the
Planning Director or designee. The application shall include the following:
         a.   The name of the landowner/applicant.
         b.   The address of the property and property number.
         c.   The name and telephone number of the local representative.
         d.   The maximum occupancy requested.
         e.   A parking plan to show the number of off-street parking spaces
provided on the property and the maximum number of vehicles allowed to be
parked on the property.
         f.   The solid waste disposal collection day.
         g.   The name of the fire district in which the vacation rental
resides if applicable.
         h.   Site plan showing the location of all property lines and
structures on the property.
         i.   Any additional material needed for a complete review of the
application, as determined by the Planning Director.
         j.   Fees as determined by the Board of County Commissioners.
   C.   Vacation Rental Standards:
      1.   Permit: The vacation rental permit shall be issued for one (1) year.
The Planning Department shall issue the permit where it finds the application
requirements and the requirements of this section have been met, and upon
payment of the "permit fee" in an amount as determined by the Board of County
Commissioners.
         a.   To renew a vacation rental permit, the holder shall submit for
renewal on a form provided by the County together with the renewal fee.
         b.   The renewal request shall be submitted no sooner than sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration of the vacation rental permit. A permit for which
a renewal application is not timely submitted shall automatically expire.
         c.   If a permit has expired, a new application shall be required.
         d.   All current standards of this section, as existing and amended on
the submission date of the application for renewal, shall be met in order
obtain the vacation rental permit renewal.
         e.   Any residential dwelling in the County may be rented without a
permit for no more than fourteen (14) days per calendar year, where those
fourteen (14) days are divided into no more than two (2) stays.
      2.   Ownership: A vacation rental permit is issued to a specific owner of
a property in the applicable zone. If the property holding a vacation rental
permit is sold, the vacation rental permit shall immediately expire. Vacation
rental permits shall not be transferred between landowners, either by sale or
any other means.
      3.   Occupancy:
         a.   The maximum occupancy for a vacation rental shall be two (2)
persons per bedroom plus an additional two (2) persons up to a total of twenty
(20) persons, regardless of age. The maximum occupancy shall also be limited by
available off-street parking as set forth in this section, whichever is less.
If the cumulative total occupancy exceeds twenty (20) persons allowed per lot
or parcel, a High Occupancy Vacation Rental permit is required.
         b.   No recreational vehicle, travel trailer or other temporary
shelter or accessory building shall be used as a vacation rental or in
conjunction therewith to provide additional sleeping areas or otherwise, except
for structures permitted as Recreational Vehicle Dwelling Units pursuant to
section 12-496 which are connected to septic or sewer.
      4.   High Occupancy Vacation Rental Permit: An application with a
proposed cumulative total occupancy exceeding twenty (20) persons people per
lot or parcel shall be reviewed against the following:
         a.   Adequate evidence shall be provided to demonstrate that the use
and any appurtenant structures are so arranged on the land as to minimize any
adverse effects on surrounding properties, and that the use will not create
particular hazards to adjacent properties.
         b.   Performance Standards For All Uses as found in section 12-421.
         c.   The Planning Director may, at any time during the review of a
High Occupancy Vacation Rental Permit, forward the application to the Hearing
Examiner or Zoning Commission for a public hearing and decision in accordance
with the public hearing process in section 12-267. The Planning Director shall
evaluate whether granting the permit will be consistent with the standards
listed in this subchapter.
      5.   Access: Approval shall be obtained from the agency having
jurisdiction over the access serving the site.
      6.   Parking: One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
three (3) persons of occupancy in a vacation rental. No more vehicles shall be
parked on the property than there are designated off-street parking spaces.
Inability to provide the required off-street parking will reduce the permitted
occupancy. The site plan submitted with a vacation rental permit application
shall clearly identify the location of the required off-street parking. All
accessory uses and additional parking in conjunction with the vacation rental
shall be located off-street. On street parking in connection with a vacation
rental is prohibited.
      7.   Solid Waste Disposal: The property owner/owner's representative or a
waste collection provider shall provide weekly solid waste collection during
all months that the vacation rental is available for rent.
      8.   Permit Posting: The vacation rental permit shall be posted within
five feet (5') of the front door of each dwelling unit, on the inside of the
dwelling unit, and contain the following information.
         a.   The name and telephone number of the local representative.
         b.   The name and mailing address of the owner.
         c.   The contact information for the Planning Department and the
Sheriff's Office in Bonner County.
         d.   The maximum occupancy permitted.
         e.   The parking plan with the number of off-street parking spaces
provided on the property. The posted parking plan shall be in the form a clear
and legible site plan and shall show all structures on the property and all
designated parking spaces on the property.
         f.   The solid waste disposal collection day.
         g.   Rules of the area, Homeowners Association rules, etc. Bonner
County will not enforce Homeowners Association rules or Covenants, Conditions
and Restrictions.
         h.   Boating and recreational rules.
      9.   Signs/Advertising: One on premises sign not in excess of six (6)
square feet, shall be permitted. All advertising for the vacation rental shall
include the County permit number, maximum occupancy, and the maximum number of
vehicles accommodated by off-street parking spaces.
      10.   Zoning: All vacation rentals shall conform to the zoning in which
they are located including and up to floodplain permitting, shoreline
regulations and other applicable building location permits.
      11.   Inspection: the County may require an inspection to verify
compliance the County standards, upon complaint of non-compliance, or in
relation to other enforcement actions.
   D.   Local Representative:
      1.   Local Representative: The owner of the property shall designate a
"local representative". The local representative must be either the owner or
other individual person who resides permanently within ninety (90) minutes of
the property or; a legally operating resort, bed and breakfast establishment,
or property management company.
      2.   Change Local Representative: The local representative may be changed
by the owner from time to time throughout the term of the permit, by the owner
filing a written notice that includes the name, address and telephone number of
the new local representative.
      3.   Notification Of Change: Failure to notify the County within thirty
(30) days of a change in the local representative constitutes a violation and
is grounds for a penalty pursuant to this section.
      4.   Complaints: The local representative must be authorized by the owner
to respond to questions or concerns from the occupants or neighbors. The local
representative shall serve as the initial contact person if there are questions
or complaints regarding the operation of the property as a vacation rental. The
local representative must respond to those complaints within seven (7) business
days to ensure that the use of the property complies with the standards for
vacation rental occupancy, as well as other pertinent County Code requirements
pertaining to noise, disturbances, or nuisances, as well as State law
pertaining to the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.
      5.   Neighbor Notification: The County shall notify property owners and
residents within three hundred feet (300') of the property of the issuance of
the permit and associated information. The purpose of this notification is so
that adjacent property owners and residents can contact the local
representative and/or owner to report and request the resolution of problems
associated with the operation of the vacation rental.
   E.   Violations:
      1.   Violations: Failure to comply with the occupancy limits or other
requirements of the vacation rental permit and/or this section, shall
constitute a violation. Disturbances or nuisances caused by the occupants (and
their invited guests) of a vacation rental that violate Bonner County Revised
Code or State Law, IC 18-6409, shall also constitute a violation.
      2.   Revocation:
         a.   The Planning Director is hereby authorized to revoke any vacation
rental permit, issued under the terms of this section, if, after due
investigation, it is determined that the holder thereof has received three (3)
violations in a twelve (12) month period.
         b.   A failing septic system, as identified by Panhandle Health
District, shall result in a suspension of the vacation rental permit. Once the
landowner has obtained approval of the repaired septic system the suspension
shall be lifted. Operating a vacation rental with a suspended permit shall
result in a revocation of the vacation rental permit.
         c.   If a vacation rental permit is revoked, the landowner or their
representative may not reapply for a vacation rental permit on the subject
property for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation.
         d.   The applicant may appeal the Planning Director's decision to
revoke a vacation rental permit to the Board of County Commissioners, pursuant
to the provisions of section 12-261 of this title.
(Ord. 574, 10-25-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. Ord. 581, 10-24-2018; Ord. 590, 6-
12-2019; Ord. 607, 11-18-2020; Ord. 707, 3-13-2024)
12-485: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   A.   Each mobile home shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from
any park property line.
   B.   A mobile home may not be located closer than twenty feet (20') from any
other mobile home or permanent building within the mobile home park. A mobile
home accessory building shall not be closer than ten feet (10') from a mobile
home or building on an adjacent lot.
   C.   Each mobile home lot within a mobile home park shall have direct access
to a park street. The park street shall consist of an unobstructed area twenty
feet (20') wide and shall be well marked to provide for continuous traffic
flow. The street system shall have direct connection to a public or private
road meeting applicable standards set forth in title 2 of this code or
appendix A of this title.
   D.   Streets and walkways designed for the use of the mobile home park
residents shall be lighted during the hours of darkness.
   E.   Each mobile home lot (site) shall be provided with utility connections.
   F.   Water supplies for fire department operations shall be as required by
the authority having jurisdiction. Water supplies shall be adequate to permit
the effective operation of minimum hose stream flows and duration of flows as
required by international fire code for mobile home parks on any fire in a
mobile home or elsewhere in the mobile home park. Hydrants shall be located
within five hundred feet (500') of all mobile home lots (sites), unless
otherwise specified by the fire code.
   G.   Provisions for safe bicycle and pedestrian access shall be integrated
into the site.
   H.   At least two hundred fifty (250) square feet of on site recreational
space per dwelling unit shall be provided. Such open space shall be located,
designed and maintained per subsection 12-453I of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
12-486: STANDARDS FOR RENTAL WAREHOUSES, MINISTORAGE, BOAT STORAGE:
   A.   Uses are prohibited within one hundred feet (100') of a state highway
or designated arterial in the commercial or rural service center district.
   B.   At least twenty five feet (25') of type A, B, C or D landscaping (as
defined in
subchapter 4.6 of this chapter) shall be installed and maintained in the front
yard between the street and any buildings or vehicular access areas. Exception:
The buffer may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') where adjacent to a nonarterial
road. Breaks in the required trees, up to no more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the site's frontage, may be allowed by the planning director and/or
Zoning Commission to enhance visibility of signage and/or the main entrance to
the site. At least ten feet (10') of type A landscaping (as defined in
subchapter 4.6 of this chapter) shall be installed and maintained around the
side and rear perimeter of the site.
   C.   Security fencing, six feet (6') in height, shall be installed and
maintained around the site. Fencing materials shall complement exterior
building materials (similar color, material and/or detailing) of storage
buildings, except where obscured from public view with landscaping. Fencing
materials within scenic byways shall be earth toned colors.
   D.   Areas shall not be used as dwellings or as a commercial or industrial
place of business. The manufacture or sale of any item from or at a rental
warehouse, ministorage or boat storage facility is specifically prohibited.
   E.   Signs shall be limited to no more than thirty two (32) square feet
attached flat on a building or freestanding.
   F.   All lighting shall be shielded and downward directed so as to confine
lighting to the premises and produce no glare on adjacent properties or rights
of way.
   G.   The distance between structures shall be designed to allow a twelve
foot (12') wide travel lane for emergency vehicles to pass while tenant's
vehicles are parallel parked at the entrance to their storage areas. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
   H.   Sufficient land area is required to accommodate the proposed use, and
the use and any appurtenant structures shall be so arranged on the land as to
minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties. The use shall not
create particular hazards to adjacent properties.
   I.   If abutting a residential district or use, the facility hours of public
operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 540, 10-22-2014; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-487: PROVISIONS FOR UNIQUE LAND USES:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have a detrimental
influence on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this title:
   A.   Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids, Fuel, Gases Or Combustible
Materials:
      1.   Storage of flammable liquids, fuel, gases or combustible materials
above ground may be permitted only for quantities over twenty thousand (20,000)
gallons, provided all of the most restrictive state, local, and federal fire
codes and fire insurance underwriter's requirements are complied with.
      2.   No flammable liquids, fuel, gases or combustible materials will be
stored below the surface of any lake, river, stream or water body in Bonner
County.
   B.   Chemicals, Pesticide, Fertilizer: Chemicals, pesticide and fertilizer
storage and manufacturing:
      1.   Will have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and
disposal as approved by the appropriate fire official.
      2.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any
residential zone, a residence, motel or hotel, except for the residence of the
owner.
      3.   Will not be stored below the surface of any lake, river, stream or
water body in Bonner County.
   C.   Contractor Yard: Contractors' yard (i.e., road, housing, heavy
equipment):
      1.   Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from
any residence, except for an owner's residence.
      2.   Will have screening fence around the areas utilized for storage of
equipment.
      3.   Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to
contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
   D.   Development Close To Airport: The location, building height and
lighting of residential and commercial development shall be restricted within
airport approach areas, as required by the state department of transportation,
division of aeronautics and public transportation, and the federal aviation
administration. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
12-488: COMMUNICATION TOWERS:
   A.   Communication towers and attendant facilities shall be enclosed by a
fence not less than six feet (6') in height.
   B.   The base of any tower shall not be closer to any property line than a
distance equal to the tower height.
   C.   The Zoning Commission shall consider the public convenience and
necessity of the communication tower and any adverse effect the facility would
have upon properties in the vicinity and may require such reasonable
restrictions and conditions of development as to uphold the purpose and intent
of this title and the comprehensive plan.
   D.   Communication towers shall be built to telecommunication industry
association/electronic industry association (TIA/EIA) 222 revision F standards,
or as amended, for steel antenna support structures.
   E.   Communication towers shall be constructed to accommodate other future
communication services where technically feasible ("collocation").
   F.   Communication towers shall meet all operational, construction and
lighting standards of the federal aviation administration.
   G.   Communication towers shall not penetrate any airspace surface on or
adjacent to any public or private airfields as set forth at
subchapter 5.2 of this title.
   H.   Upon termination of use of a communication tower for a period of not
less than one year, the landowner and/or tower operator/applicant shall remove
the tower along with all supporting equipment, apparatus and foundation.
   I.   Flammable material storage shall be in accordance with international
fire code standards.
   J.   Communication towers shall not be used for signage, symbols, flags,
banners or other devices or objects attached to or painted or inscribed upon
any communication facility for the purposes of displaying a message of any
kind, except as required by a governmental agency. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd.
Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-489: HOME OCCUPATIONS I, II, AND III:
   A.   Intent: To provide performance standards for home occupations.
   B.   Home Occupation I: Permitted by right in applicable zoning districts
and subject to all of the following performance standards:
      1.   No person other than those residing on the premises shall be engaged
in such occupation.
      2.   Use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property
for dwelling purposes.
      3.   There shall be no alteration, structural or otherwise, in the
outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of
the conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding four
(4) square feet in area, nonilluminated and meeting applicable setback
requirements.
      4.   There shall be no commercial on premises sales in connection with
such home occupation, nor shall there be any commercial or manufacturing uses
specifically provided for in other parts of this title.
      5.   Vehicular traffic generated by such home occupation shall not
significantly exceed the traffic attributable to a normal dwelling unit (no
more than 10 vehicle trips per day on average), and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such occupation shall be met off the street and
other than in a required front or side yard.
      6.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates objectionable noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
interference.
   C.   Home Occupation II: Subject to a home occupation II permit approved by
the planning director per the procedures set forth in subsection C1 of this
section and per the standards set forth in subsection C2 of this section.
      1.   Home Occupation II Permit Procedures: No home occupation II, home
based business shall be conducted until an application for a home occupation II
permit has been reviewed and approved by the planning director or designee. The
application shall include the following:
         a.   The name of the landowner/applicant.
         b.   The address of the property.
         c.   The type of business and business activities.
         d.   The number of employees.
         e.   The location and area of the home based business (site plan).
         f.   The vehicles used in the home based business.
         g.   The number of expected customer visits per day and at any one
time.
         h.   Narrative statement describing use and associated impacts to
area.
The planning director shall issue the home occupation II permit based on
conformance with the above standards. The applicant may appeal the planning
director decision to deny a home occupation II permit to the board of county
commissioners, pursuant to the provisions of section
12-261 of this title.
      2.   Home Occupation II Standards:
         a.   Is carried out by those residing in the dwelling and up to two
(2) additional employees.
         b.   Use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
property for dwelling purposes.
         c.   Whereas the business activity may be conducted in other than the
dwelling, there shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area,
nonilluminated and meeting applicable setback requirements.
         d.   Customers/clients may come to the site, provided the following
criteria are met:
            (1)   Where access to the site is by road, the road shall meet
minimum private road standards set forth in
appendix A of this title.
            (2)   Sales in connection with the activity are limited to
merchandise handcrafted on site or items accessory to a service (i.e., hair
care products for beauty salon).
            (3)   Customers/clients are prohibited on the premises prior to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
         e.   Vehicular traffic generated by such home occupation shall not
exceed fourteen (14) vehicle trips per day on average. Any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such occupation shall be met off the street and
other than in a required front or side yard.
         f.   Certain activities are prohibited:
            (1)   Automobile, truck and heavy equipment repair;
            (2)   Auto body work or painting;
            (3)   Parking and storage of heavy equipment;
            (4)   Stables, kennels, animal husbandry or farming activities,
except as provided in this title;
            (5)   Any activities involving more than five (5) customer or
business visits per day; and
            (6)   Any use of a nature that is similar to those listed in this
section or which creates impacts on the surrounding neighborhood similar to
those created by the uses listed in this section.
         g.   Additional parking requirements:
            (1)   One for a nonresident (if applicable).
            (2)   One for patrons if services are rendered on site.
         h.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
which creates objectionable noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
interference.
         i.   Manufacturing shall be limited to the small scale assembly of
already manufactured parts, but does not preclude production of small,
individually handcrafted items, furniture or other wood items as long as the
activity meets the other standards of this chapter.
   D.   Home Occupation III: Subject to a conditional use permit and the same
performance standards as home occupation II, with the following exceptions and/
or additions:
      1.   Is carried out by those residing in the dwelling and up to four (4)
additional employees.
      2.   Limited activities and outside storage of materials and/or equipment
are permitted, provided the site is sufficiently screened from the street and
surrounding properties, as determined by the Zoning Commission.
      3.   Vehicular traffic generated by such home occupation shall not exceed
eighteen (18) vehicle trips per day on average.
      4.   Automobile, truck, heavy equipment and small engine repair may be
considered as a tier III home occupation, and are subject to the following
minimum standards:
         a.   Outdoor activity associated with the repair business shall be
limited to a maximum of two percent (2%) of the total site acreage or to a
specified area established by the Zoning Commission or hearing examiner.
Landscaping and screening to provide buffering for outdoor storage of equipment
or materials shall be provided in accord with
section 12-465, table 4-5 of this chapter.
         b.   An accessory structure for the repair business not to exceed one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet may be permitted.
         c.   No more than three (3) vehicles associated with the repair
business which are being repaired or awaiting repairs shall be stored on the
site at any given time.
         d.   The business shall comply with all building, fire and
environmental code regulations established by local, state or federal
jurisdictions.
         e.   The business owner shall provide an annual written report to the
planning department confirming continued compliance with these standards and
any other conditions of permit approval. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661,
3-18-2022)
12-490: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   To provide affordable housing opportunities throughout the county.
      2.   To limit the visual and physical impact of an accessory dwelling
unit on surrounding properties and the local infrastructure.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed nine hundred (900) square
feet.
      2.   One additional off street parking space shall be required for an
accessory dwelling unit.
      3.   No more than two (2) bedrooms shall be provided in an accessory
dwelling unit.
      4.   No more than one accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a
property.
      5.   An accessory dwelling unit may be attached to the primary dwelling
unit or detached. Exceptions: For all lots less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in size, the accessory dwelling unit must be attached to the
primary structure or located above or attached to a garage.
      6.   Accessory dwelling units shall have a separate outside entrance from
the primary structure.
      7.   Accessory dwelling units are subject to the same setbacks as a
regular dwelling unit. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 512, 1-6-2010; Ord.
520, 12-8-2010; Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
12-491: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   To provide appropriate locations for adult entertainment uses that
minimize impacts to the character of residential neighborhoods.
      2.   To minimize exposure of such facilities to minors.
      3.   To ensure that such uses do not become incompatible land uses and
further, will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of zoning
districts in which they are permitted, thereby adversely affecting property
values and deterring or interfering with the development and operation of other
businesses within the county.
      4.   To provide measures to minimize the incidents of crime associated
with such uses.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials depicting or
describing "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities", or
displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities" shall not be shown or exhibited
so as to be visible from other areas open to the general public.
      2.   All building openings, entries and windows for an adult
entertainment business shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner
as to prevent a view into the interior of an adult entertainment business from
any area open to the general public.
      3.   All entrances to an adult entertainment business shall be clearly
and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from
entering the premises.
      4.   No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult
entertainment business for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by
the public beyond the walls of the building in which the adult entertainment
business is conducted.
      5.   All off street parking areas, walkways and building entries serving
the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated during all business hours
with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal
illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult
entertainment business for personal safety of its patrons.
      6.   All exterior areas of adult entertainment businesses, including
buildings, landscaping and parking areas, shall be kept free of litter.
      7.   No adult entertainment use shall be permitted within five hundred
feet (500') of the center of any of its public entrances to the center of any
public entrance to any establishment serving or selling alcoholic beverages,
and vice versa, or within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the center
of any public entrance to a school, library, church, park, playground,
hospital, medical clinic, nursing home or daycare facility. The distance shall
be measured along the shortest route along the street or highway between the
points where lines perpendicular to the centers of the public entrances
intersect with the street or highway. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-492: RACETRACKS:
   A.   Racetracks shall be located to minimize the impacts to adjacent
properties from noise, lights, dust, odors, traffic impacts, fire and other
potential hazards or nuisances. To achieve this, the applicant shall submit a
racetrack operations plan with the conditional use permit application, which
addresses, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Air quality control.
      2.   Emergency response and access (fire, ambulance, police).
      3.   Noise abatement.
      4.   Traffic control.
      5.   Security, including crowd control and safety of spectators.
      6.   Hours of operation.
      7.   Fire control.
      8.   Spill containment. (Ord. 520, 12-8-2010)
12-493: AGRICULTURAL DIRECT MARKETING ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   To promote local and regional agriculture by providing opportunities
for accessory activities associated with retail sale of agricultural products
produced on and off the premises.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   The activity shall not create a permanent or semipermanent sales
business that would require a commercial zone classification.
      2.   The subject property shall be actively farmed by the property owner.
      3.   Retail structures shall not total more than three thousand (3,000)
square feet.
      4.   The parcel, or adjacent parcel, shall include the residence of the
owner or operator of the farm.
      5.   Carnival rides, helicopter rides, inflatable features and other
typical amusement park games, facilities and structures are not permitted.
      6.   The use shall be operated in accordance with all applicable federal,
state, and local ordinances.
      7.   Adequate sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with
Panhandle health district requirements.
      8.   The access road shall be located within a recorded easement or
public right of way, except where subject to an approved special use permit
issued by a state or federal agency.
      9.   Sufficient land area is required to accommodate the proposed use and
related parking, and the use and any appurtenant structures shall be so
arranged on the land as to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding
properties. The use shall not create particular hazards to adjacent properties.
(Ord. 538, 6-26-2014)
12-494: SEASONAL HARVEST FESTIVITIES:
   A.   Intent:
      1.   To allow temporary and accessory activities associated with the sale
of annual harvest crops.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   The site shall conform to the requirements of section
12-493 of this subchapter.
      2.   Hours of operation shall be eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock
(6:00) P.M.
      3.   Seasonal harvest festivities are prohibited on vacant property,
unless the vacant land adjoins property occupied by the owner/operator of the
festivities.
      4.   Seasonal harvest festivities shall be limited to Friday, Saturday,
Sunday and Monday, from the second weekend of June through December 31.
      5.   Inflatable amusement devices, such as moonwalks, slides, or other
inflatable games for children, shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) per
seasonal harvest festivities event. (Ord. 538, 6-26-2014)
12-495: EXPANDED SEASONAL HARVEST FESTIVITIES:
   A.   Intent: To allow a farming activity to expand beyond the restrictions
for seasonal harvest festivities for the purpose of allowing direct marketing
of crops to the public. Expanded seasonal harvest festivities are allowed
subject to a conditional use permit. (Ord. 538, 6-26-2014)
12-496: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Dwelling Unit, Recreational Vehicle.
      1.   Limited to one (1) per lot or parcel for lots or parcels less than
one (1) acre in size, or limited to two (2) per lot or parcel for lots, or
parcels greater than one (1) acre in size without respect to density.
      2.   Each recreational vehicle dwelling unit requires a building location
permit.
      3.   Shall meet all residential building setbacks.
      4.   Each recreational vehicle dwelling unit may be inside a garage or
under a snow roof.
      5.   It may be used as a vacation rental subject to the standards and
conditions in BCRC
12-484.
      6.   RV 's used in conjunction with an open building location permit
shall not require an additional permit.
(Ord. 598, 1-22-2020)
12-497: RV PARKS/CAMPGROUNDS:
   A.   Density:
      1.   Each RV space shall be an area to accommodate the size of the RV,
not less than 1800 square feet and a width of not less than twenty four feet
(24').
      2.   Each camping area must be at least three hundred fifty (350) square
feet.
      3.   RV parking is limited to five (5) units per acre.
      4.   Campsites are limited to five (5) sites per acre.
      5.   Each RV Park may allow up to 100% of campground to RV spaces
provided the requirements of this section are met.
      6.   Clustering of the RV Park is allowed as long as the original acreage
stays intact and the clustering is done in a way to decrease potential impacts
to neighbors and the natural resources.
      7.   RV Parks greater than twenty five (25) units shall follow the
standards of the PUD ordinance, BCRC 12-2.5.
   B.   Yards and Spacing:
      1.   All structures must be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
from all exterior property lines.
      2.   An RV may not be located closer than ten (10) feet from any other RV
or permanent building within the RV Park.
      3.   An RV accessory building shall not be closer than five (5) feet from
an RV or building on an adjacent RV space.
   C.   Access:
      1.   RV parks/Campgrounds shall access on maintained County roads, State
highways or forest access roads whenever possible.
      2.   Access on private roads shall be built to County standards in
Appendix A.
   D.   Parking:
      1.   Parking design shall follow the standards in Section 12-4.3 Parking
Standards.
      2.   Campground Parking: one space for each 350 square feet of allotted
space plus one guest parking space for each ten campground spaces.
   E.   Park Site Design:
      1.   Provisions for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian access shall be
integrated into the site.
      2.   May be associated with other recreational uses such as rafting,
canoeing, swimming, cross country skiing, hiking, hunting and fishing,
horseback riding and snowmobiling, together with accessory facilities.
      3.   Each space within an RV park shall have direct access to a
travelway.
      4.   The park travelway shall consist of an unobstructed area twenty feet
(20') wide and shall be well marked to provide for continuous traffic flow.
      5.   Parking spaces may be up to a forty five (45) degree angle from the
travelway.
      6.   The travelway system shall have direct connection to a public or
private road meeting applicable standards set forth in title 2 of this code or
appendix A of this title.
      7.   Any RV space that is to be occupied throughout the winter months may
have an open-shell snow-roof. Snow roofs shall have a minimum often foot
spacing from one another, measured from greatest architectural projection.
Complete enclosure of snow roofs is prohibited.
      8.   The RV park/campground may be built in phases as approved through a
conditional use permit.
      9.   Uses that are clearly incidental to the operation of the park, such
as management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, dumping stations,
laundry facilities, a convenience store, and other facilities established
within the park, are permitted as accessory uses.
      10.   Internal roads and parking service areas shall provide safe and
convenient access for service and emergency vehicles and to amenities within
the park. Internal roads shall not be designed to encourage use by outside
traffic to traverse the park to adjoining developed areas.
      11.   Setbacks to wetlands, floodplain, vegetative buffers, and
shorelines shall be maintained for all uses onsite.
   F.   Landscaping:
      1.   Landscaping and screening shall follow the standards in BCRC 12-4.6
Landscaping and Screening Standards.
   G.   Water and Sewer:
      1.   Each site may provide utility connections, including water and sub-
surface sewage disposal system.
      2.   An appropriate number, per industry standard, of restroom/port-a-
johns for tent camping spaces.
   H.   Refuse Collection:
      1.   The park shall provide for regular refuse service whether self-
supported or contracted out with a refuse service. Accumulation of trash is
prohibited.
   I.   Signs:
      1.   Signs advertising the business are allowed per BCRC 12-4.4 Sign
Standards.
   J.   Permits Required.
      1.   A conditional use permit is required for each RV park/campground for
twenty five (25) spaces or less.
      2.   A PUD Permit is required for all sites allowing more than twenty
five (25) RV spaces.
      3.   A building location permit is required for construction of the
entire project or each phase of the approved project.
   K.   Site Plan: A site plan shall be submitted upon application for a
conditional use permit for the development of a recreational vehicle park/
campground. The site plan must include a north arrow and must clearly depict
the following:
      1.   Existing structures which will remain on the parcel, and their uses,
and any existing structures proposed to be modified or removed;
      2.   All proposed structures and their uses;
      3.   Existing and proposed roads, easements, and points of access;
      4.   Recreational vehicle space dimensions;
      5.   Campground space dimensions;
      6.   Size of the site in acres;
      7.   Dimensions of property lines and property line setbacks;
      8.   Reserved or dedicated open space;
      9.   Major landscape features, both natural and manmade;
      10.   Locations of existing and proposed utility lines;
      11.   Accessory off street parking and loading facilities, and parking
space areas;
      12.   Wastewater drainfield areas;
      13.   Traffic circulation patterns;
      14.   Refuse and service areas;
      15.   Signs;
      16.   Outdoor storage; and
      17.   Proposed screening and buffering, including fences, yards, walls or
vegetation.
(Ord. 594, 12-18-2019)
CHAPTER 5
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
SECTION:
12-500: Overlay Districts; Purpose
12-501: Establishment Of Overlay Districts
Subchapter 5.1 – Area Of City Impact Overlay District (Reserved)
Subchapter 5.2 – Airport Overlay District
12-520: Purpose Of District
12-521: Airport Overlay Districts Established
12-522: Airport Zone Height Limitations
12-523: Use Restrictions
12-524: Nonconforming Uses
12-525: Variances
Subchapter 5.3 – Wellhead Protection Overlay Zone
12-530: Purpose Of District
12-531: Establishment Of Overlay District; Applicability
12-532: Eligibility For Overlay District
12-533: Applicants For Overlay District
12-534: Zone Boundaries For Scientifically Established Wellhead Protection
Overlay District
12-535: Use Table
12-536: Special Requirements And Restrictions Within District
12-537: Application For Wellhead Protection Overlay District; Contents
12-538: Procedure
12-539: Standards
12-540: Watershed Protection Overlay (Reserved)
12-500: OVERLAY DISTRICTS; PURPOSE:
The purpose of the overlay districts is to carry out comprehensive plan and
community, subarea or neighborhood plan policies that seek to minimize hazards,
preserve unique natural resources and/or identify special opportunities for
achieving public benefits by allowing or requiring alternative uses and
development standards that differ from the general provisions of this title.
Overlay districts are generally applied to a group of individual properties or
an entire community, subarea or neighborhood planning area and are designated
primarily through the area zoning process. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-501: ESTABLISHMENT OF OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
Overlay districts are established to permit limited special use activities
which are subject to additional limitations and restrictions. Land within an
overlay district is also subject to the provisions of the underlying zoning
district. Where overlap exists between the standards of the overlay district
and those of the underlying zone, the more stringent standards shall be
applied. The following overlay district designations and zoning map symbols are
adopted:
   TABLE 5-1
   OVERLAY DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS
 
Overlay District    Map Symbol
Area of city impact -ACI
Airport             -Air
Wellhead protection -WP
 
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 5.1 – AREA OF CITY IMPACT OVERLAY DISTRICT
   (Reserved) (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 5.2 – AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT
12-520: PURPOSE OF DISTRICT:
The airport overlay district is established for the purpose of preventing the
creation or establishment of "airport hazards", as defined in section
12-801 of this title, or where such hazards are already created or established,
eliminating, removing, altering, mitigating, marking or lighting such airport
hazards. The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to, but not
limited to, conditional use permits, special use permits, variances,
preliminary and final plats, lot line adjustments, planned unit developments,
zone changes and building location permits or building permits. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
12-521: AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones for existing and future planned airport
conditions as they apply to the Bonner County airport. The zones include all
the land lying within the primary zones, approach zones, transitional zones,
horizontal zones and conical zones. Such zones are shown on the approved
Sandpoint airport master plan 1993-2013, as amended from time to time, which by
this reference is incorporated and made a part hereof as if set forth in full.
Whenever the zoning map shows zones for future planned airport improvements,
the more stringent future planned zones govern. Their limitations and
boundaries shall be adapted for present zoning purposes. The various zones are
hereby established and defined as follows:
   A.   Utility Runways Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones: The inner edge
of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a horizontal distance five thousand feet
(5,000') from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
   B.   Transitional Zones: These zones are hereby established as the area
beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at
ninety degree (90o) angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline
extended at a slope of seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically
from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to which they intersect in
the horizontal conical surfaces.
   C.   Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging
arcs of five thousand feet (5,000') radii from the center of each end of the
primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing
lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the primary,
approach and transitional zones.
   D.   Conical Zone: The conical zone is hereby established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there
from the horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The conical zone
does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional
zones. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-522: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be
erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained in any zone created by this
chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established
for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for
each of the zones in question as follows:
   A.   Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: Slopes upward
twenty feet (20') horizontally for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at
the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended runway
centerline.
   B.   Transitional Zones: Slopes upward and outward seven feet (7')
horizontally for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extending
to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation, the
airport elevation which is two thousand one hundred twenty six feet (2,126')
above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established
height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet (7') horizontally for each
one foot (1') vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as
the approach zones, and extending to the intersection with the conical surface.
Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical
zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet (7') horizontally for
each one foot (1') vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface, and
extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured at
ninety degree (90o) angles to the extended runway centerline.
   C.   Horizontal Zone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport
elevation or a height of two thousand two hundred seventy six feet (2,276')
above mean sea level.
   D.   Conical Zone: Slopes upward and outward twenty feet (20') horizontally
for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal
zone and at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation and
extending to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the airport
elevation.
   E.   Restrictive Limitation Prevails: Where an area is covered by more than
one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-523: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this subchapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or
otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the Sandpoint airport.
   B.   No change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree
shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby
created unless in conformance with this subchapter.
   C.   No use or structure shall be established that would allow the creation
of an "airport hazard", as defined in section
12-801 of this title, or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to
become a greater hazard to air navigation than the hazard was on the effective
date hereof, or any amendments thereto. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-524: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   The regulations prescribed by this subchapter shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure
or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date hereof, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to the effective date hereof, and is diligently prosecuted;
provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall restrict or otherwise
interfere with the use of North Boyer Avenue by vehicular traffic.
   B.   Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of
any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the chairperson of the board to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such
airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the county.
   C.   Nonconforming uses are subject to the provisions for nonconforming uses
as set forth generally in this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-525: VARIANCES:
   A.   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or permit the growth of any tree, or use property not in accordance with the
regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply for a variance from such
regulations, the procedure for variances as set forth generally in this title.
   B.   However, a tree or structure of less than forty five feet (45') of
vertical height above the ground is permitted in the horizontal and conical
zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of
four thousand two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of the runway, except
when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective
zone.
   C.   Any variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstance,
be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question
to permit the county, at the owner's expense, to install, operate and maintain
thereon such markers and lights as may be deemed necessary by the Bonner County
airport commission or other appropriate agencies as necessary to indicate to
pilots the presence of an "airport hazard", as defined in section
12-801 of this title.
   D.   Variance applications required by this chapter are to be submitted by
applicant to the Bonner County planning department for review by the:
      1.   Bonner County airport commission for its review and recommendation;
      2.   Federal aviation administration; and
      3.   Other appropriate agencies as necessary. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 5.3 – WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
12-530: PURPOSE OF DISTRICT:
The wellhead protection overlay district is established for the purpose of
protecting public water supply wells or springs from contamination by land use
activities occurring or which may occur within the delineated recharge areas
for such wells or springs. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-531: ESTABLISHMENT OF OVERLAY DISTRICT; APPLICABILITY:
There is hereby created a wellhead protection overlay district within Bonner
County, the boundaries of which shall be established by the procedures and
according to the criteria set forth in this subchapter. The provisions of this
subchapter shall only be applicable within a properly established wellhead
protection overlay district; provided, further, that no existing lawful use
shall be affected by this title, but such uses will be governed by
subchapter 3.4 of this title, nonconforming uses and structures, as amended.
The requirements of this subchapter shall be deemed to be cumulative and
supplementary to those of any underlying zone district. Whenever a conflict
between the provisions of this subchapter and the underlying zone district
exist, the more stringent requirements shall apply. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-532: ELIGIBILITY FOR OVERLAY DISTRICT:
For the purposes of this subchapter, a wellhead protection overlay district
shall only be established where a direct relationship exists between the
overlay district and a well or spring serving a public water system which
serves ten (10) or more connections or twenty five (25) or more of the same
persons for at least six (6) months of the year, whether such public water
system is publicly or privately owned or operated. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-533: APPLICANTS FOR OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The following persons or entities may apply for lands to be designated as a
wellhead protection overlay district:
   A.   The owner of any well as set forth at section
12-532 of this subchapter; or
   B.   Any incorporated municipality, water district, water and sewer
district, recreational water district or homeowners' association which is the
primary user of any well as set forth at section
12-532 of this subchapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-534: ZONE BOUNDARIES FOR SCIENTIFICALLY ESTABLISHED WELLHEAD PROTECTION
OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Scientific studies conducted by hydrogeologists, licensed geologists or
licensed professional engineers shall be provided, and such studies shall
include, but are not limited to, calculations and modeling to include zone III
mixing water flow, transmissivities, effective porosity, regional and local
hydraulic gradients, depth to saturated zones, aquifer saturated zones, aquifer
saturated thickness, boundary conditions, degree of confinement and recharge
areas as appropriate to develop time of travel boundaries. The United States
environmental protection agency methodology, "Wellhead Protection Area (WHPA)
Delineation Code, Version 2.1", by Blandford and Huyakorn, April 1992, or
equivalent, shall be used for calculating and modeling time of travel
boundaries. The following shall constitute the boundaries for the wellhead
protection overlay district:
   TABLE 5-2
   OVERLAY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
 
Zone     Criteria And Thresholds                Methods
Zone IA  Minimum distance of 100 feet for wells Fixed radius
         and/or springs
Zone IB  2 year time of travel                  Calculated/modeled boundary
Zone II  5 year time of travel                  Calculated/modeled boundary
Zone III 10 year time of travel                 Calculated/modeled boundary
 
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-535: USE TABLE:
The following
table 5-3 identifies uses of special concern in the wellhead protection overlay
district. Uses identified with a "C" are conditional, and uses not identified
as conditional are prohibited. Uses listed in
table 5-3 are subject to either the standards set forth in this subchapter or
to the standards set forth in the underlying zone, whichever is more stringent.
Uses not listed in
table 5-3 are subject to the standards set forth in the underlying zone.
Standards associated with particular uses are identified by numbers and are
listed below the table.
   TABLE 5-3
   USES IN THE WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Use Overlay District
    IA IB II III
Use                                                            Overlay District
                                                               IA IB II III
Residential Uses:
Dwelling, multi-family                                            C  C  C
Mobile home parks                                                 C  C  C
Residential care or assisted living facility                      C  C  C
Commercial Uses:
Animal establishments                                             C  C  C
Convalescent center                                               C  C  C
Farm equipment sales and service                                  C  C  C
Hotels/motels                                                     C  C  C
Miscellaneous commercial uses (1, 2)                                    C
Racetracks                                                        C  C  C
Repair services, boat and motor, minor                            C  C  C
Resorts, commercial                                               C  C  C
Resorts, private                                                  C  C  C
Storage of hazardous materials, above or belowground (1)             C  C
Vehicle sales and service, mechanical repair shops                C  C  C
Industrial Uses:
Industrial and manufacturing                                         C  C
Junkyards/wrecking yards
Manufacturing of explosives                                       C  C  C
Manufacturing of hazardous materials (1)
Sawmills, shingle or planing mills, woodworking plants            C  C  C
Slaughterhouses, meat processing or rendering plants              C  C  C
Public Uses:
Airports                                                          C  C  C
Cemeteries
Golf courses                                                      C  C  C
Heliports                                                         C  C  C
Hospitals and clinics                                             C  C  C
Injection wells for waste products
Public utility complex facility                                   C  C  C
Recreational facilities                                           C  C  C
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds                        C  C  C
Sanitary landfills
Sewage treatment or storage, 2-9 dwelling units or capacity of    C  C  C
less than 2,500 gallons per day
Sewage treatment or storage, 10 or more dwelling units or               C
capacity of 2,500 gallons or more per day
Solid waste collection facilities                                 C  C  C
Stormwater drain fields, impoundments, infiltration beds or          C  C
injection wells
Resource Based Uses:
Agribusiness activities (1)                                       C  C  C
Commercial land application of agricultural wastes (2)               C  C
Commercial land application of effluent, sludge or septage (2)          C
Commercial surface impoundments of agricultural, commercial or    C  C  C
industrial wastes (2)
Confined animal feeding operation
Fur farms, commercial                                             C  C  C
Mining                                                               C  C
Rock crushing operations                                             C  C
 
Standards:
   1.    Where fuel, chemicals, fertilizer, solvents, pesticides, waste oils
and other similar petroleum products or byproducts, leachates or other
detrimental materials and/or wastewater discharge pose a proximate threat to
groundwater as determined by the Panhandle health district and/or state of
Idaho.
   2.    "Commercial", for purposes of this section, shall be defined as
"activities designed for the market; relating to commerce; viewed with regard
to profit; or supported by advertisement", excluding "home occupations", as
defined in section
12-808 of this title.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-536: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS WITHIN DISTRICT:
   A.   Within an established wellhead protection overlay district, and subject
to the provisions of this subchapter, the performance and conditional use
standards listed in
subchapter 2.2 and chapter 4 of this title, respectively, and the requirements
of the underlying zone district, the following uses are prohibited or require
conditional use permit issuance. Uses not listed within this section that are
listed as permitted uses within the underlying zone district are subject to the
provisions of that district, together with the performance standards listed in
chapter 4 of this title. Uses not listed within this section that are listed as
conditional uses within the underlying zone district are subject to the
provisions of that district, together with the performance and conditional use
standards listed in
subchapter 2.2 and chapter 4 of this title, respectively.
   B.   In addition to the performance and conditional use standards listed in
subchapter 2.2 and chapter 4 of this title, respectively, and the requirements
of the underlying zone district, uses requiring conditional use permit issuance
are subject the following:
      1.   Prior to conditional use permit issuance, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Panhandle health district and/or state
of Idaho pursuant to applicable standards and appropriate practices that, where
applicable, fuel, chemicals, fertilizer, solvents, pesticides, waste oils and
other similar petroleum products or byproducts, leachates or other detrimental
materials and/or wastewater discharge shall not pose a proximate threat to
groundwater. The applicant shall provide to the planning department written
verification from the Panhandle health district and/or state of Idaho
confirming implementation of Panhandle health district and/or state of Idaho
requirements.
   C.   Where all "urban services", as defined in section
12-821 of this title, are not available, the minimum lot or parcel size for
divisions of land within an established wellhead protection overlay district
shall be five (5) acres. Exception: cluster lots in a conservation subdivision
may be less than five (5) acres, provided the overall subdivision density does
not exceed one dwelling unit per five (5) acres. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-537: APPLICATION FOR WELLHEAD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT; CONTENTS:
An application for wellhead protection overlay district shall include all of
the items required for zone changes in
subchapter 2.1 of this title, and shall be accompanied by the fee for a zone
change as set forth at section
12-265 of this title, and shall additionally include:
   A.   The names of the applicants and documentation that the applicants meet
the criteria set forth at section
12-533 of this subchapter;
   B.   The scientific study completed for the proposed wellhead protection
area, meeting the requirements of section
12-534 of this subchapter, and additional copies of said study as determined by
the planning director;
   C.   A map at a scale of one inch to four hundred feet (1" = 400'), showing
the proposed boundaries of zones IA, IB, II and III, as appropriate, and
depicting individual lots or parcels, property ownership, and existing zoning
within the boundaries;
   D.   A map at a scale of one inch to four hundred feet (1" = 400'), showing
the proposed boundaries of zones IA, IB, II and III, as appropriate, and
depicting lot or parcel boundaries, and significant features to include, but
not limited to, existing wells (identifying any public water supply wells);
existing springs; existing roads; existing gravel pits or other mining
operations; existing above or belowground fuel storage tanks; and any existing
land uses which may constitute a significant, potential contamination source
for groundwaters.
   E.   A public information/public awareness plan specifying how and when the
applicant will notify landowners within the wellhead protection overlay
district of ways to promote groundwater protection.
   F.   A management plan identifying high risk activities that may pose a
proximate threat to groundwater and ways to mitigate those threats.
   G.   A contingency plan identifying an alternate water source for the
applicant and the method of procuring that source, financially and technically,
in the event of closure of the subject well or spring.
   H.   A program establishing, at a minimum, annual subject well or spring
water testing; voluntary water testing of private wells located within the
established overlay district; and a method of notifying at minimum landowners
within the wellhead protection overlay district of testing results.
   I.   Written documentation verifying that the applicant has invited public
participation from, at a minimum, landowners within the wellhead protection
overlay district. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-538: PROCEDURE:
The procedure for the addition of a wellhead protection overlay district shall
be as set forth for zone changes generally in this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-539: STANDARDS:
In addition to the standards for zone changes generally, as set forth in this
title, the following standards shall be applicable to any application for a
wellhead protection overlay district:
   A.   There is a need to protect and preserve clean drinking water supplies
for current and future residents.
   B.   There is a potential for groundwater contamination of current and
potential land uses within the proposed overlay district.
   C.   There is not a potential for significant loss of use of properties not
owned by the applicant through the restrictions imposed by the proposed overlay
district.
   D.   There are reliable data upon which the zone district boundaries have
been proposed. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-540: WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY:
(Reserved) (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
CHAPTER 6
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
12-600: Purpose
Subchapter 6.1 - General Provisions
12-610: Applicability, Qualifications
12-611: Definitions
12-612: Additional Requirements
12-613: Notice Of Land Division, Procedure
12-614: Prohibitions
12-615: Remedies
12-616: Certificate Of Compliance, Conditional Certificate Of Compliance
Subchapter 6.2 - Design Standards
12-620: General
12-621: Lot And Parcel Design
12-622: Submerged Lands
12-623: Services And Utilities
12-624: Roads And Access
12-625: Trails And Parks
12-626: Environmental Features
12-627: Subdivisions In The Commercial And Rural Service Center Districts
Subchapter 6.3 - Conservation Subdivisions
12-630: Purpose
12-631: Description And Definitions
12-632: Applicability, Procedures And Preapplication Review
12-633: Standards And Guidelines For All Conservation Subdivisions
12-634: Standards For Conservation Subdivisions In Agricultural/Forestry-20
District
12-635: Standards For Conservation Subdivisions In Agricultural/Forestry-10 And
Rural Districts
12-636: Standards For Conservation Subdivisions In Suburban, Recreation And
Alpine Village Districts
12-637: Density Bonuses For Conservation Subdivisions
Subchapter 6.4 - Preliminary Plat Procedures
12-640: Processing Of Subdivision Applications, General
12-641: Subdivisions, Preapplication Review
12-642: Preliminary Plat, Contents Of Application
12-643: Subdivisions, Procedure For Processing Preliminary Plat
12-644: Improvement Plan Required, Contents
12-645: Standards For Review Of Applications For Preliminary Plats Of All
Subdivisions
12-646: Final Plat, Contents
12-647: Endorsements To Be Shown On Final Plat
12-648: Procedure For Final Plat Review And Approval
12-649: Digital Submission Of Final Plat
Subchapter 6.5 - Short Plats, Procedures
12-650: Application/Contents Of Preliminary Plats For Short Plat Procedure
12-651: Short Plat, Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Short Plat
12-652: Short Plat, Contents Of Final Plat, Procedure For Approval Of Final
Plat
Subchapter 6.6 - Minor Land Divisions
12-660: Minor Land Division Procedure
12-661: Administrative Review Of Minor Land Division
Subchapter 6.7 - Lot Line Adjustments
12-670: Readjustment Of Lot Lines Within Platted Subdivision
12-671: Applications For Adjustment Of Lot Lines, Minor Notational Changes
12-672: Procedure For Administrative Review And Approval Of Adjustments Of Lot
Lines, Minor Notational Changes
12-673: Final Plat For Lot Line Adjustments/Notational Changes To Be Drawn,
Time For Filing, Signing
12-600: PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide standards and procedures for subdivisions and other land
divisions, and lot line adjustments.
   B.   To establish subdivision and land division standards consistent with
the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.
   C.   It is unlawful for a person or group of persons acting in concert to
attempt to avoid this article by acting in concert to divide a parcel of land
or sell subdivision lots by using a series of owners or conveyances or by any
other method that ultimately results in the division of the lands into a
subdivision or the sale of subdivided land.(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord.
634, 8-4-2021)
SUBCHAPTER 6.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-610: APPLICABILITY, QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to “subdivisions”, as
defined in section
12-611 of this subchapter, lot line adjustments as set forth at section
12-660 of this chapter, and all other applications authorized by this chapter.
   B.   Parcels or lots created in conformance with the provisions of this
title which are uniquely described on any recorded plat or other legal
instrument of conveyance as of the effective date hereof shall retain
individual status and eligibility for sale, lease, financing, gift, building,
construction or other transfer of ownership, as so described. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008; amd. Ord. 634, 8-4-2021)
12-611: DEFINITIONS:
             Any division of land into four (4) or fewer lots or parcels. Exception: those
MINOR LAND   lots under common ownership, and limited in use to common open space or
DIVISION     agricultural pursuits, need not be counted as a lot for purposes of determining
(MLD):       applicable land division procedures only. . A minor land division shall not be
             used contiguously to avoid the regular subdivision process. (See BCRC
             12-600 C.)
SHORT PLAT:  Any division of land into five (5) to ten (10) lots or parcels.
             Any division of land into eleven (11) or more lots or parcels or divisions of
             those parcels that do not qualify for a Minor Land Division or Short Plat.
             The term “subdivision” shall not include:
             A.   The lease of agricultural lands for agriculture or agricultural purposes.
             B.   The lease or conveyance of land to a governmental agency, quasi-public or
             public entity, political subdivision, or private or public utility. The portion
             conveyed to the previously mentioned entities need not meet minimum acreage
             standards, however, any other portion or remainder that remains in private
             ownership shall meet minimum acreage standards.
             C.   Mineral, oil or gas leases.
             D.   A lot line adjustment or minor notational change.
SUBDIVISION: E.   Land within a recognized cemetery which has been divided into lots or plats
             for the purpose of burial only.
             F.   The financing or leasing of any commercial or industrial lot or parcel, or
             portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial
             buildings on a single lot or parcel.
             G.   The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial
             buildings on a single lot or parcel.
             H.   The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space
             with apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings or mobile
             home parks, so long as each unit or space is not separately owned.
             I.   Minor Land Divisions. (Ord. 557, 11-10-2016; amd. Ord. 591, 10-23-2019; Ord.
             634, 8-4-2021)
 
12-612: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Replatting Required:
      1.   Any division of land that has been platted shall not be divided
again without replatting.
   B.   Recorded Survey Required:
      1.   Any division of land created pursuant to subsection C of this
section must be surveyed and the survey recorded with the County Recorder if
any one parcel in the division is less than five (5) acres, or a 1/128 aliquot
division of a section.
   C.   Family Division: The following division of land is exempt from
platting: A division of unplatted land which is made for the purpose of a
single gift or sale to the landowner’s spouse, parent, child, sibling,
grandparent or grandchild; provided, that the division complies with all of the
following:
      1.   A division of unplatted land made for the purpose of a single gift
or sale from the landowner’s spouse, parent, child, sibling, grandparent or
grandchild;
      2.   The landowner has not previously been exempt from platting
requirements by a gift or sale of another single parcel to the same person;
      3.   An individual may only receive one parcel by gift or sale created
pursuant to this exemption after November 18, 2008. Examples:
         a.   If a husband owns two (2) different parcels in Bonner County and
wishes to divide both parcels under the provisions described in this subsection
C, he can give his wife only one of the divided parcels. However, he can give
or sell the second parcel created by the other land division to his child,
sibling, grandparent or grandchild.
         b.   An individual may receive by gift or sale a single parcel from
his father through the exemption process, but may not again receive from any
other family member another parcel through the exemption process.
      4.   The parcel created and any remaining parcel meets the minimum zoning
district requirements for the district in which the parcel is located;
      5.   The parcels created conform with the design criteria set forth in
section
12-621, subsections
12-623 A and B, sections
12-624 A, D, and E,
12-625, and subsections
12-626 A and C of this chapter;
      6.   A “notice of land division” is recorded in accordance with the
provisions set forth for all parcels and remainder parcel created; and
         a.   The applicant shall file an application for exemption from
platting with the Planning Department, along with the supporting documents for
those divisions of land set forth at subsection 12-612C of this subchapter. The
application shall contain the legal descriptions of the parcels created and any
other information deemed necessary for consideration of the application.
         b.   The Planning Director or designee shall examine application and
the supporting documents for compliance with the applicable provisions of
section 12-612 of this subchapter. Upon a determination that the application is
in compliance, the Planning Director is authorized to sign the notice of land
division or affix the notice of land division to deeds prepared for recording.
A copy of the recorded notice or deed shall be retained by the Planning
Department.
      7.   Limited to the creation of 4 parcels total.
   D.   Financing of a Lot or Parcel: The following is exempt from platting:
The financing of any portion of a single lot or parcel; provided, that:
      1.   The portion separated for financing purposes and any remaining
portion meet the minimum zoning district lot size requirements for the district
in which the single lot or parcel is located; and
      2.   The single lot or parcel remains in one ownership.
   E.   Reservation of a Life Estate: The following is exempt from platting:
The reservation of a life estate; provided, that the single lot or parcel
remains in one ownership.
   F.   Waiver Of Land Division Requirements: The Director may waive minor land
division, short plat and regular subdivision requirements on parcels to be
created that have legal access and the resulting parcel size is not less than
twenty (20) acres or can be described as a one thirty-second (1/32) aliquot
description or larger. This waiver may be granted upon review of the proposed
legal descriptions prior to recording.
   G.   Boundary Line Adjustment: A change in location of the property line
between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from
one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel. Further defined as a combining of
one or more parcels to create fewer parcels and where no greater number of
parcels than originally existed is thereby created. No boundary adjusted parcel
may be reduced below the minimum parcel size for the zoning district in which
the parcel is located, except that if a parcel is already below the minimum
parcel size, the boundary line adjustment shall not create any parcels that are
smaller than the smallest original parcel in the subject configuration.
      1.   The applicant shall file an application for Boundary Line Adjustment
with the Planning Department, along with the supporting documents. The
application shall contain the legal descriptions of the parcels created and any
other information deemed necessary for consideration of the application.
      2.   The Planning Director or designee shall examine application and the
supporting documents for compliance with the applicable provisions of section
12-621,
12-622,
12-624 A, D, and E of this subchapter. Upon a determination that the
application is in compliance, the Planning Director is authorized to sign the
notice of land division or affix the notice of land division to deeds prepared
for recording. A copy of the recorded notice or deed shall be retained by the
Planning Department.
      3.   No application submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed
complete nor any deed recorded, until all fees set forth at section 12-265 of
this title have been paid, unless waived by the board.
      4.   Those existing, non-conforming features shall not be made more non-
conforming. (Ord. 577, 5-23-2018;amd. Ord. 634, 8-4-2021; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022;
Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
12-613: NOTICE OF LAND DIVISION, PROCEDURE:
   A.   The applicant shall file an application for exemption from platting
with the Planning Department, along with the supporting documents for those
divisions of land set forth at subsection
12-612C of this subchapter. The application shall contain the legal
descriptions of the parcels created and any other information deemed necessary
for consideration of the application.
   B.   The Planning Director or designee shall examine application and the
supporting documents for compliance with the applicable provisions of section
12-612 of this subchapter. Upon a determination that the application is in
compliance, the Planning Director is authorized to sign the notice of land
division or affix the notice of land division to deeds prepared for recording.
A copy of the recorded notice or deed shall be retained by the Planning
Department. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-614: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Except where exempt from the definition of "subdivision", as provided
for in this chapter, or until a final plat or notice of land division in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and Idaho Code, where
applicable, has been recorded with the Bonner County Recorder, no person shall:
      1.   Sell, lease, finance or gift any lot or parcel of real property or
portion thereof;
      2.   Commence the construction of any building for sale, lease, financing
or gift;
      3.   Allow occupancy of any lot or parcel of real property, or portion
thereof, for which a final plat or notice of land division is required pursuant
to this chapter.
   B.   The conveyance of any part of a division of land for which a final plat
or notice of land division is required pursuant to this chapter shall not be
made by lot or parcel number, letter or other designation until a final plat or
notice of land division has been recorded with the Bonner County Recorder.
   C.   This section shall not apply to any lot or parcel created in
conformance with the provisions of this title which is uniquely described on
any recorded plat or legal instrument of conveyance as of the effective date
hereof. Said lot or parcel shall retain individual status and eligibility for
sale, lease, financing, gift, building construction or other transfer of
ownership, as so described. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-615: REMEDIES:
   A.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any
lot or parcel of real property:
      1.   Exempt from the definition of "subdivision", as provided for in this
chapter;
      2.   Described in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to section
12-616 of this subchapter;
      3.   Identified in a recorded final plat or notice of land division
pursuant to this chapter, from and after the date of recording.
   B.   This section shall not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to
which the County or other public agency or any person may otherwise be
entitled. The County or other public agency or any person may file suit to
restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease,
financing or gift of any lot or parcel, or portion thereof, contrary to the
provisions of this title. The provisions of this section shall not limit or
affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any
other provision of law.
   C.   The County shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to
develop or use any lot or parcel which has been divided, or which has resulted
from a division, contrary to the provisions of this title. The authority to
deny a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of
the lot or parcel at the time of the division, or whether the applicant is the
current owner of the lot or parcel with, or without, actual or constructive
knowledge of the division at the time of the acquisition of interest in the lot
or parcel. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-616: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE, CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Any person owning a lot or parcel may apply for a certificate of
compliance, on an application form provided by the Planning Department,
requesting the Planning Director to determine whether the lot or parcel
resulting from a division of land complies with the applicable provisions of
this Code in effect at the time the division occurred. The fee for applying for
a certificate of compliance shall be as set forth in section
12-265 of this title.
   B.   If the Planning Director, upon reviewing the application, determines
that the lot or parcel resulting from a division of land complies with the
applicable provisions of this Code in effect at the time the division occurred,
and upon the effective date of the determination pursuant to this section, the
Planning Director shall record, on a form provided by the Planning Department,
a certificate of compliance with the Bonner County Recorder. The certificate of
compliance shall identify the lot or parcel, and shall state that the lot or
parcel resulting from a division of land complies with the applicable
provisions of this Code in effect at the time the division occurred.
   C.   If the Planning Director, upon reviewing the application, determines
that the lot or parcel resulting from a division of land did not comply with
the applicable provisions of this Code in effect at the time the division
occurred, and upon the effective date of the determination pursuant to this
section, the Planning Director shall record, on a form provided by the Planning
Department, a conditional certificate of compliance with the Bonner County
Recorder. The conditional certificate of compliance shall identify the lot or
parcel, and shall state that the lot or parcel resulting from a division of
land will comply with the applicable provisions of this Code in effect at the
time the division occurred upon completing only those conditions which would
have been applicable to the lot or parcel at the time the division occurred.
The conditional certificate of compliance shall list those conditions.
Compliance with the conditions listed shall be required prior to the issuance
of any permit for the development or use of the property. The Planning Director
shall record a certificate of compliance upon the applicant completing the
listed conditions. A recorded final plat or notice of land division pursuant to
this chapter constitutes a certificate of compliance with respect to the lot or
parcel described therein.
   D.   If the Planning Director, upon reviewing a permit for the development
or use of any lot or parcel, determines that the lot or parcel resulting from a
division of land did not comply with the applicable provisions of this Code in
effect at the time the division occurred, and upon the effective date of the
determination pursuant to this section, the Planning Director shall record, on
a form provided by the Planning Department, a conditional certificate of
compliance with the Bonner County Recorder. The conditional certificate of
compliance shall identify the lot or parcel and shall state that the lot or
parcel resulting from a division of land will comply with the applicable
provisions of this Code in effect at the time the division occurred upon
completing only those conditions which would have been applicable to the lot or
parcel at the time the division occurred. The conditional certificate of
compliance shall list those conditions. Compliance with the conditions listed
shall be required prior to the issuance of any permit for the development or
use of the lot or parcel. The Planning Director shall record a certificate of
compliance on the application completing the listed conditions. A conditional
certificate of compliance recorded pursuant to this subsection shall include as
a condition the fee as set forth at section
12-265 of this title.
   E.   For the purposes of the administration of this section, the following
shall be considered to be in compliance:
      1.   Any lot or parcel which is described on a recorded legal instrument
of conveyance prior to November 18, 2008;
      2.   Any lot or parcel for which a valid building permit or building
location permit has been issued by Bonner County since November 18, 2008,
whereon development has occurred and a use has been established in reliance on
that permit;.
      3.   A recorded final plat or notice of land division pursuant to this
chapter constitutes a certificate of compliance with respect to the lot or
parcel described therein.
      4.   When an original parcel or lot is divided by a public right of way
as a result of some kind of governmental action (e.g. the construction of a
road or railway through a parcel or lot, thereby dividing it), each of the two
resulting parcels or lots shall be deemed original parcels or lots and shall
have an origination date equal to that of the governmental action. The burden
of proof shall be on the applicant to provide. (Ord. 551, 3-9-2016; Ord. 607,
7-22-2020; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
SUBCHAPTER 6.2 - DESIGN STANDARDS
12-620: GENERAL:
Any easements, specific constraints on building placement, other than
easements, and land areas reserved, be shown and plainly marked on the plats.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-621: LOT AND PARCEL DESIGN:
   A.   All proposed lots or parcels which are three hundred feet (300') or
less in width shall maintain a depth to width ratio of not greater than three
point two to one (3.2:1); and lots which are more than three hundred feet
(300') in width shall maintain a depth to width ratio of not greater than four
point two to one (4.2:1).
   B.   All proposed lots or parcels one hundred feet (100') or less in width
shall be designed so that the angle of intersection of the side lot lines with
the fronting road is between eighty-five (85) and ninety-five degrees (95°),
for a distance of not less than fifty feet (50') from the point of
intersection.
   C.   Submerged lands are not to be included when determining the depth to
width calculation.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
12-622: SUBMERGED LANDS:
Lands below the applicable natural or ordinary water mark, or the applicable
artificial high water mark, of any lake, river, stream, channel or other body
of public water shall not be counted in the calculations for determining the
maximum density for a subdivision. For example, if a forty (40) acre parcel in
the R-5 zoning district contains thirty (30) acres submerged under Lake Pend
Oreille's artificial high water mark, then the parcel contains ten (10)
"usable" acres for the purpose of determining the maximum density in a
subdivision. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-623: SERVICES AND UTILITIES:
   A.   Where proposed lots are smaller than one acre in area, exclusive of any
ingress or egress easements, all "urban services", as defined in section
12-821 of this title, shall be provided. Lots in conservation subdivisions
shall be exempt from this requirement, provided all other requirements of this
title are met.
   B.   A water supply shall be provided per at least one of the following:
      1.   Lots to be served by an individual well on each lot: Applicants
shall demonstrate how the aquifer proposed for water supply has sufficient
production capability to provide drinking water to all applicable lots and that
a location is available within each lot for installation of a well without
conflicting with proposed sewage systems on or adjacent to the proposed lot.
      2.   Lots to be served by a new water system serving from two (2) to nine
(9) lots: Documentation by an Idaho licensed professional engineer or
professional geologist that the sources proposed for water supply have
sufficient production capability to provide drinking water to the lots in the
proposed subdivision.
      3.   Lots to be served by a new public drinking water system: Division of
environmental quality written approval of an engineering report prepared by an
Idaho licensed professional engineer demonstrating that an adequate water
supply is available to meet the estimated demand for water from the lots in the
proposed subdivision.
      4.   Lots to be served by connection to an existing public or private
water system: A letter from the owner of the system indicating it has
sufficient reserve production capacity to supply water to the lots in the
proposed subdivision.
   C.   A sewage disposal method for all building sites, as approved by the
Panhandle health district and/or the state of Idaho, may be provided.
   D.   All proposed lots shall be designed by the applicant to provide a fire
protection plan for the proposed lots to provide, at a minimum, an assessment
of fire risk and plans to reduce the risk, and provisions for defensible space,
where material capable of allowing a fire to spread unchecked will be treated,
cleared or modified to slow the rate and intensity of an advancing wildfire and
to create an area for fire suppression operations to occur, and for at least
one of the following:
      1.   Prior to final plat, an approved water and fire hydrant system
capable of providing one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for a minimum of
two (2) hours where a community water system exists or is proposed as part of
the development and is capable of delivering the pressurized water supply
necessary for delivering fire flows as prescribed by the international fire
code, as adopted by the state fire marshal, and such later editions as may be
so published and adopted by the state fire marshal, or as amended, modified or
superseded, and incorporated herein by reference with a copy on file with the
office of the clerk of the board of county commissioners, and hereinafter
referred to as IFC.
      2.   A note on the final subdivision plat stating: "At the time of
building location permit or building permit, the lot owner shall install a
minimum two thousand (2,000) gallon water storage system, meeting IFC
standards". Refill on demand is not required to meet IFC standards.
      3.   A note on the final subdivision plat stating: "The installation of
an approved IFC residential fire suppression sprinkler system is required in
all newly constructed residences".
      4.   Prior to final plat, a manmade or natural water source with a dry
hydrant capable of delivering adequate water supply as prescribed by IFC.
      5.   A note on the final subdivision plat stating: "At the time of
building permit or building location permit, the lot owner shall install an
approved fire suppression method to the satisfaction of Bonner County". (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
12-624: ROADS AND ACCESS:
   A.   All new roads created for subdivisions shall be designated by unique
road names, unless such roads are determined to be and are designed to be
extensions of existing roads.
   B.   Road networks shall be designed and constructed to private road
standards set forth in
appendix A of this title, except as otherwise noted herein. Road networks shall
be designed to provide for a continuous transportation system to adjacent
properties, where topographical conditions warrant.
   C.   Legal access shall be provided to each proposed lot, which shall be
developed for ingress and egress, providing for ready access meeting the
standards in subsection B of this section.
   D.   All proposed lots less than five (5) acres gross shall have direct
frontage on, and direct access to, a public right of way. Cluster lots less
than five (5) acres gross in a conservation subdivision within the rural,
agricultural/forestry and forestry districts are exempt from this requirement.
Right of way offered for dedication in any zoning district shall be developed
with a road constructed to the standards set forth in title 2 of this code.
Such road may be maintained privately or by a public highway agency. Exceptions
to the direct frontage and access requirements to allow for private frontage or
interior roads may be granted in the commercial, industrial, or rural service
center districts provided such access meets the applicable private road
standards of this title.
   E.   For the purposes of a boundary line adjustment, family division, or lot
line adjustment legal access shall be provided to each proposed lot or parcel,
which shall demonstrate ingress and egress. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord.
524, 1-11-2012; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
12-625: TRAILS AND PARKS:
   A.   Trails:
      1.   Implementing Bonner County Trails Plan: New subdivisions should be
integrated with, and expand upon, existing and planned trail network per the
Bonner County trails plan adopted by the Bonner County board of county
commissioners. Subdivisions on land featuring proposed trails per the Bonner
County trails plan are required to construct the trail as part of the
subdivision approval. The Bonner County trails plan shall be used as a guide to
determine the appropriate alignment and design any public trails or pathways
(where applicable).
      2.   Public Access To Trails: All public trails shall be provided within
public rights of way (when approved by the entity having jurisdiction over the
right of way), designated common open space or within a trail easement
dedicated or conveyed to Bonner County, or to the entity that will provide
maintenance as approved by the board. The width of the common open space or
easement shall be sufficient to provide for trail maintenance activities. When
future access may be needed to adjacent parcels of land, trail easements and/or
rights of way shall extend to the property line of the subdivision.
      3.   Sidewalks/Pathways In Residential Subdivisions: All residential
subdivisions featuring average residential lot sizes of less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet shall provide a sidewalk/pathway system that
connects all residential lots in the subdivision. Conservation subdivisions in
the rural or A/F districts are exempt, except where there are more than ten
(10) contiguous residential lots averaging less than twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet in size.
      4.   Developing Design Standards For Trails: Trail width and design
standards and guidelines shall be developed in accord with the adopted trails
plan.
   B.   Public Access, Parks And Facilities: Public access easements or the
conveyance of land for public access, parks or facilities may be required for
subdivisions that are contiguous to: 1) public lands; 2) public streams, lakes,
ponds, wetlands or similar areas; or 3) for areas designated in a county
facilities acquisition plan. If so required, the property owner shall be paid
fair market value for the easement or land, or may qualify for a density bonus
as part of a conservation subdivision set forth in section
12-637 of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-626: ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURES:
   A.   The subdivision shall be designed around identified natural hazards
(highly erosive soils on steep slopes, landslide areas, rock falls, areas of
subsidence, floodplains) to protect building sites and roads from damage from
such hazards.
   B.   The subdivision shall meet the requirements of chapter 7,
"Environmental Standards", of this title.
   C.   All subdivisions containing waterfront property shall conform to the
following standards:
      1.   New lots or parcels on sites in the forestry, agricultural/forestry,
rural and other zoning districts where all urban services are not available,
shall maintain an average width (as measured parallel to the shoreline) of at
least two hundred feet (200') for all portions of the lot or parcel within one
hundred feet (100') of the shoreline. The total depth of the lot (as measured
from the shoreline to the opposite end of the lot or parcel) must be deep
enough to allow development to meet applicable vegetation conservation and
building setback requirements per
subchapter 7.1 in this title.
      2.   New lots or parcels not in the forestry, agricultural/forestry or
rural zoning districts and containing all urban services, shall maintain an
average width (as measured parallel to the shoreline) of at least one hundred
feet (100') for all portions of the lot within one hundred feet (100') of the
shoreline. The total depth of the lot (as measured from the shoreline to the
opposite end of the lot or parcel) must be deep enough to allow development to
meet applicable vegetation conservation and building setback requirements per
subchapter 7.1 in this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-627: SUBDIVISIONS IN THE COMMERCIAL AND RURAL SERVICE CENTER DISTRICTS:
Subdivision applicants in both districts shall demonstrate how the proposed
lots are appropriate for applicable residential and/or nonresidential uses
where permitted in sections
12-332 through
12-336 (tables 3-2 through 3-6) of this title. Individual lots shall be sized
appropriately to accommodate permitted uses in the district, or may be designed
to accommodate a particular set of permitted uses (for example, townhouses,
which feature common walls and zero lot lines). The board may place conditions
on the lots that restrict uses and the exact location and nature of
development. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 6.3 - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
12-630: PURPOSE:
   A.   Encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the
land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography;
   B.   Protect environmentally sensitive areas of a development site and
preserve on a permanent basis open space, natural features and prime
agricultural lands;
   C.   Minimize water quality impacts by reducing the amount of impervious
surfaces in site development;
   D.   Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and maintenance by
such techniques as reducing the distance over which utilities, such as water
and sewer lines, need to be extended, or by reducing the width or length of
streets; and
   E.   Provide opportunities walking and hiking in open space areas. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-631: DESCRIPTION AND DEFINITIONS:
A "conservation subdivision" is a subdivision where lots are clustered in
specific areas to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, open
space, agriculture and/or preservation of features and/or structures with
environmental, historical, cultural or other significance. "Conservation
subdivisions" may include the following terms:
CLUSTER LOT: A cluster lot is a lot in a conservation subdivision (typically
smaller than the minimum lot size for the applicable zoning district) in which
residential development can occur.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A part of a conservation subdivision that is set aside in
perpetuity as open space. This area may include freshwater wetlands,
floodplains or flood hazard areas, stream corridors, recreational areas, prime
agricultural lands, wildlife habitat, scenic views, historical or cultural
features, archaeological sites, or other land to be protected from development,
as well as easements for public utilities.
CONSERVATION LOT: A large (larger than the minimum lot size for the applicable
zoning district) privately owned (not common) lot in a conservation
subdivision. Such lot may incur a dwelling unit, but it will count against the
overall density of a subdivision. A conservation lot may be an alternative to
common open space. For example, a property owner can subdivide a portion of
property into a number of smaller cluster lots and retain most of the acreage
for him or herself.
DEVELOPMENT RESERVE LOT:
   A.   An area in a conservation subdivision that is set aside for future
development opportunities. For example, owners of suburban zoned land that do
not yet have all urban services may choose to create a conservation subdivision
to cluster lots and create a development reserve lot that allows for future
development once urban water and sewer services are provided on the land.
   B.   Property owners can choose to utilize a combination of lot types. For
instance, it is possible to have both a conservation lot and common open space
in a conservation subdivision.
FIGURE 6-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e305d10625567243f1e158cbb0e68c3fd51ca889/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1301.gif]
 
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-632: APPLICABILITY, PROCEDURES AND PREAPPLICATION REVIEW:
   A.   Applicability: A conservation subdivision shall be permitted as of
right in any zoning district.
   B.   Procedures: Conservation subdivisions are subject to the standard
preliminary plat procedures set forth in
subchapter 6.4 of this chapter.
   C.   Preapplication Review Required: The developer or developer's
representative for a conservation subdivision shall meet with the planning
director or designee, prior to submitting an application. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss early and informally with the developer, the purpose and
qualifying provisions of this chapter along with any known constraints in order
to assist the applicant in determining the feasibility of the proposal. The
preapplication review shall include a general description of the proposed
subdivision, and a sketch map of sufficient scale to convey the scope and
layout of the proposed subdivision. Discussions may include the concept, the
applicable regulations and standards, comprehensive plan objectives and
specific problems with the proposed subdivision such as impacts on roads,
schools or potential conflicts with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-633: STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR ALL CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Uses: All principal and accessory uses authorized in the applicable
zoning districts shall be allowed in the conservation subdivision. Uses not
authorized by chapter 3 of this title will not be permitted in conservation
subdivisions.
   B.   Development Standards: Development standards in chapter 4 of this title
for the applicable zoning district shall apply to all lots in a conservation
subdivision, except where otherwise noted in this chapter.
   C.   Design Standards: Conservation subdivisions are subject to
subchapter 6.2 of this title, design standards, except where otherwise noted.
   D.   Minimum Lot Size: Cluster lots may be smaller than the minimum lot size
for the applicable zoning district, provided the following requirements are
met:
      1.   The minimum lot size for lots containing both individual wells and
septic within the boundaries of the lot shall be two and one-half (21/2) acres.
      2.   The minimum lot size for lots containing either individual wells or
septic (but not both) within the boundaries of the lot shall be one acre.
      3.   Lots may be smaller than the minimum sizes in subsections D1 and D2
of this section, provided water and sewage disposal provisions are provided
within common areas via utility easements.
   E.   Suitable Land: Cluster lots are encouraged to be located on land most
suitable for residential development. For example, where the site contains
floodplains and/or wetlands, such floodplains and/or wetlands are encouraged to
be designated as common open space.
   F.   Further Subdivision Of Cluster Lots: Cluster lots in a conservation
subdivision may not be further subdivided except where in compliance with this
title. For example, if a forty (40) acre conservation subdivision in the R-10
zoning district contains 4 two (2) acre lots and a thirty two (32) acre common
open space is rezoned to R-5, each of the four (4) cluster lots may be split
into two (2) lots to achieve maximum density per the R-5 standards, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in this chapter. However, notes on the final plat as
approved by the board may include other restrictions on future subdivision of
the lots.
   G.   Wells, Sewage Disposal Facilities Within Common Open Space: Individual
and/or common wells and sewage disposal facilities may be provided within
designated common open space areas to allow for maximum efficiency of cluster
lot design and minimize potential negative impacts to the environment.
Applicable easements for the facilities shall be shown on the final plat.
   H.   Preservation Of Common Open Space: Common open space shall be preserved
as permanent open space, except where otherwise noted in this title, and
subject to the following standards:
      1.   A management plan is required for the designated common open space.
The plan shall be submitted and approved with the preliminary plat application.
The plan shall include all of the following items:
         a.   Details concerning ownership, tax liability and responsible
parties for maintenance of open space.
         b.   Use of the designated common open space shall be in accordance
with this title.
         c.   Details concerning permanent protection of open space.
         d.   Details on maintenance of the open space, including control of
noxious weeds.
         e.   Any construction activities (trails, fencing, agricultural
buildings) and vegetative clearing that may occur on site.
      2.   All subsequent activities must be conducted in conformance with the
approved open space management plan. Open space management plans may be
modified through amendment procedures for a plat alteration, but in no case
shall perpetually dedicated open space be revoked.
      3.   The open space management plan, as described above, shall be
referenced on the face of the final plat and shall be filed as a title notice.
   I.   Unavailable Urban Services: For conservation subdivisions in the
suburban, commercial, industrial, recreation, rural service center or alpine
village zoning districts where all urban services are not available, land may
be set aside for future development as a "development reserve lot" if and when
the applicable urban services become available. Such a lot may be privately
owned or collectively owned by the owners of all subdivision lots. See
subsection
12-637A2 of this subchapter for related density bonus provisions. Specific
requirements for development reserve lots:
      1.   For such conservation subdivisions, the following title notice shall
be filed on the property and adjacent properties within the plat and the
wording shall additionally be placed on the face of the plat:
Lot        , Block        , of            is a development reserve lot reserved
for future development when urban services become available. Future development
of this parcel may include uses permitted in the applicable zoning district.
The lot is not intended to be preserved in perpetuity as open space, as
indicated by the consent(s) to plat recorded at Instrument #            .
      2.   Applicants shall submit a sketch of a prospective future street
system and lot layout on development reserve lots to demonstrate that the land
can be subdivided in conformance with the design standards of this title.
   J.   Conservation Lot As Alternative: As an alternative to designated common
open space, applicants may choose to include a large "conservation lot" that is
privately owned and maintained. A conservation lot may incur a dwelling unit,
provided it counts against the overall density of the subdivision.
   K.   Buffering, Clustering: Clustered lots shall be accessed by interior
road systems. To the maximum extent possible, cluster lots shall be located so
that common open space provides a buffer between the cluster lots and adjacent
properties and/or right of way. When this is not possible, the development
shall be designed to provide at a minimum one of the following:
      1.   Cluster lots that abut surrounding properties or right of way shall
be at least seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum lot size standard for the
subject parcel.
      2.   Cluster lots that abut surrounding properties or right of way shall
be separated from adjacent properties or right of way by a minimum buffer strip
of one hundred feet (100'). At a minimum, proposed or existing landscaping and
vegetation within the buffer strip shall be of sufficient size and type to
provide a buffer of vegetation six feet (6') in height and fifty percent (50%)
opaque year round within three (3) years of planting. New landscaping materials
shall consist of a combination of native trees and shrubs, as provided in
appendix B of this title. Variations to these standards may be permitted where
the applicant can demonstrate that unique topographic conditions provide
sufficient buffering, such as intervening waterways, ridges or ravines or other
land features. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-634: STANDARDS FOR CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS IN AGRICULTURAL/FORESTRY-20
DISTRICT:
All conservation subdivisions in the A/F-20 zoning district shall use the
conservation subdivision design standards set forth below:
   A.   Cluster lots shall be located on land least suitable FOR commercial
agricultural or forestry purposes based on soil types, slopes, adjacent uses or
other unique existing conditions.
   B.   For all lands within the A/F-20 district, cluster lots shall maintain
an adequate area to accommodate applicable setbacks and sufficient separation
for water and sewage disposal facilities.
   C.   Conditions may be placed on cluster lot development to minimize impacts
to nearby agricultural uses and maintain the agricultural character of the
area. To accomplish this, building envelopes, no disturbance zones, driveway
location, and planting or retaining vegetation may be required. At minimum,
building envelopes for cluster lots shall provide for a minimum setback of one
hundred feet (100') to any property adjacent to the parent tract.
   D.   More than one conservation lot may be created, provided they are at
least thirty (30) acres in size.
   E.   The envelope area for residential development on the conservation lot
shall be authorized on the plat and shall be limited to no more than one acre
in size and located to maximize opportunities for agricultural use on the lot.
   F.   The maximum number of lots in a cluster shall be four (4), except where
lots are clustered at least one hundred feet (100') from an existing road. The
minimum separation of clusters of lots shall be three hundred feet (300').
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-635: STANDARDS FOR CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS IN AGRICULTURAL/FORESTRY-10 AND
RURAL DISTRICTS:
Cluster subdivisions in the A/F-10 and rural districts shall have the
flexibility to create common open space and/or a conservation lot or lots,
depending on unique site characteristics and/or interests of the applicant,
provided the following requirements are met:
   A.   The maximum number of lots in a cluster shall be four (4), except where
lots are clustered at least one hundred feet (100') from an existing road. The
minimum separation of clusters of lots shall be three hundred feet (300').
   B.   At minimum, building envelopes for cluster lots shall provide for a
minimum setback of one hundred feet (100') to any property adjacent to the
parent tract.
   C.   Multiple dwelling units may be included on individual lots, provided
the subdivision meets applicable density requirements and other requirements in
this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-636: STANDARDS FOR CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS IN SUBURBAN, RECREATION AND
ALPINE VILLAGE DISTRICTS:
Conservation subdivisions in these districts shall have the flexibility to
create common open space, a conservation lot or lots, and/or development
reserve lots, depending on unique site characteristics and/or interests of the
applicant, provided the following requirements are met:
   A.   Minimum Lot Size: There is no minimum lot size for cluster lots,
provided the subdivision meets the density requirements specified in this
title. However, cluster lots shall be sized sufficiently to meet applicable
setbacks and other requirements in this title, unless otherwise noted herein.
   B.   Development Reserve Lots: All subdivisions that do not contain urban
services are encouraged to use clustering techniques that allow for future
development at urban densities. To accomplish this, applicants may designate an
area or areas "development reserve lot" that can be further subdivided when
urban services become available. See subsection
12-633I of this subchapter for related development reserve lot requirements.
See subsection
12-637A2 of this subchapter for related density bonus provisions.
   C.   Reduction In Setbacks: Front, side and/or rear yard setbacks may be
reduced to accomplish design objectives for the development, provided other
applicable standards in this title are met.
   D.   Multiple Dwelling Units: Multiple dwelling units may be included on
individual lots, provided the subdivision meets applicable density requirements
and other requirements in this title.
   E.   Common Open Space: Applicants are encouraged to set aside at least
twenty percent (20%) of the land as common open space, or recreational
facilities for the residents of the subdivision. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-637: DENSITY BONUSES FOR CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Exceptions To Qualifying Subdivisions: All conservation subdivisions
shall qualify for bonuses, except:
      1.   Sites within the F and I districts.
      2.   Sites within the S, REC and AV districts where all urban services
are not available may qualify for density bonuses only under the following
conditions:
         a.   Lots are clustered in a way that allows for the future
resubdivision at urban densities and/or permanent common open space. See
subsection
12-633I of this subchapter for requirements for development reserve lots, and
subsections B through D of this section.
         b.   Dry line sewer and water lines servicing all lots less than one
acre in size shall be installed prior to occupancy of the applicable lot's
first dwelling unit.
         c.   A sewer management agreement must be incorporated into the final
plat requiring that applicable lots be connected to sewer and water systems
should those systems be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
Applicable septic systems and wells must be abandoned once the urban sewer and/
or water services are operational.
      3.   Sites where more than fifty percent (50%) of the land includes
floodways and wetlands (as determined from a professional wetlands delineation
or from the U.S. fish and wildlife service national wetland inventory maps).
   B.   Common Open Space:
   TABLE 6-1
   DENSITY BONUS FOR COMMON OPEN SPACE
   Numbers in parentheses refer to additional
   standards located below the table.
                            Maximum Percentage Increase In Approved Building
Amount Of Common Open Space Lots (1)
(Percent Of Site) (2)       A/F-10, R-5 (3) A/F-20 And R-10 Districts
                                            S, AV, C, REC And RSC Districts (4)
                            Maximum Percentage Increase In Approved Building
Amount Of Common Open Space Lots (1)
(Percent Of Site) (2)       A/F-10, R-5 (3) A/F-20 And R-10 Districts
                                            S, AV, C, REC And RSC Districts (4)
10 percent - 19 percent     0 percent       0 percent
20 percent - 29 percent     10 percent
30 percent - 39 percent     20 percent      Bonus percentage increase equal to
40 percent - 49 percent     30 percent      percentage of common open space.
50 percent - 79 percent     40 percent
80 percent or more          50 percent
 
   Standards:
      1.    To qualify for the full bonus percentages here, the common open
space must comply with applicable requirements of subsection
12-256A of this title.
      2.    Common open space percentages may be rounded off to the nearest
whole percentage.
      3.    Planned unit development subdivisions shall not exceed 150 percent
of the density allowed by the underlying zoning district through provision of
common open space percentages and other density bonus actions listed in
table 6-2 below. For example, an applicant with 40 acres in the R-5 district
[normally allowed a maximum of 8 lots] may qualify for up to 12 lots via common
open space and other bonus actions.
      4.    Planned unit development subdivisions shall not exceed 200 percent
of the density allowed by the underlying zoning district through provision of
common open space percentages and other density bonus actions listed in
table 6-2 below. For example, an applicant with 40 acres in the R-5 district
[normally allowed a maximum of 8 lots] may qualify for up to 16 lots via common
open space and other bonus actions.
   C.   Density Bonus For Other Actions:
   TABLE 6-2
    DENSITY BONUS FOR OTHER ACTIONS
 
Density Bonus Action                    Maximum Percentage Increase In Approved
                                        Building Lots
1. Provide subdivision residents with
usable access to adjacent lakes,
streams or public lands. The access     5 percent
must meet the minimum trail/pathway
design standards specified in section
12-625 of this chapter.
2. Provide general public with usable
access to common open space, adjacent
lakes, streams or public lands. (Note:
This option is in lieu of, not in       15 percent
addition to, action 1.) The access must
meet the minimum trail/pathway design
standards specified in section
12-625 of this chapter.
3. Provide a sidewalk or pathway system 5 percent if open only to subdivision
that connects each lot in the           residents.
subdivision per the design standards in 15 percent if open to the general
section                                 public.
12-625 of this chapter.
4. Provide other public amenities. The
board may approve bonus lots for other
improvements and amenities, both on and
off site, where the applicant can
successfully demonstrate that the
proposed improvements/amenities benefit Up to 25 percent
the public. See subsections D and E of
this section for examples and
requirements. Improvements required to
mitigate impacts shall not be used to
earn bonus lots.
5. Bonus for urban sewer (where not
required to achieve given density)      25 percent
(i.e., suburban using "urban sewer" to
get to smaller acres)
 
   D.   Public Amenities: Below are public amenities that can be provided to
obtain a density bonus. All are subject to approval by the board:
      1.   Construct recreational improvements that are available for the use
by the general public. Improvements may include, but are not limited to, play
fields, picnic shelters, children play areas and indoor recreational
facilities. Applicants must successfully demonstrate that the improvements are
safe, accessible and desirable to the general public.
      2.   Construct public facilities such as schools, fire stations or
libraries. To qualify, the land and/or facilities must be accepted by the
applicable public agency. The land itself set aside for such public use shall
be considered as common open space for the purposes of obtaining a density
bonus.
      3.   Pave roadways (where they are not required to be paved).
      4.   Provide environmental improvements as certified by wetlands, plant
or other biologists having expert knowledge of the specific environmental
feature. An example could be replacement of nonnative vegetation with native
vegetation in common open space areas. Such improvements are particularly
desirable in and around wetland areas and designated critical wildlife habitat.
      5.   Provide off site road improvements (above and beyond what is
required by board for subdivision approval).
The applicant shall include a cost estimate for the proposed public amenity
improvements prepared by a professional construction estimator, registered
general contractor, engineer, architect or landscape architect, which shall be
submitted with the application. The cost estimate shall be limited to physical
improvements, labor and utility costs associated with the proposed public
amenity feature.
   E.   Requirements For Density Bonus: To qualify for a density bonus, the
proposed public amenity must meet the following requirements:
      1.   Applicants must successfully demonstrate how the improvements
benefit the public.
      2.   The percentage of density bonus shall be commensurate with the cost
of the applicable improvements per the following scale:
Cost of proposed improvements = $Y
Density bonus = Extra lot or lots* valued at the equivalent of two (2) times
the cost of proposed improvements (2 x Y) up to a maximum density bonus of
twenty five percent (25%).
*The average value of lots in the proposed subdivision as determined by a state
licensed appraiser at the time the application is submitted. The appraised
value shall take into account the average size of proposed lots, proposed
physical improvements (including proposed amenities), and locational
attributes.
For example, if the applicant proposes off site road improvements costing an
estimated fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the applicant is then eligible for
a bonus lot or lots equaling up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
in assessed value. If a state licensed appraiser concludes that the average
market value for one of the proposed cluster lots is fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), then the applicant qualifies for up to two (2) additional lots
(provided the extra lots do not exceed 25 percent of the total density of the
subdivision). (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 6.4 - PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES
12-640: PROCESSING OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS, GENERAL:
The requirements and procedures set forth at sections
12-641 through
12-648 of this subchapter shall apply to the processing of all applications for
subdivisions to which this chapter is applicable, except for applications which
are eligible for processing as short plats (as set forth in section
12-660 of this chapter), or for processing as lot line adjustments (as set
forth in
subchapter 6.7 of this chapter), or for processing condominium projects (as set
forth in
subchapter 6.8 of this chapter). (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-641: SUBDIVISIONS, PREAPPLICATION REVIEW:
   A.   Any person contemplating a subdivision is encouraged to contact the
planning department prior to the submission of the application for discussion
of the procedures, standards and criteria which are applicable to the proposed
subdivision.
   B.   The preapplication review shall include a general description of the
proposed subdivision, and a sketch map of sufficient scale to convey the scope
and layout of the proposed subdivision.
   C.   Discussions may include the concept, the applicable regulations and
standards, comprehensive plan objectives and specific problems with the
proposed subdivision, such as impacts on roads, schools or potential conflicts
with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-642: PRELIMINARY PLAT, CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Application form, available in the planning department to be completely
filled out, including legal owner’s signature (or a letter from the holder of
legal title authorizing the application to file for the subdivision), and a
copy of purchasing agreement.
   B.   One print of a preliminary plat prepared by an Idaho licensed surveyor
showing the parcel or parcels to be divided clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale suitable to ensure the clarity of all lines, bearings and dimensions.
This plat shall include the following:
      1.   Subdivision name, geographic grid (township, range and tier section
number and location within the section), north arrow, and vicinity map showing
location and boundary of the proposed tract and existing road pattern in the
vicinity.
      2.   Boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided drawn to scale,
together with intersecting property lines, abutting public and private roads,
and names and addresses of adjoining owners shown in their respective places of
ownership on the plat.
      3.   The location, dimensions and area (in acres) of proposed lots. All
proposed lots shall be numbered or in a systematic order.
      4.   The location, dimensions and tentative names of proposed streets and
roads.
      5.   Sufficient contours to show the shape of the land and extending at
least one hundred feet (100') beyond the subdivision limits (use of USGS map
acceptable).
      6.   Location of all watercourses, floodplains as delineated on flood
insurance rate maps or base flood elevations, the elevations derived from flood
insurance rate maps, and approximate areas subject to inundation of stormwater
overflow.
      7.   Existing wells, springs, wetland boundaries as depicted on national
wetlands inventory maps or as delineated by a professional authorized by the
U.S. army corps of engineers to perform wetland delineations, drainage
channels, overhead and underground utility lines, structures, sanitary sewers
and culverts within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto.
      8.   Proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and solid waste
disposal.
      9.   All easements of record, including sufficient recording data to
identify the conveyance.
      10.   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or
reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
      11.   A statement setting forth the intended land use of the parcels,
i.e., residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial or other appropriate
land use classifications.
   C.   The application shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   Application fee as set forth at section
12-265 of this title.
      2.   Preliminary subdivision road design plan and profile, prepared,
stamped and signed by an Idaho licensed engineer demonstrating ability to
comply with the minimum applicable road standards for all new or reconstructed
roads proposed to serve the subdivision.
      3.   Any other information required by this title or necessary for
consideration of the application. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 681, 10-12-
2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
12-643: SUBDIVISIONS, PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   The applicant shall file an application for a preliminary plat with the
planning department, pursuant to the procedures of section
12-268 of this title.
   B.   The Zoning Commission shall hold the public hearing on the application
for preliminary plat, in accord with the procedures set forth in
subchapter 2.6 of this title. The commission shall consider the application for
the preliminary plat, any comments received, the facts on the record and may:
      1.   Recommend approval of the application for preliminary plat, as
presented;
      2.   Recommend approval of the application for preliminary plat, as
modified in any particular;
      3.   Continue the public hearing on the preliminary plat pending changes
to be made in the application, the subdivision design or the receipt of
additional information; or
      4.   Recommend denial of the application for preliminary plat.
   C.   The Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation to the board, at
the close of the public hearing, explaining the reasons for its recommendation
and citing the ordinance standards and comprehensive plan provisions used in
making its recommendation and findings and conclusions in support of its
recommendation.
   D.   Upon receipt of the Zoning Commission recommendation, the planning
director shall proceed to schedule the application for preliminary plat for the
next available public hearing date before the board, allowing sufficient time
for published public notice at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
public hearing in one issue of the official county newspaper, and mailed
notification to landowners as required at section
12-217 of this title. Such notices shall contain the applicant’s name, a
description of the proposed subdivision, its general location and the date,
time and place of the public hearing.
   E.   The board shall hold the public hearing on the application for
preliminary plat, in accord with the procedures set forth in
subchapter 2.6 of this title. The board shall consider the facts of the
application, any comments received, the facts on the record, the relevant
ordinance standards and comprehensive plan provisions, testimony and evidence
received at the public hearing conducted by the Zoning Commission, the
recommendation of the Zoning Commission, and any action taken by an affected
city council.
   F.   The board may:
      1.   Approve the application for preliminary plat, as presented;
      2.   Approve the application as modified in any particular;
      3.   Continue the public hearing on the preliminary plat pending changes
to be made in the application, the subdivision design or the receipt of
additional information; or
      4.   Deny the application for preliminary plat.
   G.   The board shall set forth its decision in writing explaining the
reasons for its decision, and citing the ordinance standards and comprehensive
plan provisions used in making its decision and findings of fact and
conclusions in support of its decision. If the board denies the application for
preliminary plat, the board shall also set forth in writing the actions (if
any) the applicant could take to obtain approval.
   H.   As a part of its decision approving an application for a preliminary
plat, the board may require the completion of improvements (such as roads,
utilities or stormwater management controls) prior to final plat approval.
Improvements not completed prior to final plat approval are subject to surety
agreements pursuant to section
12-644 of this subchapter. In addition to the standards set forth in this
chapter, the board may stipulate conditions to be placed on the final plat,
provided evidence of record is sufficient to so warrant, which may include:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent properties;
      2.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      3.   Requiring the provision of on or off site public facilities or
services;
      4.   Assuring the development is maintained properly;
      5.   Provisions for setbacks that are greater than the minimum standards
set forth in this title to mitigate effects of the development on wildlife,
fisheries, wetlands, adjoining properties, or to reduce hazards due to
floodplain, floodways, steep slopes or other physical constraints of the land,
provided evidence is deemed sufficient to warrant greater setbacks;
      6.   Safeguards to protect adjoining properties.
   I.   The preliminary plat shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2)
years from the date of approval. At any time prior to the expiration date of
the preliminary plat, an applicant may make a written request to the planning
director for a single extension of the preliminary plat for a period up to two
(2) years. The board may consider such request for extension at any regular
business meeting. The extension request must be approved or denied prior to the
expiration date of the preliminary plat. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661,
3-18-2022)
12-644: IMPROVEMENT PLAN REQUIRED, CONTENTS:
   A.   After the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider shall have an
improvement plan for the subdivision prepared by a registered civil engineer.
Two (2) copies of the improvement plan shall be filed with the county engineer.
This plan shall include the following:
      1.   The subdivision name and number, geographic grid (township, range
and tier, section number and location within the section), north arrow, date
and scale no smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100').
      2.   The plan and profile of all proposed roads showing final grades and
cross sections of roads in accord with the requirements contained in title 2 of
this code.
      3.   The plan and profile of proposed sanitary and stormwater systems
with grades and sizes indicated. Drain calculations may be required.
      4.   A grading plan, showing stormwater drainage for each lot.
      5.   Any other improvements such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bridges,
lift stations, fire hydrants, streetlighting, etc., as required, and in accord
with the requirements contained in title 2 of this code.
   B.   The county engineer, or his representative, shall check inspection
reports of the applicant's engineer and shall perform a final inspection and
additional inspections (if called for). Construction and inspection of road
improvements shall be completed in accord with the requirements contained in
title 2 of this code or
appendix A of this title.
   C.   In lieu of completing all improvements as required before final plat
recording, the subdivider shall enter into a surety agreement with the board
agreeing to complete the improvements in accordance with surety agreement
conditions and preliminary and final plat approvals. A cash deposit,
certificate of deposit, corporate surety bond written by an insurance company
licensed in Idaho having a rating from AM Best & Company of "A" or better,
letter of credit issued and backed by a federal or state chartered bank, is
required equivalent to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the project
engineer's estimated cost of construction of the improvements for the purpose
of guaranteeing completion of the work and repair of any defects in
improvements which occur within one year of the first acceptance of the
completed work by the board. Sureties guaranteeing the work and repair of any
defects in improvements which occur within one year after first acceptance of
the completed work by the board may be reduced by the board by one-half (1/2)
for that one year. The surety agreement shall be valid for a period not to
exceed two (2) calendar years from the date of approval. At any time prior to
the expiration date of the surety agreement, the subdivider may make a written
request to the planning director for a single extension of the surety agreement
for a period up to two (2) years. The board may consider such request for
extension at any regular business meeting. The extension request must be
approved or denied by the board prior to the expiration date of the surety
agreement. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-645: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS OF ALL
SUBDIVISIONS:
The Zoning Commission shall apply the following standards in making its
recommendation, and the board shall apply the following standards in rendering
its decision on all applications for preliminary plat:
   A.   The proposed subdivision is in accord with the purposes of this title
and of the zone district in which it is located.
   B.   The site is physically suitable for the proposed development.
   C.   The design of the proposed subdivision will not adversely impact Bonner
County’s natural resources, as identified in the comprehensive plan. Any
adverse impacts or potential for impacts shall be mitigated as a condition of
approval.
   D.   The public and private services, including, but not limited to, water,
sewer services, solid waste, fire protection, emergency services, and school
facilities and transportation, which will serve the proposed subdivision are
adequate for the needs of future residents or users.
   E.   The proposed subdivision will not cause circumstances to exist that
will cause future residents or the public at large to be exposed to hazards to
health or safety.
   F.   The design of the proposed subdivision or related improvements will
provide for coordinated access with the county system of roads and with
adjacent properties, and will not impede the use of public easements for access
to, or through the proposed subdivision. The proposed transportation system is
designed to adequately and safely serve the future residents or users without
adversely impacting the existing transportation system by reducing the quality
or level of service or creating hazards or congestion.
   G.   The proposed subdivision is designed to comply with the design criteria
for subdivisions set forth in
subchapter 6.2 of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-
2022)
12-646: FINAL PLAT, CONTENTS:
The final plat shall conform with the following items:
   A.   A distinct subdivision name, consistent with the provisions of Idaho
Code section 50-1307. For the purposes of this section, the subdivision name
shall be considered distinct if the exact name, either pronounced the same or
similarly spelled, has not been used previously.
   B.   Names of the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor.
   C.   The "initial point" and description thereof, shall be indicated on the
drawing and the location and description in conformance with Idaho Code.
   D.   Street lines of all existing or recorded streets, principal property
lines, patent lines, Township lines or section lines, intersecting, crossing or
contiguous to the subdivision (which should be mathematically tied to the lines
of the subdivision by distances and bearings) and the status of adjoining
property shall be indicated (name of subdivision or unplatted area).
   E.   The accurate location and description and filing of all monuments shall
be in accordance with the Corner Perpetuation and Filing Act, Idaho Code title
55, chapter 16.
   F.   The length and bearings of the lines of all lots, streets, alleys and
easements as laid out, length of arc, points of curvature, radii and tangent
bearings in the case of curved lines (the system of lengths and bearings of the
boundary lines).
   G.   All lots shall be numbered consecutively in each block, and each block
lettered or numbered as set forth at Idaho Code section 50-1304. Unique block
numbers shall be assigned for lots separated by streets, public land, railroad
rights- of-way, waterways or any other barriers to the continuity of the
development. All streets shall bear the street or road name as it appears on
the official road name list.
   H.   The accurate outline of all property that is offered for dedication for
public use, with the purpose indicated thereon and all property owners in the
subdivision and conform with Idaho Code.
   I.   Private restrictions, if any.
   J.   North point, graphic scale and date.
   K.   A certificate of a licensed engineer or surveyor of the State to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him that all of the monuments,
shown thereon, actually exist and that their positions are as shown.
   L.   Location of all watercourses, base flood elevations, the elevations
derived from flood insurance rate maps, and approximate areas subject to
inundation of stormwater overflow.
   M.   Wetland boundaries and any proposed easements or easements of record
for drainage, channels, overhead and underground utility lines, sanitary sewers
and water systems within the tract. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 590, 6-12-
2019)
12-647: ENDORSEMENTS TO BE SHOWN ON FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall also contain the following information:
   A.   Owner's certificate. A notarized description of the property
encompassed by the plat, dedications and restrictions.
   B.   A place for the Planning Director's approval.
   C.   A place for the County Surveyor's approval.
   D.   A place for Panhandle Health District approval or the Sanitary
Restriction as allowed by I.C. 50-1326.
   E.   A place for Board approval.
   F.   A place for the County Treasurer's approval.
   G.   A place for the Recorder's signature.
   H.   A place for city approval if within an Area of City Impact.
   I.   A place for the lienholder's approval. The lienholder's approval may be
excluded from any plat that does not contain dedications of land to the public,
provided the landowner proves the lienholder has received notice by certified
mail of the pending subdivision. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 524, 1-11-
2012; Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
12-648: PROCEDURE FOR FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Upon the payment of final plat check fees, as set forth at section
12-265 of this title, and receipt of a copy of a current preliminary title
report, and one blueprint copy of the proposed final plat, the Planning
Director shall cause a review of the proposed final plat to verify conformance
with the provisions of this title and the conditions of preliminary plat
approval.
   B.   The applicant shall prepare a final plat which conforms to the
requirements for final plats set forth at Idaho Code section 50-1304, bearing
the endorsement certificates as required at section
12-647 of this subchapter and Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13.
   C.   Upon receipt of such plat, and the payment of the plat checking fee as
set forth at section
12-265 of this title, the Planning Director shall cause an examination of such
plat by endorsing agencies and a licensed surveyor, registered in the State of
Idaho for checking in accordance with the requirements of Idaho Code section
50-1305. When such agencies have signed the plat and all plat certificates,
except those of the Board, Recorder and Planning Director have been endorsed,
the Planning Director shall place the request for final plat approval on the
agenda for the next available meeting of the Board of County Commissioners.
   D.   The Board shall approve the final plat when:
      1.   The final plat conforms to the requirements of Idaho Code and this
Code; and
      2.   The final plat conforms with the approved preliminary plat; and
      3.   The conditions of preliminary and final plat approval have been
completed or financially guaranteed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   The Board may continue consideration of the final plat approval to a
date and time certain to allow receipt of additional information regarding any
aspect of the final plat or its conditions of approval. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-649: DIGITAL SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   In addition to the hard copy final plat submitted for recordation,
applicants are required to submit a digital copy of the subdivision plat. The
digital copy submission shall not substitute for any contents of the final plat
listed above. The digital copy submission will expedite the subdivision process
as well as provide economies in maintaining an accurate Countywide parcel base
map in geographic information systems. The following are required:
      1.   Digital files should be submitted in AutoCAD or other approved
computer aided drafting (CAD) software format with a submission form or
directly to the Geographic Information Systems Department via e-mail.
      2.   The digital files should be named according to naming conventions.
      3.   The digital file should include all appropriate layers.
      4.   There shall be an indication of whether the submission is tied to
control and to which control.
      5.   If projected, the projection parameters should be provided with the
file. (Ord. 572, 10-25-2017)
SUBCHAPTER 6.5 - SHORT PLATS, PROCEDURES
12-650: APPLICATION/CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLATS FOR SHORT PLAT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Purpose: To define the procedures for which an administrative approval
may be granted for the development of five (5) to ten (10) lots; to encourage
small scale development which conforms to the intent and scope of the Bonner
County comprehensive plan by providing a means for land development other than
the regular subdivision process; and to expedite the subdivision approval of
developments that conform with the comprehensive plan and this chapter. The
procedures of a regular subdivision apply to the short plat with the exceptions
as outlined in this section.
   B.   Application: Applications for short plats which contain five (5) to ten
(10) contiguous lots under common ownership may be processed as "short plats"
as set forth in sections
12-651 through
12-652 of this subchapter.
   C.   Permit Required: Lots created by a short plat, shall only be eligible
for one short plat for a period of not less than two (2) years. Land divisions
done prior to the end of the two (2) year period shall be processed as a
subdivision.
   D.   Contents: The contents of the preliminary short plat shall include all
of the items set forth in
subchapter 6.2 of this chapter. (Ord. 557, 11-10-2016; amd. Ord. 607, 7-22-
2020)
12-651: SHORT PLAT, PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY SHORT PLAT:
   A.   The applicant shall file an application for a preliminary short plat
with the planning department, pursuant to the procedures of section
12-268 of this title.
   B.   Upon the determination of the planning director that an application is
complete, the planning department shall:
      1.   Send copies of the application, by first class mail, to public
agencies and entities pursuant to section
12-268 of this title.
      2.   Provide notice of the proposed short plat by first class mail to all
property owners of record within three hundred feet (300') of the external
boundaries of the land being considered. The notice shall, at a minimum,
include the applicant's name, a description of the proposed short plat and the
general location of the property. The notice shall advise of a thirty (30) day
written comment period beginning the day after notice is mailed.
      3.   Provide notice to the official county newspaper of record. The
notice shall provide a summary of the proposal and advise of the thirty (30)
day comment period.
      4.   When a short plat is in an area of city impact (ACI) the notice
requirement shall be forty (40) days.
   C.   At the close of the comment and review period and upon a determination
by the planning director that the agency review comments have been addressed by
the applicant, the planning department shall issue a staff report containing,
at a minimum, proposed findings, conclusions and conditions of approval and a
recommendation for action. Any response to the staff report by the applicant or
interested parties shall be received by the planning department not later than
ten (10) days after the issuance of the report.
   D.   Following the ten (10) day response period, the planning director shall
consider the application for the preliminary short plat, any comments received,
the facts on the record and the standards for considering the short plat
application and may:
      1.   Approve the preliminary short plat, as presented;
      2.   Approve the preliminary short plat, as modified in any particular;
      3.   Continue action on the short plat to a date certain, pending changes
to be made in the application, the short plat design or the receipt of
additional information;
      4.   Deny the application for preliminary short plat;
      5.   Recommend the board conduct a public hearing pursuant to the public
hearing noticing requirements and procedures set forth in
subchapter 2.6 of this title, based upon the extent of public comment or other
contested factors in the case which warrant a full hearing before the board.
This option may be selected at any time following the initiation of the review
and comment period when evidence of the record supports it, to ensure prompt
processing of the application for hearing.
   E.   The planning director shall render a decision in writing, setting forth
the ordinance provisions and standards used, all comments received from the
neighbors and agencies, the facts of the application and such conclusions as
support the decision. If the planning director denies the preliminary short
plat, the planning director shall specify in the decision the actions, if any,
which the applicant could take to obtain approval.
   F.   As a part of its decision approving an application for a preliminary
plat, the planning director may require the completion of improvements (such as
roads, utilities or stormwater management controls) prior to final plat
approval. Improvements not completed prior to final plat approval are subject
to surety agreements pursuant to section
12-644 of this chapter. In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter,
the planning director may stipulate conditions to be placed on the final plat
provided evidence of record is sufficient, which may include:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
      2.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
      3.   Requiring the provision of on or off site public facilities or
services.
      4.   Assuring the development is maintained properly.
      5.   Provisions for setbacks that are greater than the minimum standards
set forth in this title to mitigate effects of the development on wildlife,
fisheries, wetlands, adjoining properties, or to reduce hazards due to
floodplain, floodways, steep slopes or other physical constraints of the land,
provided evidence is deemed sufficient to warrant greater setbacks.
      6.   Safeguards to protect adjoining properties.
   G.   The preliminary short plat shall be valid for a period not to exceed
two (2) calendar years from the date of approval. At any time prior to the
expiration date of the preliminary short plat, an applicant may make a written
request to the planning director for an extension of the preliminary short plat
for a period up to two (2) years, finding that conditions or applicable
regulations have not changed so substantially as to warrant reconsideration of
the proposed subdivision with respect to the public health, safety, and general
welfare. The planning director may recommend such request for extension at any
regular business meeting of the board of commissioners. The extension request
must be approved or denied prior to the expiration date of the preliminary
short plat.
   H.   Any determination made by the planning director in the administration
of this section may be appealed to the board by notifying the planning director
in writing of the intent to appeal within ten (10) calendar days from the date
of the determination. Upon receipt of the appeal, the planning director shall
schedule the application for a public hearing before the board, allowing
sufficient time for notice. The board shall conduct a public hearing and
consider the application, in accord with the procedures set forth in
subchapter 2.6 of this title.
(Ord. 557, 11-10-2016)
12-652: SHORT PLAT, CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT, PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL
PLAT:
   A.   The contents of the final plat for short plats processed under the
short plat procedure shall be as set forth in section
12-646 of this chapter.
   B.   The procedure for processing final plats of short plats utilizing the
short plat procedure shall be as set forth in section
12-648 of this chapter. (Ord. 557, 11-10-2016)
SUBCHAPTER 6.6 - MINOR LAND DIVISIONS
12-660: MINOR LAND DIVISION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Purpose: To ensure that land divisions comply with the applicable
zoning regulations; to establish a ministerial review of all land divisions;
and to expedite the process for those small divisions of land that conform to
the existing zone regulations in which the division lies.
   B.   Procedure: Applications for a minor land division which contain four
(4) or fewer contiguous lots under common ownership may be processed as “minor
land divisions” as set forth in this section and section
12-661 of this subchapter; provided, that no planned unit development is
requested to accommodate the proposed lot sizes.
   C.   Permit Required: Lots created by a minor land division, shall only be
eligible for one minor land division for a period of not less than two (2)
years. Land divisions done prior to the end of the two (2) year period shall be
processed as a subdivision or short plat.
   D.   Application: The application for a minor land division shall include:
      1.   Application: Prior to recordation of a deed or MLD plat, each
application for a minor land division shall be submitted on a form provided by
the Planning Department with appropriate fees approved by the Board of County
Commissioners.
      2.   Design Criteria: The MLD shall conform to the following design
criteria:
         a.   Any new and existing easements or roads showing access to each
property, considering alignment with existing or planned roads.
         b.   All proposed lots which are three hundred feet (300') or less in
width shall maintain a depth to width ratio of not greater than three point two
to one (3.2:1); and lots which are more than three hundred feet (300') in width
shall maintain a depth to width ration of not greater than four point two to
one (4.2:1). All proposed lots one hundred feet (100') or less in width shall
be designed so that the angle of intersection of the side lot lines with the
fronting road is between eighty-five (85) and ninety-five degrees (95), for a
distance of not less than fifty feet (50') from the point of intersection.
Submerged lands are exempt from the requirements herein.
         c.   Lands below the applicable natural or ordinary water mark, or the
applicable artificial high water mark, of any lake, river, stream, channel or
other body of public water shall not be counted in the calculations for
determining the maximum density for a subdivision. For example, if a forty (40)
acre parcel in the R-5 zoning district contains thirty (30) acres submerged
under Lake Pend Oreille’s artificial high water mark, then the parcel contains
ten (10) “usable” acres for the purpose of determining the maximum density in a
subdivision.
         d.   The division shall be designed around identified natural hazards
(highly erosive soils on steep slopes, landslide areas, rock falls, areas of
subsidence, floodplains) to protect building sites and roads from damage from
such hazards.
         e.   All plats shall include the sanitary restriction or the sanitary
restriction lift per Idaho Code 50-13266.
         f.   The lot size minimum shall be appropriate for the zone in which
the division is located.
         g.   Resulting lots shall not be divided by boundary of any city,
county, zoning designation, railroad right-of-way, or public right-of-way.
      3.   MLD Plat: The legal description and MLD plat shall be prepared by an
Idaho State registered land surveyor and shall include the plat certifications,
descriptions, approvals and comments as set forth in sections
12-646,
12-647 and
12-649 of this chapter.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 557, 11-10-2016; Ord. 581, 10-24-2018; Ord.
591, 10-23-2019; Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
12-661: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF MINOR LAND DIVISION:
Upon receipt and review of completeness, the planning and zoning department
shall:
   A.   Review the MLD plat and supplemental information to determine
compliance with these ordinances and prepare its report, which shall include
comments received from other departments.
   B.   Distribute the application to the county surveyor, the Assessor, the
road and bridge department, GIS and floodplain administrator for review and
compliance.
   C.   Based on the above findings, the planning director shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application within ninety (90) days, from
the date of a completed application was stamped as received.
   D.   If administratively approved, the final plat shall be transmitted to
the board of county commissioners at the next business meeting for review and
possible approval.
(Ord. 557, 11-10-2016; amd. Ord. 591, 10-23-2019; Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
SUBCHAPTER 6.7 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
12-670: READJUSTMENT OF LOT LINES WITHIN PLATTED SUBDIVISION:
   A.   The procedures set forth in sections
12-671 through
12-673 of this subchapter shall be used to process applications for "minor
notational changes", as defined in section
12-813 of this title, and any adjustment of platted lot lines between two (2)
or more existing adjacent lots or parcels where land taken from one lot or
parcel is added to an adjacent lot or parcel, but not to include readjustments
where public right of way is proposed for dedication. Where dedication is
proposed, the procedures for short plats, as set forth in this chapter, shall
be followed. Applications for readjustment may include:
      1.   The combining of two (2) or more lots.
      2.   Any adjustment of lot lines where no additional lots or parcels than
originally existed are created; and where no lot or parcel is reduced below the
minimum lot or parcel size for the zoning district in which the lots or parcels
are located, except that if a lot or parcel is already below the minimum lot or
parcel size, the lot or parcel shall not be further reduced in size and none of
the reconfigured lots shall be smaller than the smallest original lot or
parcel.
   B.   The board shall retain the authority to make a final determination when
any question should arise as to whether the provisions of this section are
applicable under any particular circumstance.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 591, 10-23-2019)
12-671: APPLICATIONS FOR ADJUSTMENT OF LOT LINES, MINOR NOTATIONAL CHANGES:
   A.   All applications made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to
the Bonner County planning department. Any person contemplating a lot line
adjustment/minor notational change is encouraged to contact the planning
director prior to submission of the application for discussion of procedures,
standards and criteria which are applicable to the proposed application.
   B.   All applications for readjustments of lot lines and minor notational
changes shall include:
      1.   Paper copies of the final plat prepared by an Idaho licensed
professional land surveyor containing the minimum information required at
subsection
12-642B3 and sections
12-646 and
12-647 of this chapter, the requirements for plats set forth in Idaho Code
title 50, chapter 13, and depicting the location of existing structures and
wells.
      2.   Additional information reasonably required for a thorough review of
the application as may be requested by the planning director.
      3.   A copy of the current preliminary title report.
   C.   Applications shall additionally include one copy of the plat currently
recorded marked to clearly indicate the proposed changes to the plat.
   D.   No application submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed
complete nor any plat recorded, until all fees set forth at section
12-265 of this title have been paid, unless waived by the board.
   E.   Applications for lot line adjustments shall conform to the design
criteria for subdivisions as set forth in sections
12-620 and
12-621, and subsections
12-624 A, D, and E of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 591, 10-
23-2019; Ord. 607, 7-22-2020; Ord. 681, 10-12-2022; Ord. 682, 10-12-2022)
12-672: PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF ADJUSTMENTS OF LOT
LINES, MINOR NOTATIONAL CHANGES:
   A.   The applicant shall file an application for a readjustment of lot lines
or minor notational change with the planning director, who shall have
reasonable time to examine the application to determine its completeness, with
regard to the requirements for said application as set forth at section
12-671 of this subchapter. If the application is determined to be incomplete,
the planning director shall inform the applicant in writing of additional items
or information necessary to complete the application.
   B.   Upon the determination of the planning director that an application is
complete, the planning director shall cause a report to be made specifying
whether the application is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter,
and if not, the changes that could be made in the application to bring it into
conformance.
   C.   The planning director shall consider the facts of the application and
the relevant ordinance standards and shall approve the application as presented
or subject to specific modifications upon finding adequate evidence that:
      1.   No additional lots are being created and no lot is being reduced
below the minimum lot size required by zoning; and
      2.   The proposed lot line adjustment is in accord with the purposes of
this title and of the zone district in which it is located.
   D.   The planning director shall set forth the decision in writing
explaining the reasons for the decision, and citing the ordinance standards
used in making the decision and findings of fact and conclusions in support of
the decision. If the planning director denies the application, the planning
director shall also set forth in writing the actions, if any, the applicant
could take to obtain approval.
   E.   Changes in an approved application, resulting in the modification of
the terms and conditions of approval, may be approved by the planning director
upon a written request by the applicant provided:
      1.   No additional lots are created;
      2.   The changes are consistent, and substantially conform, with the
original preliminary plat approval; and
      3.   The changes do not result in any violation of the provisions of this
title.
   F.   Any decision or determination made by the planning director in the
administration of the provisions of this section may be appealed to the board
as set forth at section
12-261 of this title.
   G.   The lot line adjustment application approval shall be valid for a
period not to exceed two (2) calendar years from the date of approval. Within
two (2) years of the approval, the applicant shall submit the final plat to the
planning director. At any time prior to the expiration date of the application
approval, an applicant may make a written request to the planning director for
a single extension of the application approval for a period up to two (2)
years. The planning director may consider such request for extension. The
extension request must be approved or denied prior to the expiration date of
the approval.
   H.   Upon approval of the lot line adjustment/notational change application,
the planning director shall cause a review of the paper copy of the final plat
by endorsing agencies to verify conformance with the provisions of this title,
conditions of application approval and provisions of Idaho Code title 50,
chapter 13.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 591, 10-23-2019)
12-673: FINAL PLAT FOR LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS/NOTATIONAL CHANGES TO BE DRAWN,
TIME FOR FILING, SIGNING:
Upon approval of the paper copy of the final plat, the applicant shall cause a
final plat to be drawn, suitable for recording and in compliance with the
requirements for plats set forth at Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, and the
requirements for final plats set forth in this chapter. The chairperson of the
board shall be authorized to sign the final plat upon the receipt of a
statement from the planning director confirming that:
   A.   The final plat conforms to the requirements of Idaho Code and this
code; and
   B.   The final plat conforms with the approved application; and
   C.   The conditions of approval have been completed or financially
guaranteed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 591, 10-23-2019)
CHAPTER 7
ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-700: Purpose
Subchapter 7.1 - Shorelines
12-710: Purpose
12-711: Shoreline Setbacks
12-712: Fence Restrictions Near Water
12-713: Impervious Surface Standards Near Water
12-714: Shoreline Vegetative Buffer
Subchapter 7.2 - Grading, Stormwater Management And Erosion Control
12-720.1: Purpose
12-720.2: Applicability
12-720.3: Activities To Which This Subchapter Is Not Applicable
12-720.4: General Provisions, Violations
12-721.1: Administration
12-721.2: Administrative Exceptions
12-722.1: Procedures For New Subdivisions
12-722.2: Procedures For Concurrent Review Of Applications Other Than For New
Subdivisions Or Building Location Permits Or Building Permits
12-722.3: Procedures For Processing Of Individual Building Location Permit Or
Building Permit Applications
12-722.4: Procedures For Review Of Public Projects
12-722.5: Procedures For Review Of Other Projects
12-723.1: Grading Standards
12-723.2: General Requirements For Stormwater Management Control
12-724.1: Contents Of Grading/Stormwater Management Plan
12-724.1.2: Contents Of Grading Plan
12-724.2: Contents Of Grading/Erosion Control Plans
12-724.3: Contents Of Operation And Maintenance Plans
12-724.4: Optional Preliminary Grading/Stormwater Management And Erosion
Control Plan
12-725: Modifications Of Grading/Stormwater Management Plans And Erosion
Control Plans During Construction
12-726: Performance Standards
12-727.1: Inspections
12-727.2: Guarantee Of Installation
12-728: Variances, Application For, Notification, Procedure
12-729: Investigation, Violation, Enforcement, Remedies And Penalties
Subchapter 7.3 - Wetlands
12-730: Purpose
12-731: Wetlands Reconnaissance Required
12-732: Wetlands Delineation Required
12-733: Wetland Buffers And Setbacks
Subchapter 7.4 - Wildlife
12-740: Purpose
12-741: Wildlife Protection Standards For New Subdivisions
Subchapter 7.5 - Flood Damage Prevention  1  (Rep. by Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
Subchapter 7.6 - Hillsides
12-760: Purpose
12-761: Conceptual Engineering Plan Required
12-762: Geotechnical Analysis Required
12-763: Hydrological Analysis Required (Reserved)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 14 of this Code.
12-700: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Preserve and manage the county's natural resources, including pure
water, clean air and diverse wildlife, to attain the greatest long term public
benefit.
   B.   To protect its community from the loss of lives and property and to
reduce public and private financial losses due to flood, fire, mass wasting,
avalanches and excessive slopes by setting standards for development within
hazard areas and discouraging development in high hazard areas. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 7.1 - SHORELINES
12-710: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is:
   A.   To preserve both the quality and quantity of Bonner County water
resources.
   B.   To reduce erosion and sedimentation into waterways. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-711: SHORELINE SETBACKS:
   A.   The following shoreline setbacks shall apply in all zoning districts:
      1.   For lakes, sloughs, ponds or other similar basins, or the Clark Fork
or Pend Oreille rivers, or intermittent streams as shown on the national
hydrography dataset (NHD), no structure shall be located closer than forty feet
(40'), measured horizontally from the "shoreline", as defined in Section
12-819 of this title.
      2.   For rivers, streams, creeks or other similar flowing bodies of
water, excluding the water bodies identified in subsection A1 of this section,
no structure shall be located closer than seventy five feet (75'), measured
horizontally from the applicable natural or ordinary water mark of any stream
as shown on the NHD published by the United States geological survey, or by
actual land survey or field inspection.
   B.   Shoreline Setback Exceptions:
      1.   Placement of constructed trams, rails, uncovered steps, stairs or
walkways, any of which shall be four feet (4') or less in width and installed
to provide access to the shoreline, are permitted within the shoreline setback.
Such structures shall not be constructed in a manner that is parallel to the
shoreline that would create a boardwalk along the waterfront (except where
steep slopes require switchback designs).
      2.   For all parcels or lots where implementation of a seventy five foot
(75') shoreline setback would result in a remaining building envelope of less
than one hundred feet (100'), the shoreline setback may be reduced to a minimum
of forty feet (40') as needed to allow for a maximum building envelope depth of
one hundred feet (100'). The shoreline setback shall only be reduced to the
minimum necessary to achieve the one hundred foot (100') building envelope.
This exception shall apply only to dimensional constraints, but shall not apply
to topographical, environmental or other constraints. This exception shall not
apply to the following streams or rivers: Pack and Priest rivers; Hellroaring,
Twin, Lightning, Grouse, Rapid Lightning, Trestle and Cocolalla creeks. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
12-712: FENCE RESTRICTIONS NEAR WATER:
   A.   Fences or walls, excluding seawalls, taller than thirty six inches
(36"), shall not be located closer than forty feet (40') from the shoreline.
   B.   Fences that are generally perpendicular to the shoreline may be
permitted per subsection A of this section, but may only be placed along
property lines. Fences in other locations within forty feet (40') of
shorelines, including those placed parallel to shorelines, shall be prohibited.
   C.   The fencing restrictions shall not apply to fences erected for the
pasturing of livestock. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-713: IMPERVIOUS SURFACE STANDARDS NEAR WATER:
The maximum "impervious surface", as defined in section
12-809 of this title, within "shore land" areas, as defined in section
12-819 of this title, which are defined as those lands extending landward for
two hundred feet (200') in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane
from any shoreline, shall be thirty five percent (35%).
   A.   Exceptions:
      1.   Submerged lands shall be excluded from the lot size calculations
above. Building location permits or building permit applications shall clearly
show all existing and proposed impervious surfaces within the shoreline area
and calculate the applicable percentage.
      2.   Developments may exceed these requirements by up to fifty percent
(50%), provided all structures are not located closer than seventy five feet
(75') from the shoreline. For example, the maximum percentage of impervious
area may be increased from thirty five percent (35%) of the shore land area to
fifty two and one-half percent (521/2%) of the shore land area, provided all
structures are not closer than seventy five feet (75') from the shoreline.
(Ord. 527, 5-16-2012)
12-714: SHORELINE VEGETATIVE BUFFER:
   A.   Areas: Vegetation buffer management areas include all lands within
forty feet (40') from shorelines.
   B.   Delineated On Final Plat: Shoreline vegetation buffer management areas
shall be delineated on the final plat of any subdivision. Applicants for shore
land subdivisions may be required to plant vegetation as provided in
appendix B of this title in shoreline vegetation buffer management areas prior
to final plat approval. Exceptions may be made for areas that contain no
cultivatable soil, such as pebble beach areas or rock outcroppings.
   C.   Water Quality Standards: To maintain water quality, reduce the
potential for nutrients entering the waterways and to protect fish and wildlife
habitat and drinking water standards, within shoreline vegetation buffer
management areas, one of the following standards shall be met:
      1.   Preferred option: Noninvasive vegetation shall be left intact in
existing natural condition within the shoreline vegetative buffer. The
vegetative buffer may be enhanced with the planting of additional native and
nonnative beneficial forbs, reeds, sedges, grasses, vines, shrubs, trees,
ferns, perennials or ground cover listed in
appendix B of this title.
      2.   Alternative option: Noninvasive vegetation shall be established and
maintained within the shoreline vegetative buffer. The vegetative buffer strip
shall consist of any combination of native and nonnative beneficial forbs,
reeds, sedges, grasses, vines, shrubs, trees, ferns, perennials or ground cover
listed in
appendix B of this title. The planting shall be sufficiently dense to provide
close growing vegetation designed to receive overland flow and hold and
stabilize soils.
   D.   Trees: In addition, in vegetative buffers adjacent to perennial
streams, trees shall be retained in accord with the following:
      1.   Standing trees, including conifers, hardwoods and snags, shall be
left within forty feet (40') of the ordinary high water mark on each side of
all perennial streams, in the following minimum numbers of standing trees per
one thousand feet (1,000') of stream on each side:
      TABLE 7-1
      TREE RETENTION STANDARDS FOR STREAM CORRIDORS
 
Tree Diameter Breast Height (dbh) (Measured At  Perennial Stream Width
4.5' Above Mean Ground Level On Standing Trees) Over 20' 10' - 20' Under 10'
   3" - 7.9"                                 200      200       200
   8" - 11.9"                                42       42        42
   12" - 19.9"                               21       21        -
   20"+                                      4        -         -
 
         a.   Snags will be counted as standing trees in each diameter class if
snag height exceeds one and one-half (11/2) times the distance between the snag
and the stream's ordinary high water mark. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of
any class may consist of snags.
         b.   Trees should only be pruned up to one-third (1/3) of their height
in order to maintain optimum tree health. If defensible space is a high
priority, up to one-half (1/2) of the tree height may be pruned. (Ord. 501, 11-
18-2008)
   E.   Exceptions: The shoreline vegetation standards shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   Placement of trams, rails, uncovered steps, stairs, walkways four
feet (4') or less in width to provide access to the shoreline. These structures
shall not be constructed in a manner that is parallel to the shoreline that
would create a boardwalk along the waterfront, except where steep slopes
require switchback designs.
      2.   Replacement of lawn areas with native vegetation.
      3.   Removal of trees infected by a pathogen or attacked by insects that
threaten the surrounding trees.
      4.   Removal of trees that are potentially hazardous to public health or
safety due to the risk of falling, and structural instability cannot be
remedied due to nonmanmade, natural caused injury, such as weather or animal
related damage.
      5.   Shoreline property owners are encouraged to plant native vegetation
where none exists, in areas that contain cultivatable soils.
      6.   Exceptions may be made for areas that contain no cultivatable soil,
such as pebble beach areas or rock outcroppings. (Ord. 512, 1-6-2010)
SUBCHAPTER 7.2 - GRADING, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
12-720.1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to protect property, surface water and
groundwater against significant adverse effects from excavation, filling,
clearing, unstable earthworks, soil erosion, sedimentation and stormwater
runoff, and to provide maximum safety in the development and design of building
sites, roads and other service amenities. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-720.2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to:
   A.   All new subdivisions subject to the provisions of chapter 6 of this
title, as amended, and all new planned unit developments subject to the
provisions of chapter 2,
subchapter 2.5 of this title, as amended, except as provided for in subsection
12-720.3J of this subchapter;
   B.   Commercial and industrial site development and commercial or industrial
planned unit developments subject to the provisions of this title, as amended,
and building permits for commercial and industrial uses subject to the
provisions of title 11 of this code, except as provided for in subsection
12-720.3K of this subchapter;
   C.   All public projects, including road construction, undertaken by Bonner
County, or undertaken by any other political subdivision of the state of Idaho
or public agency over which Bonner County asserts jurisdiction through this
title and title 11 of this code, as amended; (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   D.   New building construction which occurs within three hundred feet (300')
of any lake, slough, pond, river, stream or intermittent stream shown on the
national hydrography dataset (NHD), as published by the United States
geological survey, or by actual survey, and which is subject to the provisions
of title 11 of this code, as amended;
   E.   New building construction or development which occurs on or within
three hundred feet (300') of a slope with fifteen percent (15%) or greater
incline as determined from the applicable seven and one-half (7.5) minute
quadrangle map published by the United States geological survey or by actual
survey, and which is subject to the provisions of title 11 of this code, as
amended; (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
   F.   Land disturbing activities which are a part of, accessory to, or
preparatory to any of the activities listed in subsections A through E of this
section;
   G.   Conversion of roads from one use to another (such as a logging road to
a private road, private road to a public road, etc.), regardless of level of
improvement required on the road; and
   H.   All other "excavation", defined as the mechanical removal of more than
fifty (50) cubic yards of rock, natural soil or fill in any configuration, and
grading (except those specifically exempted in section
12-720.3 of this subchapter). (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-720.3: ACTIVITIES TO WHICH THIS SUBCHAPTER IS NOT APPLICABLE:
The provisions of this subchapter shall not be applicable to any activity not
specifically enumerated in section
12-720.2 of this subchapter, and shall not be applicable to:
   A.   Road construction which proceeds in compliance with and is restricted
by the Idaho forest practices act, Idaho Code title 38, chapter 13;
   B.   Agricultural activities and practices specifically exempted from the
local planning act at Idaho Code section 67-6529, to include the construction
or use of ranch or farm roads used for access to fields, pastures or woodland;
   C.   Road or highway construction within the jurisdiction of any public
highway agency other than Bonner County, and over which Bonner County may not
assert use or control pursuant to provisions at Idaho Code title 40;
   D.   Installation, repair, replacement or maintenance of septic tanks which
proceeds under the terms of a permit issued by the Panhandle health district;
   E.   Stream channel alterations which proceed under the terms of a permit
issued by the Idaho department of water resources pursuant to Idaho Code title
42, chapter 38; (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   F.   Traditional uses and activities carried out in conjunction with a
residential use, including, but not limited to, such activities as gardening,
yard maintenance, tree planting and reforestation, snow removal, maintenance of
existing road or driveway, etc.; (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
   G.   Drilling of wells which proceed under the terms of permits issued by
the Idaho department of water resources;
   H.   Land clearing and similar activities which occur as a part of fire
suppression, or for the purpose of constructing fire breaks in forest lands;
   I.   Land clearing of rights of way by utility companies for the purpose of
utility transmission and servicing of utility owned equipment;
   J.   Subdivisions in which all lots contain five (5) acres or greater, and
no additional "impervious surface", as defined in section
12-809 of this title, are created. For subdivisions in which all lots contain
five (5) acres or greater and new impervious surface is limited to driveways
and roads only, the driveways and roadways only shall be subject to this
subchapter; and
   K.   Applications for conditional use permits, industrial and commercial
site plan reviews, planned unit developments and variances that do not result
in the creation of additional "impervious surface", as defined in section
12-809 of this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-720.4: GENERAL PROVISIONS, VIOLATIONS:
   A.   For all activities to which this subchapter is applicable as set forth
at section
12-720.2 of this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, group,
association, entity or body corporate to proceed to conduct any activity or
initiate construction on any structure, including excavation, site preparation
or leveling, without first complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
   B.   No person shall damage, harm, fail to install or complete, or otherwise
impair the grass infiltration areas, or any portion of a grading/stormwater
management system, without prior approval from the county.
   C.   The failure to maintain any component of a grading/stormwater
management system in accord with an approved grading/stormwater management plan
shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this subchapter. (Ord. 501,
11-18-2008)
12-721.1: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The planning director shall administer the provisions of this
subchapter and shall perform all duties imposed upon the planning director
within this subchapter.
   B.   In addition to the specific duties as may be set forth in other
sections, the planning director shall:
      1.   Examine all permit applications submitted to the Bonner County
planning department to determine whether the provisions of this subchapter
apply. The planning director will receive all applications relating to the
administration of this subchapter.
      2.   Direct applications into the relevant and proper procedural manner
for review.
      3.   Maintain on file all applications, records of proceedings, final
decisions, final grading/stormwater management plans, administrative exceptions
issued, variances and records of appeals as are required by this subchapter.
      4.   Use as guidelines for examining all erosion control plans,
preliminary grading/stormwater management plans and final grading/stormwater
management plans, the handbook of best management practices for stormwater
management and erosion and sedimentation control, and the stormwater management
plan criteria and engineering standards prepared for the Panhandle health
district, and the interagency stormwater committee by Kennedy Engineers,
Spokane, WA, April 1992. The handbooks shall be used for guidance purposes
only, not as a regulatory standard, and shall be made available to the public
at the offices of the Bonner County planning department, the Bonner County
clerk and at all public libraries within Bonner County.
      5.   Assist applicants to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
      6.   Designate such assistants as the planning director may find
necessary to fulfill these duties in a timely manner. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-721.2: ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the planning director to exercise sound professional
judgment in the issuance of administrative exceptions and to determine that
such exceptions are within the purposes set forth in this subchapter:
   A.   The planning director may issue an administrative exception from the
provisions of this subchapter, in whole or in part, for applications for
building location permits or building permits for additions, remodeling or
restoration of existing structures which would otherwise be subject to the
provisions of this subchapter as set forth at section
12-720.2 of this subchapter.
   B.   The planning director may issue an administrative exception from the
provisions of this subchapter to accommodate unique topographical, existing
impervious surfaces, vegetative, geological or hydrological conditions.
   C.   The planning director may issue an administrative exception from the
provisions of this subchapter when an applicant can demonstrate that the site
located within three hundred feet (300') of a body of water is so situated
topographically that the natural drainage from the site flows away from the
body of water.
   D.   The planning director may issue an administrative exception in whole or
in part from the provisions of this subchapter for commercial and industrial
site development, and commercial or industrial planned unit developments listed
at subsection
12-720.2B of this subchapter, for development which is part of an approved
conditional use permit that includes an approved grading/stormwater management
plan pursuant to section
12-724.1 of this subchapter.
   E.   The planning director may issue an administrative exception in whole or
in part from the provisions of this subchapter for new residential building
construction listed at subsections
12-720.2D and E of this subchapter, for lots which are part of an approved
subdivision that includes an approved lot specific grading/stormwater
management plan pursuant to section
12-724.1 of this subchapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
12-722.1: PROCEDURES FOR NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   At the time of application for a new subdivision as set forth at
chapter 6 of this title, the applicant shall cause a grading/stormwater
management plan to be developed for the subdivision application. The grading/
stormwater management plan and the preliminary plat of the subdivision shall be
reviewed concurrently by the Zoning Commission.
   B.   No final plat for a subdivision shall be approved until the grading/
stormwater management plan for the subdivision is also approved by the board.
   C.   No final plat shall be signed by the board until the requirements at
section
12-727.1 of this subchapter have been met.
   D.   A set of final drawings illustrating the actual placement of the
components of the grading/stormwater management system shall be filed with the
planning director prior to final plat approval and prior to the release of any
bond or financial surety for the grading/stormwater management system. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-722.2: PROCEDURES FOR CONCURRENT REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS OTHER THAN FOR NEW
SUBDIVISIONS OR BUILDING LOCATION PERMITS OR BUILDING PERMITS:
Any application which is not an application for a subdivision or a building
location permit or building permit, but which is subject to the procedural
requirements set forth in this title, as amended, shall be reviewed following
the procedures set forth in this section. This section is applicable to
applications for conditional use permits, industrial and commercial site plan
reviews, planned unit developments and variances which are included at section
12-720.2 of this subchapter.
   A.   A grading/stormwater management plan shall be submitted concurrently
with the application to be processed through this title. The planning director
shall review the grading/stormwater management plan to determine compliance of
the plan with this subchapter.
   B.   At the time of review of the application, the grading/stormwater
management plan shall also be reviewed.
   C.   No final approval of an application shall occur unless a grading/
stormwater management plan for the application is approved. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008)
12-722.3: PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING OF INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOCATION PERMIT OR
BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Unless an administrative exception has been issued, all grading, stormwater
management, or erosion control plans for building location permits or building
permits to which this subchapter is applicable, as set forth at section
12-720.2 of this subchapter, shall be processed as set forth in this section:
   A.   For a building permit or building location permit which would result in
land disturbing activity at the site equal to or greater than four thousand
(4,000) square feet of area, the applicant shall submit a grading/stormwater
management plan as required at section
12-724.1 of this subchapter, prior to land disturbing activities.
   B.   For building location permits or building permits which would result in
less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of land disturbing activity at the
site, the applicant shall submit a grading/erosion control plan as required at
section
12-724.2 of this subchapter, prior to land disturbing activities. (Ord. 524, 1-
11-2012)
   C.   The planning director shall review the grading/stormwater management
plan or the grading/erosion control plan for compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter.
      1.   If the planning director finds the erosion control plan or the
grading/stormwater management plan in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter, the building location permit or building permit shall also be
deemed to be in compliance.
      2.   If the planning director finds that the erosion control plan or the
preliminary grading/stormwater management plan is not in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, the planning director shall notify the applicant
in writing of the changes that need to be made to the drawings or the plan to
bring it into compliance. Changes to a plan or drawings shall not require
reapplication.
   D.   Grading/erosion control plans and grading/stormwater management plans
shall be retained on file with the building location permit or building permit
application. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-722.4: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PUBLIC PROJECTS:
   A.   Public projects which require zoning review and approval shall be
processed as at section
12-722.2 of this subchapter.
   B.   Public projects which require only a building location permit or
building permit shall be processed as at section
12-722.3 of this subchapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
   C.   Public projects which do not require zoning review and which do not
require building location permits or building permits shall conform to the
following procedures:
      1.   A grading/stormwater management plan shall be prepared by the
applicant for the public project and submitted to the planning director for
review, prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity associated
with the project.
      2.   The planning director shall review the grading, stormwater
management, or erosion plan for compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
      3.   If the planning director finds the plan in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, the director shall provide written approval to
the applicant. The approval shall expire if development has not commenced
within two (2) years of the date of approval.
      4.   If the planning director finds that the plan is not in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter, the planning director shall notify the
applicant in writing of changes required to bring the plan into compliance. The
filing of these changes shall not require reapplication. (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
12-722.5: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF OTHER PROJECTS:
   A.   Projects that are subject to section
12-720.2, "Applicability", of this subchapter but are not accompanied by other
land use or building applications listed at sections
12-722.1 through
12-722.4 of this subchapter, are subject to the following:
      1.   For commercial or industrial site development or conversion of roads
from one use to another, a grading/stormwater management plan shall be
submitted to the planning department.
      2.   For preparatory activities listed at subsection
12-720.2F of this subchapter, the corresponding type of stormwater or grading
plan required for the eventual land use shall be submitted to the planning
department.
      3.   For fill, excavation and grading to which this subchapter is
applicable, the following plan is required:
         a.   For sites not on or within three hundred feet (300') of a fifteen
percent (15%) or greater slope or sites which are not within three hundred feet
(300') of any lakes, sloughs, ponds, rivers, streams or intermittent streams as
shown on the NHD, the following applies:
            (1)   No grading or stormwater plan is required for fill, grading
or excavation which is greater than fifty (50) cubic yards but less than one
hundred (100) cubic yards.
            (2)   A grading/erosion plan is required for fill, grading or
excavation which involves between one hundred (100) cubic yards and five
hundred (500) cubic yards of material.
            (3)   A grading/stormwater plan is required for fill, grading or
excavation which exceeds five hundred (500) cubic yards of material.
         b.   For sites on or within three hundred feet (300') of a fifteen
percent (15%) or greater slope or within three hundred feet (300') of any
lakes, sloughs, ponds, rivers, streams or intermittent streams as shown on the
NHD, the following applies:
            (1)   A grading/erosion plan shall be submitted for fill, grading
or excavation which is greater than fifty (50) cubic yards but less than one
hundred (100) cubic yards.
            (2)   A grading/stormwater plan shall be filed for fill, grading or
excavation which is one hundred (100) cubic yards or greater.
   B.   The grading, stormwater management, or erosion control plan and
requisite fee shall be submitted to the planning department.
   C.   The planning director shall review the grading, stormwater management,
or erosion plan for compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
      1.   If the planning director finds the plan in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, the director shall provide written approval to
the applicant. The approval shall expire if the use has not commenced within
two (2) years from the date of approval.
      2.   If the planning director finds that the plan is not in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter, the planning director shall notify the
applicant in writing of the changes that need to be made to the drawings or the
plan to bring it into compliance. The filing of these changes shall not require
reapplication. (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
12-723.1: GRADING STANDARDS:
   A.   The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the
intended use and shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1),
unless a design professional can demonstrate to the planning director
substantial evidence that steeper slopes are feasible, taking into account
safety, stability, erosion control, revegetation and overall water quality
impacts. Subsurface drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability. All
engineering reports are subject to review by the planning director or designee.
   B.   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and
shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), unless a design
professional can demonstrate to the planning director substantial evidence that
steeper slopes are feasible, taking into account safety, stability, erosion
control, revegetation and overall water quality impacts. Fill slopes shall not
be constructed on natural slopes of forty percent (40%) (21/2 horizontal to 1
vertical) or steeper, without special treatment or design. In addition, the toe
of fill slopes shall not be closer to the top of existing or planned downhill
cut slopes than the height of that cut (e.g., if an 8 foot cut is planned, the
toe of the uphill fill slope shall not be closer than 8 feet to the top of that
cut), unless the design professional has demonstrated that comparable stability
can be achieved with lesser setbacks.
   C.   Prior to placement of fill, the ground surface shall be prepared to
receive fill by removing vegetation, topsoil, forest duff and any other
unsuitable material. The area to receive fill shall be scarified to provide a
bond with the new fill. Fill shall not be placed until the area is prepared by
constructing a level or slightly insloped toe bench into competent material at
the base of the new fill. The planning director may waive the benching
requirement for minor fills which are not intended to support a road, driveway
or structure where the project design professional provides adequate evidence
the fill is not at risk for slippage or movement. In high risk areas where
slopes exceed fifteen percent (15%), or where highly erosive soils, seepage
areas or known areas of subsidence exist, the position, width and configuration
of the bench shall be determined by a design professional. Fill slopes and the
transition zone into natural terrain shall be configured to a generally smooth,
planar configuration so that runoff traverses the area as sheet flow and is not
concentrated. Fill material shall be composed of mineral soil that is free of
organic material. Roadway fills shall be placed in lifts and compacted to a
minimum of ninety five percent (95%) of the maximum density as determined by
the AASHTO T-99 or ASTM D-698 compaction procedure, or as specified in the
design professional's report.
   D.   Except where roads or driveways cross property lines, the tops and toes
of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries one-half (1/
2) of the height of the slope with a minimum of five feet (5') and a maximum of
twenty feet (20'), unless a design professional has demonstrated to the
planning director that smaller setbacks provide a sufficient measure of safety
and stability for activities which may occur on adjacent property.
   E.   Terracing shall be required on all cut or fill slopes which exceed
fifty feet (50') in height. Spacing, width and drainage requirements of the
terrace shall be determined by a design professional. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-723.2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL:
Unless otherwise lawfully excused from compliance with the standards set forth
in this subchapter, all development to which this subchapter is applicable
shall comply with the following requirements and methods for stormwater
management control:
   A.   Stormwater, in accordance with the performance standards set forth
herein, shall be directed by nonerosive means to a stormwater management system
identified in the handbook of best management practices for stormwater
management and erosion and sedimentation control, and the stormwater management
plan criteria and engineering standards prepared for the Panhandle health
district and the interagency stormwater committee by Kennedy Engineers,
Spokane, WA, April 1992, or by implementation of measures shown by a design
professional to have an effective design capability which equals or exceeds the
standards of this subchapter.
   B.   All development subject to this subchapter shall be carried out such
that the runoff of stormwaters shall not be accelerated or concentrated beyond
predevelopment levels beyond the exterior property lines or project boundaries.
Exceptions for joint management of stormwater with adjoining property owners
will be allowed by the planning director if an acceptable joint agreement is
presented as a part of the grading/stormwater management plan.
   C.   Stormwater runoff shall be managed through compliance with the design
standards and best management practices, or by implementation of measures shown
by a design professional to have an effective design capability which equals or
exceeds the standards of this subchapter.
   D.   Each applicant who proposes and implements a grass covered retention
area for the collection or treatment of stormwater in accordance with this
subchapter shall also establish the necessary maintenance system, including an
acceptable plan for sustained functioning of the collection and treatment
system. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-724.1: CONTENTS OF GRADING/STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A grading/stormwater management plan shall bear the stamp or signature of a
design professional and shall include:
   A.   A project summary or site plan showing the entire area covered by the
application, any construction sites, existing drainage patterns, constraining
environmental conditions and areas proposed or likely to be covered by
impervious surfaces at completion of the project.
   B.   Construction quality drawings of all physical features of a proposed
stormwater management system, to include a grading plan and the dimensions
clearly shown for all conveyances, retention basins and swales designed for
collection, treatment and infiltration of stormwater runoff.
   C.   Calculations which include, at a minimum: the extent of impervious
surfaces, the capacity of conveyances and retention basins; and the design
storm yield expected at the site.
   D.   A proposed construction schedule for the stormwater management system.
   E.   A proposed system of maintenance of the various elements of the
stormwater management system, designating specifically any portions which are
to be conveyed to a group, association or political subdivision for
maintenance.
   F.   An erosion control plan.
   G.   For any injection wells or dry wells subject to the provisions of Idaho
Code title 42, chapter 39, that registration for such wells has been obtained
from Panhandle health district or other jurisdiction which may supersede, as
provided by the state of Idaho.
   H.   For any stream channel alterations subject to the provision of Idaho
Code title 42, chapter 38, that a permit for such alterations has been obtained
from the Idaho department of water resources.
   I.   The operation and maintenance plan. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-724.1.2: CONTENTS OF GRADING PLAN:
A grading plan shall include the following:
   A.   All areas to be disturbed.
   B.   Cut and fill limits for roadways, parking lots, buildings and all other
proposed improvements.
   C.   Grade break, drainage channels and other stormwater conveyance
channels, showing construction quality grading and layout.
   D.   All existing and proposed structures with finished floor elevation
stated.
   E.   Point elevation details for all grade breaks, angle points, curve
points and tie-in points at existing surfaces.
   F.   Location, elevation, width and configuration of any benches, terraces,
retaining walls or other slope treatments. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-724.2: CONTENTS OF GRADING/EROSION CONTROL PLANS:
   A.   Drawings of an appropriate scale, not to exceed one hundred feet to the
inch (1" = 100') showing the areas of land disturbing activities, surface water
bodies and watercourses, utilities, easements, areas subject to clearing,
grading and for stockpiling of topsoil.
   B.   Location of temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures.
   C.   Location of permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures.
   D.   A proposed construction and revegetation schedule.
   E.   Maintenance and repair responsibility.
   F.   Calculations which include at a minimum the extent of impervious
surfaces and the capacity of retention basins or other erosion and
sedimentation control measures. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-724.3: CONTENTS OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLANS:
   A.   An inspection schedule for the grading/stormwater management system to
assure its continued operation as designed.
   B.   The person, organization, political subdivision or corporation
responsible for the continued operation and maintenance of the grading/
stormwater management system.
   C.   The contact person.
   D.   Financial arrangements for the support of continued maintenance of the
grading/stormwater management system. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-724.4: OPTIONAL PRELIMINARY GRADING/STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION
CONTROL PLAN:
For preliminary plats, conditional use permits, variances or planned unit
developments subject to the requirements of this subchapter, an optional
preliminary grading/stormwater management and erosion control plan may be
submitted at the time of application in lieu of the plans required at sections
12-724.1 through
12-724.3 of this subchapter, subject to the following:
   A.   The optional preliminary grading/stormwater management and erosion
control plan shall bear the stamp or signature of a design professional and
shall contain the following:
      1.   A project summary describing the proposed improvements to the site
and identifying the existing site characteristics, including slope, soil type
and ground cover.
      2.   A site plan at a scale not to exceed one inch equals two hundred
feet (1" = 200'), indicating the location of proposed roadways, any proposed
grassed infiltration areas, surface water, seasonal drainages, wetlands or
other environmentally sensitive areas. The site plan shall include flow arrows
to indicate slope and sufficient topographic information to show the contours
of the land. (Use of USGS map is acceptable, provided the scale corresponds to
the site plan scale.)
      3.   Calculations for each drainage area showing the total proposed
impervious surface, capacity of conveyances, grassed infiltration areas and
retention basins and the design storm yield expected at the site.
      4.   Photographs of the site, including the proposed road approach.
      5.   A statement from the design professional confirming the site is
capable of being developed consistent with the performance standards of this
subchapter.
   B.   Bonner County planning department shall review the optional preliminary
grading/stormwater management and erosion control plan using the procedures set
forth at section
12-268 of this title. Upon completion of the review, the preliminary plan shall
be considered by the governing body concurrently with the corresponding land
use application.
   C.   Once Bonner County has approved the preliminary plan and corresponding
application and prior to any development, the applicant shall submit to the
planning department the required fees and final grading/stormwater management
and erosion control plan that meets the applicable requirements of sections
12-723.1 through
12-726 of this subchapter.
   D.   The planning director or designee shall review the final plan and
inform the applicant in writing whether the plan is complete and approved or
incomplete. If the plan is incomplete, the director shall advise the applicant
in writing of the required information or revisions needed to complete the
plan.
   E.   The planning director shall issue a written "notice to proceed" once
the final plan has been approved. No construction or development of the site
shall occur until the notice to proceed has been issued.
   F.   Any determination made by the planning director in the administration
of this section may be appealed to the board, pursuant to section
12-261 of this title.
   G.   Failure to submit the final plan or obtain the notice to proceed prior
to initiation of construction is a violation of this subchapter and is subject
to the enforcement actions, fees and fines of this title. (Ord. 524, 1-11-2012)
12-725: MODIFICATIONS OF GRADING/STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS AND EROSION
CONTROL PLANS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
During any aspect of site preparation, development or construction, if field
conditions prove to be substantially different from conditions assumed by the
design professional in the creation of a grading/stormwater management plan or
grading/erosion control plan, such that stormwater or erosion controls may not
function as planned, the design professional or owner may apply to the planning
director for permission to make a minor modification in the plan. If the
planning director finds that the modification is necessary and in substantial
accord with the approved plan, the planning director shall notify the design
professional or owner in writing, and construction can proceed. Any such minor
modifications approved by the planning director shall be shown on the final
drawings of the grading/stormwater management plan on file with the planning
director. Any major modifications, as determined by the county engineer or
planning director, shall be considered pursuant to the provisions for
modifications of permits at section
12-266 of this title. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-726: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards shall be applicable to all design,
construction, implementation and maintenance of stormwater management systems
as required by this subchapter:
   A.   Treatment System: All stormwater from impervious areas shall be
directed to a stormwater management system identified in the handbook of best
management practices for stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control, and the stormwater management plan criteria and engineering standards,
prepared for the Panhandle health district and the interagency stormwater
committee by Kennedy Engineers, Spokane, WA, April 1992, or by implementation
of measures shown by a design professional to have an effective design
capability which equals or exceeds the standards of this subchapter. Stormwater
treatment systems shall be sized to hold and treat the first one-half inch (1/
2") of stormwater from impervious surfaces.
   B.   Collection And Conveyance System: No stormwater shall be collected or
concentrated, except within a channel or artificial watercourse protected
against erosion and containing energy dissipation measures to prevent erosion
on adjoining lands. Existing watercourses and streams shall be protected from
disturbance and erosion during site development. Any site development shall
preserve installed components of a stormwater management system if they exist.
All disturbed soils shall be protected from erosion during the course of
construction.
   C.   Disposal System: The disposal component of a stormwater management
system shall have the capacity to collect, convey and provide detention for a
twenty five (25) year design storm, without damage to the stormwater management
system or adjacent land and improvements.
   D.   For new subdivisions, planned unit developments, commercial and
industrial development and public projects, as set forth at section
12-720.2 of this subchapter, there shall be no increase in the peak rate of
runoff from the site when compared with the dissipation of stormwater from the
site prior to the start of any construction, for the first one-half inch (1/2")
of runoff. Within project boundaries, sufficient retention capacity shall be
constructed to retain stormwater flow from the first one-half inch (1/2").
   E.   Certification: Certification in the Panhandle stormwater and erosion
education program is encouraged for all contractors, developers, and excavators
involved in site disturbance activities within two hundred feet (200') of the
shoreline.
   F.   Weed, Pesticide Free Materials: Use of weed free and pesticide free
materials is encouraged when natural materials are called for in stormwater/
erosion control plans. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-727.1: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Grading/Stormwater Management Plans: At a minimum, two (2) inspections
shall be required: 1) after erosion and sedimentation controls have been
installed, prior to ground disturbance; and 2) after the project has been
completed, including revegetation. For sites which are active during the
winter, two (2) additional inspections shall be required; 3) after the site has
been prepared for the winter (typically in September or October); and 4)
sometime in January or February to ensure that the erosion and sedimentation
control measures are adequate and maintained. The permittee's design
professional shall perform the inspections and submit inspection reports to the
planning director or designee.
   B.   Grading/Erosion Control Plans: A minimum of one inspection shall be
conducted by the planning department or the permittee's design professional.
The planning director shall determine whether additional inspections are
necessary based on the nature of the project. The permittee's design
professional (when applicable) or the planning director, or their designee,
shall conduct the inspections. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-727.2: GUARANTEE OF INSTALLATION:
   A.   For subdivisions, applicants must meet the requirements of section
12-644 of this title.
   B.   For all other developments requiring grading/stormwater management
plans, the applicant shall enter into a surety agreement with the county
agreeing to complete the improvements in accordance with surety agreement
conditions and the grading/stormwater management plans. A cash deposit,
certificate of deposit, corporate surety bond written by an insurance company
licensed in Idaho having a rating from AM Best & Company of "A" or better,
letter of credit issued and backed by a federal or state chartered bank, is
required equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the design professional's
estimated cost of construction of the improvements for the purpose of
guaranteeing completion of the work. Prior to release of the financial
guarantee, the developer's design professional shall submit a letter to the
county, approving the construction and certifying its completion.
   C.   If the required improvements have not been completed by the specified
date, the county may contract to have the work completed with the money from
the financial guarantee. The county may also take additional enforcement
measures as provided by law. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-728: VARIANCES, APPLICATION FOR, NOTIFICATION, PROCEDURE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the planning director to determine when an
applicant's request for variation from the standards of this subchapter is
beyond the scope of an administrative exception as set forth at section
12-721.2 of this subchapter. The planning director shall inform the applicant
that the request must be processed as a variance, pursuant to
subchapter 2.3 of this title, and subject to the filing fee as set forth in
section
12-265 of this title.
   B.   An applicant for a variance shall show that the site character is
topographically, physiographically, vegetatively or geologically so unique that
the strict imposition of the standards of this subchapter would:
      1.   Defeat the purposes of this subchapter; or
      2.   Be less efficient in the collection, conveyance, detention,
retention or treatment of stormwaters than the proposed alternative; or
      3.   Create an undue hardship.
   C.   No variance shall be issued where such variance would impose a burden
upon adjacent landowners or divert untreated stormwaters onto adjacent lands.
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-729: INVESTIGATION, VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Investigation: The planning director shall cause investigations to be
made upon the request of the board or any public agency when any violation of
the provisions of this subchapter is alleged to have occurred. The planning
director shall make every effort to contact the property owner, and in no case
shall be authorized to conduct warrantless searches of private property in the
absence of consent from the property owner or occupier. The prosecuting
attorney may seek to obtain a search warrant upon a showing of probable cause
to suspect a violation or the existence of a reasonable program of inspection
of the terms of a stormwater management system.
   B.   Violation: Whenever the planning director determines that any person is
in violation of any provision of this subchapter, the planning director may
commence an administrative enforcement action by issuing a written notice of
violation. The notice of violation shall identify the alleged violation with
specificity and shall inform the person to whom it is directed of an
opportunity to confer with the planning director in a compliance conference. A
written response may be required within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
notice of violation by the person to whom it is directed.
      1.   The planning director shall schedule a compliance conference which
shall provide an opportunity for the recipient of a notice of violation to
explain the circumstances of the alleged violation and, where appropriate, to
present a proposal for remedying damage caused by the alleged violation and
assuring future compliance.
      2.   If the parties cannot reach agreement for remedying damages and/or
assuring future compliance, the board of county commissioners may seek civil
enforcement through court action.
   C.   Any person determined in a civil enforcement action to have violated
any provision of this subchapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) per day, and each violation of each provision of this
subchapter may be deemed a separate violation.
   D.   The planning director, with the consent of the board, may pursue civil
action to compel future compliance or to enjoin any continuing violation. (Ord.
501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 7.3 - WETLANDS
12-730: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide measures to protect and maintain
wetlands. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-731: WETLANDS RECONNAISSANCE REQUIRED:
A reconnaissance by a design professional accepted or authorized by the army
corps of engineers to determine wetland boundaries shall be required for the
following activities:
   A.   All subdivisions containing mapped wetland as determined from the U.S.
fish and wildlife service national wetland inventory maps.
   B.   All building location permits, building permits or conditional use
permits proposed for sites containing mapped wetland as determined from the
U.S. fish and wildlife service national wetland inventory maps. The following
developments are exempt from this requirement:
      1.   Building location permits or building permits where the applicant
can demonstrate on a site plan that the proposed building site is not within a
wetland as determined from the U.S. fish and wildlife service national wetland
inventory maps.
      2.   Conditional use permit applications where the applicant can
demonstrate on a site plan that the proposed building site is not within a
wetland as determined from the U.S. fish and wildlife service national wetland
inventory maps or where the development will not create additional impervious
surface.
   C.   Land disturbing activities which are a part of, accessory to, or
preparatory to new subdivisions, commercial or industrial site development, new
residential construction, or all public projects over which Bonner County
asserts jurisdiction through title 11 of this Code or this title, within a
mapped wetland as determined from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national
wetland inventory maps. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-732: WETLANDS DELINEATION REQUIRED:
A professional wetlands delineation shall be submitted at the time of
application for:
   A.   All subdivisions featuring lots containing a wetland based on a
wetlands reconnaissance as required in section
12-731 of this subchapter. Exception: Subdivisions where all building sites are
delineated on the plat are outside of a wetland based on the wetlands
reconnaissance.
   B.   All development sites and land disturbing activities that are within a
wetland based on the wetlands reconnaissance. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-733: WETLAND BUFFERS AND SETBACKS:
   A.   The Governing Body may require buffer areas adjacent to wetlands in new
subdivisions, conditional use permit or zone change sites, based on the type of
wetland as determined by Idaho Department of Fish and Game, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the applicant's design
professional.
   B.   Building setbacks to wetlands of a minimum of forty feet (40'), unless
it can be demonstrated by the wetlands professional that the wetlands are of a
low quality, have low levels of function as wetlands and are heavily disturbed,
as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the applicant's certified
wetland delineator. Setbacks to low quality wetlands may be reduced to not less
than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Vegetation conservation requirements no greater than specified in
section
12-714 of this chapter. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 7.4 - WILDLIFE
12-740: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide measures to protect and maintain
wildlife and fisheries habitat. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-741: WILDLIFE PROTECTION STANDARDS FOR NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
Wildlife mitigation measures may be required in new subdivisions based on input
from the Idaho Department of Fish and Game or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
including, but not limited to:
   A.   Requiring applicants to cluster residential lots per the conservation
subdivision standards set forth in chapter 6,
subchapter 6.3 of this title to maximize the common open space area in a way
that minimizes impacts to wildlife corridors/areas.
   B.   Requiring increased or additional vegetation conservation areas and/or
building setbacks, wildlife corridors, open space or other features, where
applicable, to protect critical wildlife habitat. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
SUBCHAPTER 7.5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 1
   (Rep. by Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 14 of this Code.
SUBCHAPTER 7.6 - HILLSIDES
12-760: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the community from the loss of
lives and property and to reduce public and private financial losses due to
slope slippage. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
12-761: CONCEPTUAL ENGINEERING PLAN REQUIRED:
When land disturbing activity is proposed in areas where the natural slope
equals or exceeds thirty percent (30%), the Planning Director, Hearing
Examiner, board or Zoning Commission may require a conceptual engineering plan
as part of a subdivision, conditional use permit or variance application. The
plan shall be developed by an Idaho licensed civil engineer, and shall depict
proposed building sites, road and driveway grades, profiles and cross sections,
and the slope and location of cuts and fills. The purpose of this plan is to
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed subdivision design and to
illustrate the nature and extent of earthwork required for site preparation and
construction. (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-762: GEOTECHNICAL ANALYSIS REQUIRED:
   A.   A geotechnical analysis shall be required for proposed building sites,
roads, driveways or other development, where any of the following conditions
apply:
      1.   Where the natural slope equals or exceeds thirty percent (30%);
      2.   Where soils are highly erodible, or where there are scarps, slumps,
seeps or other geologic features exist that may be unstable, as determined by
the Planning Director, Hearing Examiner, Zoning Commission or Board;
      3.   Where there is historic knowledge of sloughing, landslides, slumps
or other hazardous geological features.
   B.   The geotechnical analysis shall be stamped and signed by an Idaho
licensed civil or geological engineer having sufficient education and
experience to prove competency in the field of geotechnical engineering. The
geotechnical analysis shall be submitted prior to construction and shall
explain the geologic and hydrologic features of the area, shall evaluate the
suitability of the site for intended uses, shall identify potential problems
relating to the geology and hydrology, shall summarize the data upon which
conclusions are based, and shall propose mitigation measures. (Ord. 501, 11-18-
2008; amd. Ord. 590, 6-12-2019; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
12-763: HYDROLOGICAL ANALYSIS REQUIRED:
(Reserved) (Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
CHAPTER 8
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-800: General Rules For Use Of Language
12-801: Definitions - A
12-802: Definitions - B
12-803: Definitions - C
12-804: Definitions - D
12-805: Definitions - E
12-806: Definitions - F
12-807: Definitions - G
12-808: Definitions - H
12-809: Definitions - I
12-810: Definitions - J
12-811: Definitions - K
12-812: Definitions - L
12-813: Definitions - M
12-814: Definitions - N
12-815: Definitions - O
12-816: Definitions - P
12-817: Definitions - Q
12-818: Definitions - R
12-819: Definitions - S
12-820: Definitions - T
12-821: Definitions - U
12-822: Definitions - V
12-823: Definitions - W
12-824: Definitions - X
12-825: Definitions - Y
12-826: Definitions - Z
12-800: GENERAL RULES FOR USE OF LANGUAGE:
General rules for use of language:
   A.   All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this title
shall be constructed in accordance with the following general rules:
      1.   In any case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration,
the more restrictive text shall control.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples
that use terms such as "including", "such as", or similar language are intended
to provide examples and not to be exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
      3.   References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
Excluding the first day and including the last day shall determine the time in
which an act is to be done. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
observed by Bonner County, that day shall be excluded.
      4.   Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute,
regulation or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent
edition or amendment of such resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or
document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
      5.   Words in the masculine gender include the feminine.
      6.   Terms not defined within title 11 of this code or this title shall
have the meaning customarily assigned to them as defined in Webster's
dictionary ("The Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary", eleventh edition).
      7.   All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are
made are those of Bonner County, unless otherwise indicated.
      8.   The words "shall", "will", and "must" are always mandatory. The
words "may" and "should" are advisory and discretionary terms.
      9.   The words used in one tense (past, present, or future) include all
other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      10.   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular (including numeric values), i.e., truck vs. trucks.
      11.   Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions
shall be interpreted as follows:
         a.   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions
or events apply.
         b.   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events may apply or be optional.
      12.   The word "building" includes the word "structure".
      13.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel", or "tract".
      14.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
      15.   All aviation terms, definitions, and references to airports are as
defined in federal aviation regulations part 77. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
12-801: DEFINITIONS - A:
 
ACCESS:              See subsection A, “Legal Access”, of the definition of
                     Street.
ACCESSORY BUILDING   A use or structure on the same lot and of a nature that is
OR USE:              incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
                     structure.
ACCESSORY DWELLING   See definition DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY.
UNIT:
                     An official having knowledge in the principles and
ADMINISTRATOR:       practices of planning and zoning, who is appointed by the
                     board to administer this title. Also, the planning
                     director.
                     Any adult bookstore, adult hotel or motel, adult motion
                     picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, cabaret,
                     sexual encounter center, or any other business or
                     establishment that offers its patrons services or
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter
                     depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
                     activities or specified anatomical areas, but not
                     including those uses or activities, the regulation of
                     which is preempted by state law.
                     The teaching of agriculture, harvesting, culinary skills,
AGRI-EDUCATION:      dairy product production, farm animal slaughter and other
                     skills and processes in a farm or ranch setting.
                     A structure that is designed and constructed for one or
                     more of the following purposes, including but not limited
AGRICULTURAL         to: livestock shelters or buildings, including shade
BUILDING:            structures and milking barns; poultry buildings or
                     shelter; horticultural structures, including detached
                     greenhouses and crop protection shelters; grain storage;
                     or stables.
                     Those accessory activities associated with the retail sale
AGRICULTURAL DIRECT  of agricultural products produced on and off the premises.
MARKETING            This includes the sale of nonagricultural products (e.g.,
ACTIVITIES:          crafts, antiques, kitchen goods, etc.), educational
                     classes and tours, commercial farm rides on premises, and
                     temporary food services.
                     Agricultural uses include forestry, cultivation of the
                     land, storage of related agricultural products and
                     equipment, floriculture, horticulture, nurseries with
AGRICULTURE OR       wholesale and/or retail sales of agricultural products and
AGRICULTURAL         incidental sales of related products, greenhouses with
PURPOSES:            wholesale and/or retail sales of agricultural products and
                     incidental sales of related products, vineyards, truck
                     gardening, beekeeping, animal and poultry husbandry,
                     grazing or pasturing of livestock, general farming and
                     agribusiness activities.
                     A precise description of a tract or other parcel of land
                     definitely located by reference to the division of a
                     United States government survey township into exact
                     portions of the section (640 acres), half sections (320
ALIQUOT PART:        acres), quarter sections (160 acres), half quarter
                     sections (80 acres), quarter quarter or 1/16 sections (40
                     acres), 1/32 sections (20 acres), 1/64 sections (10
                     acres), 1/128 sections (5 acres) or 1/256 sections (2.5
                     acres).
                     A hard, dust free surface capable, during ordinary use, of
                     withstanding without substantial deterioration, normal
ALL WEATHER SURFACE: weather conditions. Gravel, rock or screenings alone,
                     without the use of petroleum or cement binder, does not
                     meet this definition of an all weather, dust free surface.
                     A change in the wording, context or substance of this
                     title, or change of the zone boundaries upon the zoning
AMENDMENT:           map, which is part of this title when adopted by
                     resolution passed by the board in the manner prescribed by
                     Idaho Code.
                     Any structure, land or combination thereof used, designed
ANIMAL               or arranged for the boarding, breeding, grooming, selling,
ESTABLISHMENT:       showing, training, care or treatment of domestic animals,
                     except when accessory to an agricultural use.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY:    The raising of domesticated farm animals.
                     A facility which is used to house or contain stray,
                     homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals and which is
                     owned, operated or maintained by a public body, an
ANIMAL SHELTER:      established humane society, animal welfare society,
                     society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or other
                     nonprofit organization or person devoted to the welfare,
                     protection and treatment of animals.
                     A unit of measurement calculated by adding the number of
ANIMAL UNIT:         each type of animal multiplied by the multiplier specified
                     in the table below:
Type Of Animal Multiplier
Type Of Animal                                                      Multiplier
Cattle                                                              1.50
Chickens                                                            0.01
Domestic fowl (turkeys, ducks and geese)                            0.20
Goat                                                                0.15
Horses, mules                                                       2.00
Llama, alpaca, burro, donkey, miniature horses (less than 4 feet in 0.23
height measured at withers)
Sheep                                                               0.17
Swine, weaned, weighing under 55 pounds                             0.10
Swine, weighing over 55 pounds                                      0.40
 
            Note: Adult and juvenile animals are considered equally for the purpose of
             calculating animal units.
APARTMENT:   A single living unit or suite in a multi-family structure, occupied on a
             permanent basis as distinguished from a transient occupancy basis.
             Any person who files an application for land use who is either the person(s)
APPLICANT:   identified in the assessor’s records as the owner of property on which that
             proposed activity would be located; or the authorized agent of such a person.
APPOINTIVE   All members of the Planning or Zoning Commission.
MEMBERS:
ARTIFICIAL   The high water elevation above the natural or ordinary water mark resulting
HIGH WATER   from construction of manmade dams or control works and impressing a new and
MARK:        higher vegetation line.
ARTIFICIAL   A channel created by human activity for the purposes of conveyance of waters.
WATERCOURSE: The term shall include conveyance channels, grassed swales, roadside ditches
             or gutters, but shall not include agricultural irrigation ditches.
             An establishment which provides living quarters and a variety of limited
             personal care and supportive healthcare to individuals who are unable to live
ASSISTED     independently due to infirmity of age, physical or mental handicap, but who
LIVING       do not need the skilled nursing care of a nursing home. Such a facility
FACILITY:    includes individual dwelling units with private bathroom facilities. Such a
             facility must be licensed by the state of Idaho. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd.
             Ord. 606, 7-14-2020; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022; Ord. 714, 7-24-2024)
 
12-802: DEFINITIONS - B:
 
                                       A detached single-family residential
                                       structure, occupied and operated by the
                                       owner or a resident manager, where five
BED AND BREAKFAST:                     (5) or fewer rooms are available for
                                       rent for a period not to exceed two (2)
                                       weeks per guest, and where meals are
                                       served from a central kitchen only to
                                       overnight guests.
BEDROOM:                               Any room principally used, intended, or
                                       designed to be used for sleeping.
                                       Any wall or portion of a wall that has a
                                       surface area of four hundred (400)
                                       square feet of vertical surface without
                                       a window or door, or any ground level
                                       wall surface or section of a wall over
BLANK WALL:                            four feet (4') in height at ground level
                                       that is longer than fifteen feet (15')
                                       as measured horizontally without having
                                       a ground level window or door lying
                                       wholly or in part within that fifteen
                                       foot (15') section.
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS (BOARD): The elected local legislative body.
                                       Anything that can be used as
BOAT:                                  transportation on the water, with the
                                       exception of inner tubes and
                                       inflatables.
                                       An area used for the commercial storage
BOAT STORAGE:                          of boats and related equipment. Also
                                       includes services incidental and
                                       subordinate to the storage of boats.
                                       A change in location of the property
                                       line between two (2) or more existing
                                       adjacent parcels, where the land taken
                                       from one parcel is added to an adjacent
                                       parcel. Further defined as a combining
                                       of one or more parcels to create fewer
                                       parcels and where no greater number of
                                       parcels than originally existed is
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT:              thereby created. No boundary adjusted
                                       parcel may be reduced below the minimum
                                       parcel size for the zoning district in
                                       which the parcel is located, except that
                                       if a parcel is already below the minimum
                                       parcel size, the boundary line
                                       adjustment shall not create any parcels
                                       that are smaller than the smallest
                                       original parcel in the subject
                                       configuration.
                                       The vertical distance from the average
                                       elevation of the finished grade to the
                                       highest point of the coping of a flat
BUILDING HEIGHT:                       roof, or to the deck line of a mansard
                                       roof, or the average height of the
                                       highest gable of a pitch or hip roof,
                                       excepting chimneys and steeples.
                                       Any lot, tract, parcel or subdivision of
BUILDING SITE:                         land, whether public or private, upon
                                       which a building is placed or is to be
                                       placed.
                                       The size of buildings or structures and
                                       their relationship to other structures
BULK, BULK REGULATIONS:                and features, including, lot area, open
                                       space, yards, lot coverage, height,
                                       impervious surface ratios and floor area
                                       ratios.
 
(Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-14-2020; Ord. 707, 3-13-2024)
12-803: DEFINITIONS - C:
 
CARETAKER’S A dwelling unit accessory to a professional, commercial or industrial use for
RESIDENCE:    occupancy by the owner caretaker.
CEMETERY:     Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
              said purposes.
              The destruction and/or removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical or chemical
              means, except that for the purposes of this title, the term shall not include
CLEARING:     agricultural and silvicultural practices, gardening, landscaping, snow removal
              and other incidental practices not associated with vegetative removal as a
              precursor to actual construction to which this title is applicable.
CLINIC:       A building or portion of a building containing offices for providing medical,
              dental or psychiatric services for outpatients only.
CLUSTER LOT:  A lot in a conservation subdivision (typically smaller than the minimum lot size
              for the applicable zoning district) in which residential development can occur.
              Refers to a site planning technique that concentrates buildings and structures in
              specific areas on a lot, site or parcel to allow the remaining land to be used
CLUSTER OR    for recreation, open space and/or preservation of features and/or structures with
CLUSTERING:   environmental, historical, cultural or other significance. The techniques used to
              concentrate buildings may include, but shall not be limited to, reduction in lot
              areas, setback requirements and/or bulk requirements, with the resultant open
              space being devoted by deed restrictions for one or more uses.
COMMERCIAL    A business use involving retail or wholesale marketing of goods and services.
ACTIVITY:     Examples of commercial activity include offices, retail shops, services offered
              for money, manufacturing and value added processing, and wholesale sales.
              A part of a conservation subdivision or planned unit development that is set
              aside in perpetuity as open space. This area may include freshwater wetlands,
COMMON OPEN   floodplains or flood hazard areas, stream corridors, recreational areas, prime
SPACE:        agricultural lands, wildlife habitat, scenic views, historical or cultural
              features, archaeological sites, or other land to be protected from development,
              as well as easements for public utilities.
              A structure specifically designed, constructed and/or erected for the purpose of
              attaching, mounting or otherwise affixing antennas at a height or elevation which
              is located above the base of the structure. Antenna support may include guyed
              wire support towers, lattice towers or monopole towers. A “lattice tower”
              consists of a vertical support structure consisting of a network of crossed metal
COMMUNICATION braces, forming a tower that may be three (3) or more sided. A “monopole tower”
TOWER:        consists of a vertical support structure consisting of a single vertical metal,
              concrete or wooden pole, typically round or square, and driven into the ground or
              attached to a foundation. “Communication towers” do not include dish antennas
              used for residential purposes; amateur and public safety communication radio
              towers, CB radio and radio transmitters with a tower height less than seventy
              five feet (75'); and VHF and UHF receive only residential television antennas.
COMMUNITY     A structure or structures that provide moorage facilities, together with
DOCK AND      accessory facilities, operated as a business and open to the public or operated
MARINA:       as a private club for members.
              An official statement of growth policies, adopted by the board, including such
COMPREHENSIVE things as the general location and extent of present and proposed land uses,
PLAN:         including residential densities, commercial and industrial uses, major
              transportation, parks, schools and other community facilities.
CONDITIONAL   A use or occupancy of a structure, or a use of land, permitted only upon issuance
USE:          of a conditional use permit and subject to the limitations and conditions
              specified in this title.
CONDITIONAL   A permit issued by Bonner County Zoning Commission stating that the conditional
USE PERMIT:   use complies with the conditions and standards set forth in this title and
              authorized by the Zoning Commission.
              A residential development consisting of condominiums. A condominium consists of
CONDOMINIUM   an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property, together with a
PROJECT:      separate interest in space, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded
              final plat or recorded survey in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries
              thereof.
              A.   The use of a lot, parcel or facility where the following conditions are met:
               
              1.   Animals have been, are or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained
              for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month period;
               
              2.   Crops, vegetation, forage growth or postharvest residues are not sustained
              in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot, parcel or facility; and
CONFINED       
ANIMAL        3.   The lot, parcel or facility is designed to confine or actually does confine
FEEDING       an equivalent of one thousand (1,000) animal units or more; or
OPERATION      
(CAFO):       4.   The operation results in direct or indirect discharge of manure or
              wastewater to surface water or the animals come into contact with surface water
              that passes through the area where they are confined.
               
              B.   Two (2) or more confined animal feeding operations under common ownership
              are considered, for the purposes of this title, to be a single confined animal
              feeding operation if they adjoin each other, even if separated by a public or
              private road or easement, or if they use a common area or system for the disposal
              of wastes.
              That part of a conservation subdivision that remains dedicated to agriculture,
              open space and/or natural resource protection and is devoid of any structures
CONSERVATION  other than those for the benefit of agricultural uses (including, but not limited
LOT:          to, barns, well houses, irrigation structures, hay sheds) or conservation
              purposes, but may include a primary residential dwelling unit (and any accessory
              employee housing as allowed).
              A subdivision where lots are clustered in specific areas to allow the remaining
CONSERVATION  land to be used for recreation, open space, agriculture and/or preservation of
SUBDIVISION:  features and/or structures with environmental, historical, cultural or other
              significance.
CONVALESCENT  A facility, other than a hospital, that provides nursing services and custodial
CENTER:       care on a twenty four (24) hour basis for compensation for individuals who, for
              reasons of illness, physical infirmity or advanced age, require such services.
              A mechanism for transporting stormwater from one point to another, including
CONVEYANCE:   pipes, ditches and channels, but not including agricultural ditches for
              irrigation.
CORNER LOT:   See definition of Lot Types.
COTTAGE       A housing type designed and built in a manner consistent with section 12-480 of
HOUSING:      this title, or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-
              2022)
 
 
12-804: DEFINITIONS - D:
 
DAYCARE       Refer to Idaho Code sections 39-1202 and 39-3306.
CENTER:
              A qualified person with the requisite education and experience to design a stormwater
DESIGN        management system. “Design professionals” may include, but are not limited to,
PROFESSIONAL: engineers, landscape architects and soil scientists for various components of a
              grading/stormwater management plan.
              A rainfall event of specific return frequency and duration which is used to calculate
DESIGN STORM: stormwater runoff volume and peak discharge rates. For the purposes of this title, the
              “design storms” are:
             A.   25-year design storm shall mean a rainfall event of one-tenth inch (0.1") per
              hour for a twenty four (24) hour duration;
             B.   100-year design storm shall mean a rainfall event of one hundred twenty five
              thousandths inch (0.125") per hour for a twenty four (24) hour duration.
DETENTION:    The temporary storage of stormwaters to provide for settling of suspended solids,
              infiltration, velocity reduction or a combination of these.
DEVELOPABLE   Land that is suitable as a location for structures and that can be developed free of
LAND:         hazards to, and without disruption of, or significant impact on, natural resource
              areas and not located within a floodway.
              The physical extension and/or construction of land uses. Development activities
              include subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads,
DEVELOPMENT:  utilities and other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of
              refuse, debris or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the
              exception of agricultural activities). Routine repair and maintenance activities are
              exempted.
DISTRICTS:    See definition of Zones Or Districts.
DORMITORY:    See definition of Group Housing and Guestroom.
DOUBLE        See definition of Lot Types.
FRONTAGE LOT:
DRIVEWAY:     A private easement or roadway that provides access to two (2) or fewer single-family
              residential lots or parcels.
DUPLEX:       A detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling units only.
DRIVEWAY:     A private easement or roadway that provides access to two (2) or fewer lots or
              parcels.
              A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential purposes, including
DWELLING:     one-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings, but shall not include hotels,
              boarding and lodging houses.
              A detached residential dwelling structure greater than thirty feet (30') in length,
DWELLING,     designed for transportation after fabrication; and meeting those mobile home standards
MOBILE HOME:  set forth by the latest published edition of the “Federal Mobile Home Construction And
              Safety Standards”. A “travel trailer” is not to be considered as a mobile home.
DWELLING,     A detached residential dwelling unit, manufactured and assembled to latest published
MODULAR:      uniform building code standards off site, designed to be transported to the site and
              placed on a permanent foundation.
DWELLING,     A detached residential building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
MULTI-FAMILY:
DWELLING,     See definition of Park Model.
PARK MODEL:
DWELLING,     A detached residential building, designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by
SINGLE-       one family.
FAMILY:
DWELLING      Space within a building providing complete, independent living facilities for one
UNIT:         family only, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
              sanitation.
DWELLING      A dwelling unit located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling, either within the
UNIT,         same building as the single-family dwelling or in a detached building, consistent with
ACCESSORY:    section 12-490.
DWELLING      A recreational vehicle used in the same manner as a single family dwelling or an
UNIT,         accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 598, 1-22-2020; Ord. 607, 7-
RECREATIONAL  22-2020; Ord. 696, 7-12-2023; Ord. 714, 7-24-2024)
VEHICLE:
 
 12-805: DEFINITIONS - E:
 
 
EASEMENT:    The right-of-use over the property of another as defined in I.C. 50-1301.
EROSION      Any temporary or permanent measure taken to reduce erosion; control siltation and
CONTROL:     sedimentation; or ensure that sediment bearing waters do not leave a construction
             site.
EROSION      A document consisting of drawings of a site with diagrams, explanatory text, maps,
CONTROL      etc., which are developed for the purpose of erosion control.
PLAN:
             The mechanical removal of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of rock, natural soil
             or fill in any configuration. “Excavation” shall not be deemed to include mining,
             exploratory excavations as a precursor to mining, excavations incidental to the
EXCAVATION:  issuance of a building location permit or building permit, excavations for the
             purpose of agricultural impoundments of water, refuse disposal sites controlled by
             other regulations, or excavations for wells, tunnels or utilities, or other
             excavations incidental or accessory to any permitted use, provided lateral support
             is maintained for adjoining properties.
             Expanded seasonal harvest festivities allow a farming activity to expand beyond
EXPANDED     the restrictions for seasonal harvest festivities. The purpose and intent of the
SEASONAL     conditional use for expanded seasonal harvest festivities is to allow direct
HARVEST      marketing of crops to the public. It is not to provide alternative ways to create
FESTIVITIES: permanent or semipermanent sales businesses that would otherwise require a zone
             reclassification to a commercial zone. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-14-
             2020)
 
 
12-806: DEFINITIONS - F:
 
FACADE:     The front of a building facing a street. It may also be referred to as the
            apparent width of the structure facing the street.
FAMILY:     An individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping
            unit in a single dwelling unit.
FARMERS’  A temporary or periodic market held in the open or within a structure, where
MARKET:     groups or individuals sell fresh produce, flowers, arts and crafts, dairy
            products or other agricultural produce raised, produced or crafted by them.
FEEDLOT:    See definition for Confined Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO).
            The relatively flat area of lowland adjoining the channel of a river, stream,
            lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by water of a flood
FLOODPLAIN: of one hundred (100) year frequency. The floodplain includes the channel,
            floodway and floodway fringe, as established per the engineering practices as
            specified by the army corps of engineers, as follows:
           A.   Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by
            overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
           B.   Flood Of One Hundred Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one
            percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
            C.   Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse or perceptible extent, with
           definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
            flowing water.
            D.   Floodway: The channel or watercourse and those portions of the floodplain
           adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
            floodwater of any watercourse.
            E.   Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway.
           Such area will include those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated
            by a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency.
            The sum of horizontal areas of each floor of a building, measured from the
FLOOR AREA: interior faces of the exterior walls or the centerline of walls separating two
            (2) buildings.
FRONT YARD: See definition of Yard, Front. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
12-807: DEFINITIONS - G:
 
 
GARAGE:                              A building or portion thereof in which a
                                     motor vehicle is stored, repaired or kept.
                                     A document composed of drawings, maps,
                                     calculations, etc., which is used to
GRADING/ STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: design a grading and stormwater management
                                     system and to ensure the functioning of
                                     the system.
                                     An establishment where flowers, shrubbery,
                                     vegetables, trees and other horticultural
                                     products are grown in an enclosed building
GREENHOUSE:                          on the premises for sale on a wholesale or
                                     retail basis, including the wholesale and/
                                     or retail sales of agricultural products
                                     and incidental sales of related products.
GROUNDWATER:                         Waters in a subterranean saturated zone or
                                     stratum.
GUEST:                               Any person hiring or occupying a room for
                                     living or sleeping purposes.
                                     Any room or rooms used, or intended to be
                                     used, for sleeping purposes. Every one
GUESTROOM:                           hundred (100) square feet of superficial
                                     floor area in a dormitory shall be
                                     considered to be a guestroom.
                                     Any organization whether operated for
                                     profit or not, and whether public or
                                     private, which caters to or allows the use
GUN CLUBS AND RIFLE RANGES:          of firearms, including, but not limited
                                     to, archery, target, and skeet shooting
                                     and may also include organized
                                     tournaments. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd.
                                     Ord. 607, 7-22-2020)
 
 
12-808: DEFINITIONS - H:
 
 
HEIGHT:          Reserved.
                 An occupation, profession or craft which is clearly incidental
HOME OCCUPATION: and subordinate to the residential use of the premises, and
                 meets the provisions set forth in this code.
                 An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary and
                 emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human
HOSPITAL:        patients and injured persons, licensed by state law to provide
                 facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics and general
                 medical practice.
                 Owner/manager supervised group lodging available for transient
                 rent to guests. The lodging facility typically consists of
                 small, separate or family grouped sleeping areas or dormitory
HOSTEL:          style sleeping and common rooms for cooking, meeting,
                 recreation or educational use. Food services may vary from
                 prepackaged offerings to cafeterias to full service dining for
                 lodging guests only.
                 A building in which there are guestrooms where lodging, with
                 or without meals, is provided for compensation but shall not
HOTEL:           include motels, jails, hospitals, asylums, sanatoriums,
                 orphanages, prisons, detention homes and similar buildings
                 where human beings are housed and detained under restraint.
                 (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 680, 10-12-2022)
 
12-809: DEFINITIONS - I:
 
 
           A hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into
           the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to construction, or a hard
           surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities
           or at an increased rate of flow compared to conditions prior to construction.
IMPERVIOUS Common “impervious surfaces” include, but are not limited to, rooftops,
SURFACE:   walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel
           roads, packed earthen materials and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which
           impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. Open, uncovered retention or
           detention facilities are not considered to be impervious surfaces for the
           purposes of this title.
INTERIOR   See definition of Lot Types. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
LOT:
 
 
 
12-810: DEFINITIONS - J:
 
 
          Any manufactured good, appliance, fixture, furniture, machinery, personal property
          or any other thing or part thereof, whether of value or valueless, that is
JUNK:     demolished, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, or so worn
          and deteriorated that there is no longer remaining any capability for use in the
          manner for which it was originally manufactured.
          An open area where scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, recycled, stored,
          disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other
JUNK AND/ metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles and such other worn out or discarded
OR        material as can be turned to some use, but which cannot be used again for the
SALVAGE   purpose for which it was originally intended. A sanitary landfill, refuse,
YARD:     transfer station, drop box facility for waste disposal, or recycling center shall
          not be considered a “junkyard and/or salvage yard” when operated by a governmental
          agency or other institution.
JUNK      Any vehicle meeting the following requirements:
VEHICLE:
         A.   Is apparently inoperable and without valid, current registration tabs or
          license plates; and
         B.   Is extensively damaged, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
          a damaged window or windshield, or missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission.
         C.   Unless said vehicle is stored within a completely enclosed building or sight
          obscuring fence.
          An open area where waste and scrap material are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
JUNKYARD/ baled, packed, disassembled or handled. “Junkyard/wrecking yard” is further
WRECKING  defined as any place where four (4) or more vehicles, unlicensed or not in
YARD:     operating condition, are stored in the open. “Junkyard/wrecking yard” includes the
          commercial salvaging or recycling of any goods or machinery. (Ord. 558, 12-14-
          2016)
 
 
12-811: DEFINITIONS - K:
 
 
              A commercial establishment in which six (6) or more dogs or other
KENNEL:       domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained
              or sold.
              A school, public or private, whether operated for profit or not
KINDERGARTEN: for profit, giving preschool instruction to children under the
              age of seven (7) years.
KITCHEN:      Any room principally used, intended or designed to be used for
              cooking or the preparation of food. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
12-812: DEFINITIONS - L:
 
LABORATORY:   A place devoted to experimental study, such as testing and analyzing.
              Manufacturing of a product or products is not to be permitted.
LAND          Any activity which results in a change in the existing soil cover, and includes
DISTURBING    clearing, grading, filling and excavation.
ACTIVITY:
              A qualified person with the requisite education and experience to design and
LANDSCAPE     supervise a landscaping plan. The individual must have an in depth knowledge of
DESIGN        native and drought tolerant plant materials and installation of irrigation
PROFESSIONAL: systems. Design professionals may include, but are not limited to, landscape
              architects and certified nursery persons.
              A subsurface sewage disposal system designed to receive two thousand five hundred
              (2,500) gallons of wastewater or more per day, including where the total
LARGE SOIL    wastewater flow from the entire proposed project exceeds two thousand five
ABSORPTION    hundred (2,500) gallons per day, but the flow is separated into absorption
SYSTEM:       modules (a subsurface sewage disposal system designed to serve 3 or more
              connections) which receive less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons
              per day.
LEGAL ACCESS: See definition of Street.
              Research and development activities, the manufacturing, compounding, processing,
LIGHT         packaging, storage, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semifinished
INDUSTRIAL:   products from previously prepared materials, which activities are conducted
              wholly within an enclosed building. Finished or semifinished products may be
              temporarily stored outdoors pending shipment.
LITTORAL:     Of or on a shore.
LIVESTOCK:    Cattle, horses, sheep, hogs or goats raised for home use or profit.
LOADING       Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pick ups and deliveries, scaled
SPACE, OFF    to delivery vehicles, accessible to and expected to be used by such vehicles. All
STREET:       off street loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley
              right of way.
LOCAL ROADS:  See definition of Street.
LOT:          A platted piece of land which is part of a subdivision recorded in the book of
              plats in the office of the county recorder.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the area of a lot which is occupied by all buildings or other
              covered structures.
LOT LINE      A reconfiguration of property as set forth in subchapter 6.6 of this title.
ADJUSTMENT:
LOT           A.   The depth of a lot, parcel, or tract shall be a measurement of the distance
MEASUREMENTS: between the furthest two points along the boundary of the lot, parcel, or tract.
              B.   The width of a lot, parcel or tract shall be calculated in feet by dividing
             the area of the lot, parcel or tract measured in square feet by the depth of the
              lot, parcel or tract, as measured according to the depth calculation instructions
              above.
LOT OF        A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk, or a
RECORD:       lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
              recorded.
LOT SIZE:     The area contained within the boundaries lines of a Lot including Easements.
              A.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A
              lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a “corner lot” if
LOT TYPES:    straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the
              foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred
              thirty five degrees (135o).
              B.   Flag Lot: A lot so shaped and designed that the main building site area is
             set back from the street on which it fronts and includes an access strip
              connecting the main building site with the frontage street.
             C.   Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a
              street.
              D.   Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
             street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
              frontage lots.
              E.   Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or
              approximately right angles (interior angle less than 135 degrees) to the general
             pattern in the area. A “reversed frontage lot” may also be a corner lot, an
              interior lot or a through lot. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-14-2020;
              Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
 
12-813: DEFINITIONS - M:
 
MAJOR        See definition of Street.
COLLECTOR:
MANUFACTURED Any building which is of closed construction and which is made or assembled in
BUILDING:    manufacturing facilities, on or off the building site, for installation or
             assembly and installation on the building site.
MINE,        An area where surface mining is conducted of two (2) acres in size or larger, or a
SURFACE:     volume in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of minerals or overburden are
             extracted.
             Coal, clay, stone, sand, gravel, metalliferous and nonmetalliferous types of ores,
MINERAL:     and any other similar, solid material or substance of commercial value to be
             excavated from natural deposits on or in the earth.
             The removal for commercial purposes of minerals, ores, sand, gravel, oil or gas
             from a naturally occurring deposit. “Mining” shall include surface mining,
MINING:      underground mining, oil and gas wells and dredge mining, but shall not be deemed
             to include the incidental removal of minerals, ores, sand or gravels which occurs
             as a part of, or accessory to, any permitted use or unrelated excavation on the
             same parcel.
             The activities performed at the surface of the ground related to the extraction of
             minerals from the ground, including the excavation of pits, removal and/or storage
             of minerals, disposal of overburden, and the construction of haulage roads, for
             the purpose of sale, or use of such extracted minerals in a different parcel.
MINING,      Operations within the right of way of a public highway conducted by a public
SURFACE:     agency for maintenance, repair or construction of a public highway which disturb
             less than two (2) acres shall not be deemed “surface mining”. The extraction of
             minerals from within the right of way of a public highway by a public or
             governmental agency for maintenance, repair or construction of a public highway
             shall not be deemed surface mining operations under this title; provided, that the
             affected land is an integral part of the public highway.
MINOR        See definition of Street.
ARTERIAL:
MINOR        See definition of Street.
COLLECTOR:
MINOR        A type of note change for the purpose of entering corrections, endorsements,
NOTATIONAL   dedications, easements and similar minor changes to an existing recorded plat.
CHANGE:
MITIGATION:  Compensatory actions to restore natural functions and values lost through
             development and human alterations.
             A development involving a combination of residential and nonresidential uses. For
MIXED USE:   example, a mixed use structure may have nonresidential uses at street level with
             residential uses on the second floor.
             A site specifically designed to accommodate, with or without compensation, two (2)
MOBILE HOME  or more mobile home units on the same property (contiguous ownership), providing
PARK:        stalls or spaces for each mobile home unit. This term shall not include mobile
             home subdivisions or recreational vehicle parking.
MOBILE       See definition of Dwelling, Mobile Home.
HOMES:
MODULAR      See definition of Dwelling, Modular.
DWELLING:
             A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living
MOTEL:       units where a majority of such units open individually and directly to the
             outside, and where a garage is attached or a parking space is conveniently located
             to each unit, all for the use by automobile tourists or transients.
MULTI-FAMILY See definition of Dwelling, Multi-Family. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
DWELLING:
 
12-814: DEFINITIONS - N:
 
 
                                The high water elevation over a period of
                                years, uninfluenced by manmade dams or works,
                                at which elevation the water impresses a line
NATURAL OR ORDINARY WATER MARK: on the soil by covering it for sufficient
                                periods to deprive the soil of its vegetation
                                and destroy its value for agricultural
                                purposes.
                                Existing natural elements relating to land,
                                water, air, plant and animal life, including,
NATURAL RESOURCES:              but not limited to, soils, geology, topography,
                                surface and subsurface waters, wetlands,
                                vegetation, biota, fisheries, and animals and
                                their habitats.
                                A structure or building, or portion thereof,
                                which was lawfully erected or altered and
                                maintained at the time this title was adopted,
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:        but which because of the applications of this
                                title to it, no longer conforms to the use,
                                height or area regulations of the zone in which
                                it is located.
                                A use which was lawfully established and
                                maintained at the time this title was adopted,
NONCONFORMING USE:              but which, because of the application of this
                                title to it no longer conforms to the use
                                regulations of the zone in which it is located.
                                Material which is capable of causing injury to
NOXIOUS MATTER:                 living organisms by chemical reaction or is
                                capable of causing detrimental effects upon the
                                physical or economic well being of individuals.
                                An establishment where flowers, shrubbery,
                                vegetables, trees or other horticultural
                                products are grown in the open or in an
NURSERY, PLANT:                 enclosed building on the premises for sale on a
                                wholesale or retail basis, including the
                                wholesale and/or retail sales of agricultural
                                products and incidental sales of related
                                products.
                                A school or organized program for the care and/
                                or instruction of preschool children under the
NURSERY SCHOOL:                 age of six (6) years, whether public or
                                private, and whether or not operated for
                                profit. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
 
12-815: DEFINITIONS - O:
 
OFF STREET
LOADING     See definition of Loading Space, Off Street.
SPACE:
OPEN SPACE: Any open area, including, but not limited to, parks, yards, playgrounds,
            beaches, parkways, waterways and streets.
            A.   Any card, paper, cloth, metal, wooden or other display or device of any
OUTDOOR     kind or character, including, but not limiting the same to, any poster, bill,
ADVERTISING printing, painting or other advertisements of any kind whatsoever, including
DISPLAY:    statuary, places for outdoor advertising purposes or onto the ground or any
            tree, wall, rock, fence, building, structure or thing.
            B.   “Outdoor advertising display” does not include: 1) official notices issued
            by any court or public body or officer; 2) notices posted by any public officer
           in performance of a public duty or by any person in giving legal notice; 3)
            directional warning or information structures required by or authorized by law
            or by federal, state, county or city authority.
OUTDOOR     A structure for the permanent display of off premises advertising. Off premises
ADVERTISING advertising is any commercial message referring or relating to an enterprise or
STRUCTURE:  business that is not conducted on the premises where the sign is located. (Ord.
            558, 12-14-2016)
 
12-816: DEFINITIONS - P:
PARCEL:     An unplatted piece of land which is uniquely described within a legal instrument
            of conveyance.
PARENT      A lot, lots of record, parcel or parcels proposed to be developed either as a
TRACT:      standard lot subdivision and/or as a conservation subdivision and used for
            calculating the density allowance for said subdivisions.
PARK:       A noncommercial facility designed to serve the recreational needs of the
            residents of the community.
PARKING     A.   An off street parking area, located totally outside of any road right of
SPACE:      way, for motor vehicles and having access to a public street or alley or private
            road or driveway.
            B.   In determining the gross area required for an off street parking lot
           requiring a specified number of parking spaces, including driveways and aisles,
            two hundred fifty (250) square feet per parking space shall be used.
PERFORMANCE Criteria outlined in this title for specific conditions for various uses or
STANDARD:   classifications of uses.
            An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock
PERSON:     association or governmental entity. A “person” shall include a trustee, receiver,
            assignee or similar representative of any of the above.
PLANNING    The Bonner County Planning Commission, herein further referred to as the Planning
COMMISSION: Commission. Appointed by the Board of County Commissioners per BCRC 12-122.
PLANNING    An official appointed by the board who has knowledge in the practice of planning
DIRECTOR:   and zoning or his or her designee or appointee.
PRINCIPAL   See definition of Street.
ARTERIAL:
PRIVATE     That road which is to be constructed, reconstructed or renovated within a private
ROAD:       easement or private right of way, and which is not a driveway as defined herein.
PRIVATE     See definition of Schools, Public Or Private.
SCHOOL:
PROHIBITED  See definitions of Use and Use, Prohibited.
USES:
PROPERTY    Shall mean any line bounding a lot or parcel.
LINE:
PUBLIC      A building or structure used as offices for conducting official business of
BUILDING:   government entities or political subdivisions.
            Any land dedicated and open to the public and under the jurisdiction of a public
            highway agency, where the public highway agency has no obligation to construct or
            maintain said right of way for vehicular traffic. A public right of way includes
PUBLIC      land accepted by Bonner County on behalf of the public by deed or fee simple
RIGHT OF    title; authorized easement in favor of Bonner County or the state of Idaho;
WAY:        eminent domain; recorded final plat; or prescriptive use by Bonner County.
            “Public right of way” shall not include federal lands, as provided in Idaho Code
            section 40-204A, that resulted from the creation of a facility for the
            transmission of water.
PUBLIC      See definition of Schools, Public Or Private.
SCHOOL:
            A public, private or community utility facility, including, but not limited to,
            station houses or station grounds; pumping stations; power substations; dam
            structures; solid waste transfer stations; fire stations; telephone transmission
            stations; telegraph stations; sewage disposal, treatment or storage stations and
PUBLIC      subsurface sewage disposal systems serving ten (10) or more residential dwelling
UTILITY     units or designed with a capacity of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons or
FACILITY:   more per day; public community water systems designed for fifteen (15) or more
            connections or regularly serves at least twenty five (25) year round residents;
            public libraries; railroad transportation lines or spurs; railroad classification
            lines; or structures used in interstate transmission of electricity, natural gas
            or fuel. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-14-2020; Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
 
12-817: DEFINITIONS - Q:
None at this time. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
12-818: DEFINITIONS - R:
                A commercial facility, whether private or public, indoor or outdoor, configured
                and used to conduct events involving animals or machines competing against one
                another or against time. A racetrack may include seating, concession areas to
                serve patrons of the facility only, restrooms, parking facilities and storage
RACETRACK:      facilities. The definition of racetrack shall include motocross, mud bog tracks,
                horse and dog racetracks, demolition derby courses, upland accommodations for
                water based racecourses, auto racetracks and other similar courses. Commercial,
                for the purposes of this definition, includes the charging of any fee or other
                compensation.
REAR YARD:      See definition of Yard, Rear.
RECONNAISSANCE: An inspection or exploration of an area.
                A vehicular or portable unit designed to be mounted on a chassis and wheels,
                designed and constructed to be installed with or without a permanent foundation
RECREATION      for human occupancy as a residence not more than nine hundred (900) square feet
VEHICLE:        in total floor area. The term “recreation vehicle” shall include, but is not
                limited to, travel trailers, park models, camping trailers, truck campers, and
                motor homes and tiny houses.
                A place designed and equipped for the conduct of small scale and low intensity
                sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational
RECREATIONAL    activities. Activities may include, but are not limited to, recreational uses
FACILITY:       such as rafting, canoeing, tent camping, swimming, cross country skiing, hiking,
                hunting and fishing, horseback riding and snowmobiling, together with accessory
                facilities, operated as a business and open to the public or operated as a
                private club for members.
RECREATIONAL    Any premises designed for the rental of three (3) or more recreational vehicle
VEHICLE (RV)    parking stalls or spaces.
PARK:
                Describes the use of a structure by a family (or families) as a dwelling unit
RESIDENTIAL:    (or units) and may also include home occupation, accessory uses, or structures.
                Residential is also used to describe a geographic area where permitted uses are
                typically residential in character.
RESIDENTIAL
CARE OR         Refer to Idaho Code 39-3302.
ASSISTED LIVING
FACILITY:
                An area privately owned, devoted primarily to outdoor recreational uses
                conducted for profit, which may include, but are not limited to, swimming,
RESORT,         boating, fishing, hunting, camping, picnicking, winter sports and similar uses.
COMMERCIAL:     A “commercial resort” may also include facilities for seasonal or overnight
                living quarters for guests. Such seasonal or overnight living quarters shall be
                clearly subordinate to the on site outdoor recreational uses.
RETAIL          Establishments engaged in the sale of goods or services directly to the
SERVICES:       consumer.
                The holding of stormwater runoff within a contained area in such manner that the
RETENTION:      stormwaters so contained can leave by means of evaporation, infiltration or
                emergency overflow or bypass structures.
                A facility used for professional, educational, health or religious meetings,
                training, conferences or seminars which by its design is low intensity and small
                scale. A “retreat” provides an opportunity for groups to congregate temporarily
                on a site for such purposes as education, enlightenment, contemplation, renewal
RETREAT:        or solitude. “Retreats” may include, but are not limited to, corporate retreats,
                ashrams, meditation centers, weight reduction camps, or other similar
                facilities. Retreat facilities are permitted only for those who are engaged in
                retreat activities, and shall not be used by the general public for meals or
                overnight accommodations.
REVERSED        See definition of Lot Types.
FRONTAGE LOT:
RIGHT OF WAY:   A strip of land used for access, or dedicated for use as a public right of way.
ROAD:           See subsection B, “Local Roads”, of the definition of Street.
                The building up of the natural land surface within a right of way or easement
ROAD            for the purpose of creating a travelway open for vehicular passage. “Road
CONSTRUCTION:   construction” shall include such activities as initial clearing, alteration of
                topography, and installation of culverts, filling of low areas, deposition of
                subbase or base materials, topping, grading and surfacing.
ROAD            Any modification of the cross section, subgrade or alignment of a road or
RECONSTRUCTION: travelway within a right of way or easement. Routine grading, resurfacing or
                repaving shall not be considered reconstruction.
ROOMING HOUSE:  See definition of Group Housing. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-14-
                2020; Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
 
 
12-819: DEFINITIONS - S:
             A method of disposing of solid wastes on land without creating a nuisance or
             hazard to public health or safety, by utilizing the principles of engineering to
SANITARY     confine the solid waste to the smallest practical area, to reduce it to the
LANDFILL:    smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a layer of earth at the
             conclusion of each day’s operation, or at such more frequent intervals as may be
             necessary.
SCHOOLS,     An institution of learning, public or private, which offers instruction in the
PUBLIC OR    several branches of learning and study.
PRIVATE:
             Those temporary and accessory activities associated with the sale of annual
SEASONAL     harvest crops. These accessory activities may include live music, temporary food
HARVEST      service establishments, vendors other than the owners or operators of the farm,
FESTIVITIES: commercial farm rides on the premises and recreational activities (e.g., corn
             mazes, craft booths, etc.).
             Fragmented material that originates from weathering and erosion of rocks or
SEDIMENT:    unconsolidated deposits, and is transported by, suspended in or deposited by
             waters.
SETBACK:     The minimum distance by which a building or structure must be separated from a
             street right of way, easement or property line.
             Those lands extending landward for two hundred feet (200') in all directions as
SHORE LAND:  measured on a horizontal plane of any applicable natural or ordinary water mark,
             or the applicable “artificial high water mark”, as defined in this chapter, of
             any lake, river, stream, channel or other body of public water.
             The applicable natural or ordinary water mark, or the applicable “artificial high
SHORELINE:   water mark”, as defined in this chapter, of any lake, river, stream, channel or
             other body of public water.
SIDE YARD:   See definition of Yard, Side.
             A device, descriptive display or illustration generally relating in its subject
             matter to products, persons, accommodations, services or activities on the
SIGN:        premises. However, a “sign” shall not include legal notices or informational or
             directional media erected or required by governmental bodies, nor shall it
             include residential location indicators.
             Shall consist of the smallest rectangle that can contain the sign script, logos,
             symbols and other graphic elements. Only one side of a double sided sign shall be
SIGN AREA:   used to calculate sign area. The area shall not include any structural elements
             lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the
             display.
SINGLE-
FAMILY       See definition of Dwelling, Single-Family.
DWELLING:
             The land area subject to a land disturbing activity associated with any
SITE:        construction to which this title is applicable. The site shall be deemed to
             include actual areas of land disturbance and areas designated for stockpiling or
             storage of excavated earthen materials.
STATE        See definition of Street.
HIGHWAY:
STOCK        A land development where title is held in common, when individuals or bodies
COOPERATIVE: corporate receive a right of exclusive occupancy for building construction in a
             portion of the real property.
STORAGE      Any structure that is used for storage and does not have a door or other
STRUCTURE:   entranceway into a dwelling unit and that does not have water fixtures within its
             confines, the use of which is limited solely to storage of inanimate objects.
             That portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into the ground
STORMWATER:  or evaporate, but flows via overland flow into channels or pipes into a defined
             watercourse, stream or constructed conveyance, detention or retention facility.
STORMWATER   A system of collection, detention, retention and/or infiltration areas and/or
MANAGEMENT   treatment devices designed to prevent stormwater from entering a natural body of
SYSTEM:      surface water.
             That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
             surface of the floor next above, or if there is one floor above, the space
STORY:       between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a
             story for the purpose of this title, when more than one-half (½) of such basement
             height is above the established curb level or above the finished lot grade where
             curb level has not been established.
             A natural watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks, which
STREAM:      confines and conducts intermittent or continuously flowing water, and as shown on
             national hydrography dataset published by the United States geological survey.
             A roadway - excepting driveways and trails (as defined in BCRC 12-820) - which
STREET:      provides, or is intended to provide, vehicular access to adjacent properties,
             including the following:
             A.   Legal Access: A public or recorded easement or right of way which affords
            access to one or more properties. Legal access may be a recorded easement for
             ingress or egress or a platted street right of way used for access to property.
             Assumption of maintenance by the county is not necessary for legal access.
            B.    Local Roads: A public or recorded easement or right of way which primarily
             affords access to property and connects to collectors or arterials.
             C.   Minor Collector: A public or recorded private easement or right of way which
            affords access to adjoining property and connects local access roads to roads of
             higher classification.
             D.   Major Collector: A public easement or right of way that links minor
            collectors and local roads with routes of higher classification. Frontage and
             access is limited.
             E.   Minor Arterial: A public easement or right of way thoroughfare that serves
            less dense population concentrations. Minor arterials may connect to principal
             arterials or provide intermediate routes. Frontage and access is limited.
             F.   Principal Arterial: A public easement or right of way that connects a
            network of continuous routes. Serves to primarily provide mobility to large
             intercounty population concentrations and is designed to carry heavy traffic
             loads. Frontage and access is limited.
            G.   State Highway: A public easement or right of way as designated by the State
             of Idaho.
STRUCTURAL   Any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing
ALTERATION:  walls, columns, beams or girders, or a structural change in the roof.
             Any object constructed or erected which requires location on ground or is
STRUCTURE:   attached to something having a location on the ground, including towers,
             smokestacks, overhead transmission lines, but not including fences or walls used
             as fences, less than eight feet (8') in height.
SUBDIVISION: Any division of land as set forth in the definition of “subdivision” in section
             12-611 of this title.
SUBMERGED    All lands below the applicable natural or ordinary water mark, or the applicable
LANDS:       artificial high water mark of any lake, river, stream, channel or other body of
             public water.
SUNDRIES:    Articles too small or numerous to be specified; miscellaneous items. This can
             include items sold in antique, pawn and gift shops.
SURFACE      All waters which collect, flow or accumulate on or above the ground surface.
WATER:
             A shallow depression in the ground surface with relatively gentle side slopes,
SWALE:       which is designed or used to retain stormwaters for sufficient time to allow the
             stormwater to percolate into the soil. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-
             14-2020; Ord. 696, 7-12-2023)
 
12-820: DEFINITIONS - T:
 
TEMPORARY  A residence that is either:
DWELLING   A.   For the purpose of providing adequate housing and care for the aged or
UNIT:      handicapped family member who is incapable of adequately caring for himself or
           herself.
           B.   Located on a nonresidential construction site and occupied by persons
           having construction security responsibilities of such construction site.
THROUGH    See definition of Lot Types.
LOT:
TOPSOIL:   The largely organic upper horizon of the soil, down to such restrictions as
           claypans, hardpans, coarse sand and gravel, or rock.
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling unit on a separate lot that is attached to one or more
           townhomes and having at least one common wall.
TRAIL:     A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians or cyclists.
           A constructed or manufactured area or mechanism designed for the purpose of
TREATMENT  removing contaminants from stormwaters. “Treatment devices” may include, but are
DEVICE:    not limited to, detention ponds, oil/water separators, biofiltration swales and
           constructed wetlands.
TREE:      A woody plant with at least one well defined stem or trunk and normally reaches
           a height of fifteen feet (15') or more. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
 
12-821: DEFINITIONS - U:
 
UNDEVELOPED OR UNDISTURBED STATE: The soils and vegetation in place prior to
                                  the start of any land disturbing activity.
                                  Publicly or privately maintained water supply
                                  and distribution systems; sewage collection,
                                  treatment and disposal systems (not to
                                  include individual septic tanks and
URBAN SERVICES:                   drainfield systems or community septic tanks
                                  and drainfield systems, unless subject to an
                                  approved sewer management agreement);
                                  electric power and telephone utilities; and
                                  hard surfaced roads constructed to the
                                  standards set forth in title 2 of this code.
                                  The purpose for which land or a building is
USE:                              arranged, designed or intended, or for which
                                  either is or may be occupied or maintained.
Principal Use:The main, major, and dominant use of a building or premises as
distinguished from an accessory use.USE, PROHIBITED:Those uses not specifically
classified as permitted or conditionally permitted uses in any zone district
and as set forth in subchapter 3.3 of this title. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
12-822: DEFINITIONS - V:
 
VACATION     A dwelling unit - excluding caretaker’s residences and farm labor housing, -
RENTAL:      rented for periods of up to one month per visit.
             A fixed establishment performing any processing or packaging of crops
             produced, where value is added by changing the physical state or form of the
             product, to prepare it for market. Value added agricultural processing
VALUE ADDED  products include, but are not limited to, soap, candles, baked goods, jams and
AGRICULTURAL jellies, canned vegetables, dried fruit, syrups, salsas, salad dressings,
PROCESSING:  flours, smoked or canned meats or fish, sausages, or prepared foods. It also
             includes related accessory uses such as: offices, laboratories, tasting
             facilities, retail sales of agriculture related promotional and/or educational
             items, and facility tours.
             A modification of the bulk (size, height, shape, floor area ratio or other
             relationships of a structure to a lot or other structures) and placement
             requirements of this title as to lot or parcel size, lot coverage, width,
VARIANCE:    depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space size, height
             of buildings, or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of
             a structure or the placement of the structure upon a lot or parcel, or the
             size of the lot or parcel.
             A map depicting the general location of the subject property to other
VICINITY     properties, the transportation system, landmarks and other physical features
MAP:         within a one mile radius of the site. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-
             14-2020)
 
 
12-823: DEFINITIONS - W:
 
WATERCOURSE: A natural channel carrying waters on an intermittent or infrequent basis.
             All the accumulations of water, surface and ground water, natural and
WATERS:      artificial, public and private, or parts thereof, which are wholly or
             partially within, or flow through or border on Bonner County.
             Architectural features, such as an awning, marquee or canopy that protect
WEATHER      pedestrians from rain and sunlight. To qualify as weather protection, the
PROTECTION:  feature must be at least eight feet (8') above the walking surface and
             project at least six feet (6') horizontally from the structure.
             Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
             frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
WETLAND:     circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
             life in saturated soil conditions. “Wetlands” generally include swamps,
             marshes, bogs and similar areas (EPA, 40 CFR 230.3 and CE 33 CFR 328.3).
             The selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
WHOLESALE    commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
SALES:       wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
             selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. This is not
             considered a general commercial use. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
12-824: DEFINITIONS - X:
 
 
             Landscaping characterized by the use of drought tolerant
XERISCAPING: vegetation and the promotion of good horticultural practices and
             efficient use of water. (Ord. 558, 12-14-2016)
 
12-825: DEFINITIONS - Y:
 
      An open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
YARD: upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 558, 12-14-
      2016; amd. Ord. 606, 7-14-2020)
 
12-826: DEFINITIONS - Z:
 
                    Land classifications, identified in this title for which
ZONES OR DISTRICTS: the boundaries are enumerated on official maps in the
                    office of the planning department.
                    The Bonner County Zoning Commission, herein further
ZONING COMMISSION:  referred to as the Zoning Commission, appointed by the
                    Board of County Commissioners per BCRC 12-123. (Ord. 558,
                    12-14-2016; amd. Ord. 661, 3-18-2022)
 
CHAPTER 9
CONDITIONAL ZONING DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
12-901: Purpose
12-902: Initiation Of Agreements
12-903: Jurisdiction
12-904: Time Limits
12-905: Form Of Agreements
12-906: Approval Of Agreements
12-907: Recordation Of Agreements
12-908: Duty To Comply With Terms Of Agreement
12-909: Modification Of Agreements
12-910: Termination Of Agreements
12-911: Enforcement Of Agreements
12-901: PURPOSE:
Conditional zoning development agreements are a discretionary tool that may be
used by the board as a condition of rezoning. Conditional zoning development
agreements allow a specific project with a specific use to be developed on one
or more parcels located in an area that is not currently zoned for the proposed
uses. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-902: INITIATION OF AGREEMENTS:
An agreement may be initiated with the consent of the applicant for the
rezoning of a particular parcel of land or collection of parcels of land
through the following methods:
   A.   On application by the applicant;
   B.   By recommendation of the director;
   C.   By recommendation of the Zoning Commission or a Hearing Examiner; or
   D.   As required by the board. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-903: JURISDICTION:
   A.   In the event that a hearing body finds that a conditional zoning
development agreement should be entered into, the hearing body shall retain
jurisdiction of the matter, defer consideration of the rezone applied for and
set a time limit for submittal of a proposed agreement. The hearing body shall
then proceed as specified herein.
   B.   In the event of a determination by the board that an agreement should
be entered into, the board may remand the matter to the hearing body to set a
time limit for submittal of a proposed agreement. The hearing body shall then
proceed as specified in this article. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-904: TIME LIMITS:
In the event of findings by the hearing body, or by requirement of the board to
submit an agreement, all time limits required by the provisions of Idaho Code
or this title may be stayed, modified, or extended upon affirmative decision of
the hearing body or vote of the board. The hearing body or the board may
establish time limits for submittal of a proposed agreement. Failure by the
applicant to comply with such time limits may be deemed to constitute just
cause for termination of conditional zoning development agreement proceedings
and denial of the zone change application. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-905: FORM OF AGREEMENTS:
An agreement shall be in the form required by the director. No agreement shall
be accepted by the department which does not include the following:
   A.   The legal name, title and addresses of the applicant, property owner
and/or others with a direct vested interest in the conditional zoning
development agreement and rezone request.
   B.   A legal description of the property that is subject of the rezone
request. Such legal description must be acceptable to the county.
   C.   An affidavit by the owner of the parcel agreeing to submission of the
use and property for an agreement upon the adoption of an order by the board
approving the requested rezone of the subject parcel.
   D.   The current use of the property for which the conditional zoning
development agreement is sought.
   E.   The proposed specific use of the property for which the conditional
zoning development agreement is sought and an explanation of how the proposed
use is permitted or conditionally permitted in the zone for which application
has been made.
   F.   A project summary report, which shall include:
      1.   A narrative description of the proposed density, amenities,
improvements or other uses sought, including, but not limited to: height,
setbacks, size, and location of all proposed structures or activities on the
property.
      2.   The estimated time of start and completion of all proposed
development activities. This may be simplified by devising a time line that
splits development activities into phases.
      3.   Plans for use and reuse of property after proposed project
completion.
      4.   A narrative description of physical and environmental effects,
constraints, or limitations of the proposed development, including
infrastructure demands, and proposals for mitigation of identified physical and
environmental effects, constraints or limitations.
      5.   Economic benefits gained or lost from proposed development.
      6.   Conceptual site plans, with some representation of scale showing the
approximate location of any proposed structures, perimeter buffer treatment (as
required), road improvements, conceptual drainage strategy, and other proposed
usage information. Exhibits on general soil types, topography, slope,
vegetation, drainages, and other pertinent land characteristics may also be
required.
   G.   Signed letters of application, approval, or preapproval from any
applicable federal, state, or local agencies involved in the permitting process
for the specific use proposed. Letters shall include any written agreements
made with agencies to perform specific action. If letters of application,
approval, or preapproval are not provided, acknowledgment and consent to comply
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, and
standards shall be substituted.
   H.   A statement by the owner of the property that failure to comply with
the commitments in the agreement shall be deemed consent to rezone the property
to the preexisting zone. Rezoning of the subject parcel will occur at the time
of termination of the agreement and shall comply with the notice and hearing
procedures set forth in section 67-6509, Idaho Code. The costs of such rezone
shall be paid by the applicant, owner and/or developer.
   I.   Signatures of all applicants, owners, developers, or lawfully
authorized agents, shall be notarized, and in the case of lawfully authorized
agents, properly executed powers of attorney in a form acceptable to the
county's legal counsel shall be presented to the director and shall be made
part of the agreement.
   J.   A clause that the commitment shall run with the land and be binding on
the heirs, assigns, and successors in interest of the owner and/or developer.
   K.   Any other matter mutually agreeable to the parties. This may include,
but is not limited to, performance bonding or other fiscal guarantees. (Ord.
668, 5-11-2022)
12-906: APPROVAL OF AGREEMENTS:
The board may require an agreement to be executed to allow a rezone in order to
ensure implementation of the project as represented by the applicant and to
promote the general health, safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare of the
citizens of Bonner County. A conditional zoning development agreement shall not
allow a use of the property that is not a permitted use (whether of right or
with the appropriate permit) in the zone requested.
   A.   Conditional zoning development agreements may be recommended for
approval by the hearing body, and may be approved by the board, only after
public hearings complying with the notice and hearing procedures set forth in
section 67- 6509, Idaho Code and
subchapter 2.1 of this title.
   B.   The hearing body may recommend, and the board may add, conditions,
terms, duties or obligations to the development agreement. (Ord. 668, 5-11-
2022)
12-907: RECORDATION OF AGREEMENTS:
Following approval of a conditional zoning development agreement and adoption
of a companion ordinance rezoning the subject property by the board, the
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder at the expense
of the property owner or applicant. The recorded agreement shall take effect
and be in force upon adoption of the approval order or publication of the
ordinance rezoning the subject property, whichever occurs later. The agreement,
and all conditions, terms, duties or obligations included therein, shall run
with the land and shall be considered to be continuing obligations of the
owner, all subsequent owners and any other person acquiring an interest in the
property. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-908: DUTY TO COMPLY WITH TERMS OF AGREEMENT:
Any owner, subsequent owner, and any other person acquiring an interest in
property that is restricted by an agreement adopted pursuant to this chapter,
shall comply with all terms, conditions, obligations and duties contained in
the agreement. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-909: MODIFICATION OF AGREEMENTS:
   A.   No substantial modification of an agreement may be made without
approval of the board unless the modification is required by changes in state
or federal laws, rules, or regulations. An agreement may be modified by the
board without a public hearing only upon an affirmative recommendation from the
hearing body that the proposed modification is not a substantial change to the
terms and conditions of the agreement, or that the modification is required by
changes in state or federal laws, rules, or regulations.
   B.   After recordation of a conditional zoning development agreement, any
party bound by the agreement may seek to modify the agreement. Requests for
modification of a conditional zoning development agreement shall comply with
the procedures set forth in this article, and may also follow any procedures
contained in the original agreement which are consistent with those set forth
in this article. The hearing body may recommend to the board, and the board may
approve, a substantial modification of a previously adopted agreement based
upon the following criteria:
      1.   A public hearing is held which complies with the notice and hearing
procedures set forth in section 67-6509, Idaho Code and
subchapter 2.1 of this title.
      2.   A finding that the circumstances surrounding the agreement currently
in effect have changed and that the proposed modification will:
         a.   Preserve the enjoyment of a substantial property right of the
owner;
         b.   Not be detrimental to the public welfare; and
         c.   Not be injurious to other property in the surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-910: TERMINATION OF AGREEMENTS:
   A.   A conditional zoning development agreement may be terminated by the
board without the consent of the breaching party for failure to comply with any
term, condition, obligation or duty contained in the agreement. Such
termination shall take place after a public hearing on the termination, at
which time testimony shall be taken to establish noncompliance with the
agreement. The public hearing shall comply with the notice and hearing
procedures set forth in section 67-6509, Idaho Code and
subchapter 2.1 of this title.
   B.   A conditional zoning development agreement may contain termination
procedures, including, without limitation, notification of the persons bound by
the agreement of the alleged violation and establishing a reasonable time to
remedy the violation prior to the initiation of termination proceedings.
   C.   Upon termination of the agreement, the property which was the subject
of the agreement shall revert to the zone applicable as of the date of
submittal of the rezone request which resulted in the adoption of the
agreement. If no such zone then exists, the zone then in effect which most
closely conforms to the characteristics and requirements of the prior existing
zone, as determined by the director, shall apply. At that time, all uses of the
property which are not permitted within the subsequently applied zone following
termination of the agreement shall immediately cease. The property owner may
apply for the appropriate permit for any use that is permitted within the
subsequently applied zone upon approval of such permit.
   D.   A conditional zoning development agreement shall stipulate that the
costs incurred to rezone the property upon termination of the agreement be paid
by the applicant, owner and/or developer of the property. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
12-911: ENFORCEMENT OF AGREEMENTS:
Conditional zoning development agreements may be enforced by the county through
any means deemed to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, specific
enforcement, injunctive relief, or damages for violation of any provision of
this article or of any agreement approved pursuant to the provisions of this
article. The foregoing enforcement options available to the county shall not be
deemed exclusive. (Ord. 668, 5-11-2022)
APPENDIX A OF TITLE 12
PRIVATE ROAD STANDARDS MANUAL
SECTION 0: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
It is the purpose of this manual to provide consistent standards for
construction of new private roads built in Bonner County and reconstruction or
renovation of existing private roads for subdivisions, in Bonner County. All
construction shall conform to the standards set forth in this manual.
   A.   The Board of County Commissioners is authorized to waive requirements
of
appendix A upon satisfaction of the criteria of this section. The purpose of
granting a waiver under the provisions of these regulations shall be to ensure
that an applicant is not unduly burdened as opposed to merely inconvenienced by
the Private Road Standards. The Board shall not approve any waiver(s) except
finding that all of the following apply:
      1.   The granting of the waiver will not result in impacts that are
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other
property.
      2.   Granting the waiver shall substantially secure the objectives,
standards and requirements of these regulations.
      3.   A practical hardship, or unnecessary and unreasonable expense, would
result from strict compliance with the foregoing regulations.
      4.   The purpose of these Private Road Standards may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, or where such requirements are
redundant and clearly unnecessary for the land division in a particular area.
(Ord. 581, 10-24-2018)
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Definitions
APPROACH: As used in this manual, the term "approach" shall mean any vehicular
entrance upon a County right-of-way, other than driveway.
COUNTY: The term "County" refers in all instances to Bonner County, Idaho.
DRIVEWAY: As used in this manual, the term "driveway" shall mean a vehicular
entrance upon a right-of-way/easement or a roadway which provides access to a
fourplex or smaller multi-family dwelling or two (2) or fewer single-family
residential lots or parcels.
LOCAL FIRE AGENCY: The fire district, fire subscription agency or Bonner County
in the absence of a fire district or subscription area.
NEW ROAD: As used in this manual, the term "new road" shall mean any road built
as a private road or existing private road(s) renovated or reconstructed for
subdivisions and not defined as a "driveway".
PRIVATE ROAD: Is that road which is to be constructed, reconstructed or
renovated within an easement or private right-of-way.
PROJECT ENGINEER: As used in this manual, the term "project engineer" shall
mean a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Idaho, and
who is retained to design, construct or supervise the construction of a new or
renovated or reconstructed road.
ROAD SURFACE, ROADWAY: As used in this manual, the terms "road surface" and
"roadway" shall mean the travelway and the road shoulders on each side.
TRAVELWAY: That portion of a road which has been improved for the movement of
vehicles, exclusive of shoulders.
   1.1 Applicability
The standards contained within this manual shall be applicable to construction
of new private roads built in Bonner County or existing roads renovated or
reconstructed for subdivisions in Bonner County and not defined as a
"driveway".
SECTION 2: STANDARDS FOR NEW PRIVATE ROAD CONSTRUCTION
   2.1 General Requirements
Construction of new private roads built in Bonner County and existing private
roads renovated or reconstructed for subdivisions in Bonner County shall
conform to the standards set forth in this section. Note: Dedication of
easement (right of way) to homeowner association shall be provided as part of
final plat/deeds of family exemption and may be included in the gross acreage,
where authorized by this title.
A road maintenance agreement shall be provided with the subdivision
application.
   2.2 Design And Layout
   A.   New roads shall be laid out and designed in conformance with the
transportation portion of the comprehensive plan.
   B.   New roads serving residential subdivisions shall be designed to connect
to local access roads or collectors. New roads shall be designed to provide
access to each lot.
   2.3 Specifications For Drawings
   A.   The project engineer shall prepare road and right of way/easement
drawings, and each sheet of the drawings shall bear the seal of such engineer.
A licensed surveyor may prepare the right of way/easement drawings, and each
sheet of the drawings shall bear the seal of such surveyor.
   B.   Two (2) copies of the design drawings shall be submitted to the Bonner
County planning department. The planning department shall provide one copy to
the local fire agency official. All drawings shall include the following, when
applicable:
      1.   The first sheet of the plans shall include a project title, vicinity
map, and index of plan sheets.
      2.   Road horizontal and vertical alignments with fifty foot (50')
stationing, reading from left to right, and stationing at point of curve,
tangent and intersections, with appropriate ties to existing road surveys and
stationing, section corners, quarter corners, and the horizontal control
established by the engineer and/or project surveyor. Stations shall increase
from west to east and from south to north.
      3.   Section, township and range.
      4.   Bearings on the road centerline, keyed to an associated plat map.
      5.   Curve data including radius, delta, arc length, and semitangent
length, on all road centerlines and curb returns.
      6.   Right of way/easement lines, width for proposed road travelway and
roadway, intersecting roads, and existing road improvements with dimensions.
      7.   All topographic features within right of way/easement limits or
future right of way/easement limits and sufficient area beyond to resolve
questions of setback, cut and fill slope, drainage, access onto abutting
property, and road continuations.
      8.   All existing utilities.
      9.   All proposed water and sewer utilities that will be designed and
constructed.
      10.   Identification of all roads and adjoining subdivisions.
      11.   Existing and proposed drainage features, showing direction of flow,
size and kind of each drainage channel, pipe, and structure and other specified
requirements in any county stormwater management specifications.
      12.   Horizontal scale: One inch equals fifty feet (1"=50') and a
vertical scale of one inch equals ten feet (1"=10'). However, one inch equals
one hundred feet (1"=100') shall be optional for development of lots one acre
or larger. Details for clarification may be shown on a convenient scale. A
scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" =20') may be required for urban
arterial streets where detail is sufficiently dense to cause a "cluttered"
drawing at a smaller scale.
      13.   A north arrow.
      14.   Project beginning and ending designation with stations.
      15.   A title block to include:
         a.   The project name;
         b.   Sheet number;
         c.   Road names;
         d.   Road limits.
      16.   All found and referenced survey monuments.
      17.   Section and lot lines.
      18.   Beginning, middle and ending elevations of curb returns.
Other data necessary for the specific project.
   2.4 Width Of Right Of Way/Easement Required
   A.   New private roads shall have a minimum right of way/easement width that
shall be of sufficient width to accommodate all cuts and fills, snow storage
and stormwater features, but not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
   B.   Effort shall be made to provide through roads within a subdivision and
minimize the need for dead ends. Cul-de-sacs and hammerhead turnarounds shall
have a right of way/easement sufficient to provide area within the right of
way/easement for storage of snow removed from the roadway.
   C.   Cul de sacs/hammerhead turnarounds shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the current edition of the international fire code, as adopted
by the state fire marshal, and such later editions as may be so published and
adopted by the state fire marshal, or as amended, modified or superseded, and
incorporated herein by reference with a copy on file with the office of the
clerk of the board of county commissioners, and hereinafter referred to as IFC.
   2.5 Road Design
   A.   The minimum and maximum for design parameters of new roads shall be:
 
Design Parameter                    
Vertical grades                    Maximum ten percent*
Horizontal curvature on centerline Minimum radius 50 feet
Roadway width                      22 feet minimum**
Travelway width                    20 feet minimum**
 
* Variation to grades steeper than 10 percent may be approved by Bonner County
through the subdivision process where evidence is provided by the applicant
that steeper grades are necessary and can accommodate fire and emergency
vehicles.
** Variations to roadway widths to allow a minimum of 14 feet may be approved
by Bonner County through the subdivision process where evidence is provided by
the applicant that the required roadway width cannot be installed because of
topography, waterways or other similar restricting conditions and that the
narrower width will not obstruct access by fire and emergency vehicles. When a
width variance is approved, a turnout on each end of the reduced width section
shall be constructed to a minimum of 26 feet in overall travelway width and 40
feet in length, with the turnouts constructed on the right as the traffic
enters the reduced width section. No driveways or other access roads shall be
allowed in the roadway width varied area.
The request for variation shall include evidence provided by the project
engineer in regards to safety, maintenance and year round access.
For the purposes of the standards contained in this manual, private roads are
further divided into three (3) subcategories as shown below. Where the term
private road is used within the text, it shall include all of the following
subcategories:
      1.   High Density Private Road: A private access road, in any area zoned
for lot or parcel sizes of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or less in size
on the official Bonner County zoning map.
      2.   Standard Private Road: A private access road with a projected
traffic volume* of two hundred (200) or more vehicle trips per day, or in an
area zoned for lot or parcel sizes greater than twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet and less than five (5) acres in size on the official Bonner County zoning
map.
      3.   Low Volume Private Road: A private access road with a projected
traffic volume* of less than two hundred (200) vehicle trips per day, and in an
area zoned for lot or parcel sizes of five (5) acres or greater on the official
Bonner County zoning map. Note: Private roads are not maintained by Bonner
County.
* Projected traffic volumes to be based on ten (10) vehicle trips per day per
household over the design life of the road (usually 20 years).
New private roads shall have a minimum roadway width, travelway width and
surfacing based on the classification of the road as follows:
 
Classification Of Road       Roadway Width Travelway Width Hard Surfaced
Private Access Roads                                      
   High density private ro26 feet       20 feet         yes
   Standard private road  22 feet       20 feet         yes
   Low volume private road22 feet       20 feet         no
 
Hard surfaced roads shall have a minimum surfacing of a two (2) shot
application of light bituminous surface treatment.
   B.   Where fire hydrants are located along the roadway, the minimum width of
the travelway shall be twenty six feet (26'). This may be accomplished by
construction of a turnout providing an overall travelway width of twenty six
feet (26') and forty feet (40') in length at the hydrant location.
   2.6 Road Intersections
All new private roads which intersect new or existing roads and rights of way/
easements shall intersect at an angle which is between eighty (80) and one
hundred degrees (100o), and as close to ninety degrees (90o) as is possible.
The edge of the road surfaces shall be connected with a curve having a minimum
radius of twenty eight feet (28'). All new roads intersecting a public right of
way shall be constructed or reconstructed to meet the current Bonner County
road standards.
   2.7 Visibility At Intersections
At intersections, a minimum clear sight triangle shall be maintained as
illustrated on plate 2, sight triangle at intersections, of the current Bonner
County road standards manual. It shall be the responsibility of the developer/
adjacent landowner to maintain the clear sight triangle at all times.
SECTION 3: ROAD CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES
   3.1 Clearing And Grubbing
Prior to the start of road construction, clearing of the entire width of the
right of way/easement shall be completed. All materials removed by clearing or
grubbing shall be properly disposed of in compliance with state and local
requirements. All denuded areas shall be erosion protected as specified in the
stormwater and erosion control plan if applicable.
   3.2 Erosion Control
During road construction, erosion control measures shall be installed and
maintained to minimize soil erosion from disturbed sites. Permanent erosion
control measures shall be included in all road designs, with design guidance
from the handbook of best management practices for stormwater management and
erosion and the Idaho standards for public works construction. Refer to title
12,
subchapter 7.2 of the Bonner County Revised Code for stormwater management and
erosion control plan requirements.
   3.3 Subgrade
   A.   The subgrade shall consist of the native materials remaining after duff
(organic material) and topsoil have been removed and suitable underlying road
construction material, or to a depth as necessary to allow placement of
sufficient depth of subbase material. The extent of the excavation necessary to
expose the subgrade shall be determined by the project engineer. Soil and
compaction tests are required to document the acceptability for construction.
All testing shall be at the expense of the developer.
   B.   In solid rock excavation, the solid rock shall be excavated six inches
(6") below the finished subgrade elevation and backfilled with approved
granular material.
   C.   Unstable subgrade conditions shall be remedied by over excavation and
backfilling with approved material under the direction of the project engineer
and/or placement of appropriate geosynthetic materials to meet the required
vehicular support criteria.
   D.   Subgrade shall be prepared as necessary to allow overlying road
material to be constructed in accordance with these specifications.
   E.   Prior to placing any ballast on the subgrade, the project engineer is
responsible for ensuring that all testing, required inspections and standards
outlined herein are adhered to.
   3.4 Ballast
   A.   All underground utilities and conduits crossing the road shall be
installed before placement of ballast material.
   B.   Pit run gravel or fractured rock I shall be used for the ballast
material. Ballast material shall have a sand equivalent of not less than thirty
(30), and which meets the following gradations:
 
Sieve Size Percent Passing
6 inch     100
3 inch     98 - 100
2 inch     75 - 100
1 inch     40 - 80
#4         25 - 60
#200       5 - 12
 
   C.   The ballast material shall be placed in loose six inch (6") to nine
inch (9") lifts and shall be compacted using mechanical methods to at least
ninety five percent (95%) of the ASTM D-698 standard proctor density.
   D.   Prior to placing any top course material on the ballast, the project
engineer is responsible for ensuring that all testing, required inspections and
standards outlined herein are adhered to.
   E.   All culvert installations crossing the roadway shall be installed
before any base material is placed.
   F.   Recommended ballast thickness and top course thickness:
The following charts may be used by the project engineer to assist in the soils
classification and to determine the depth of the minimum required ballast and
top course material. The intent is to design a roadway section capable of
providing an all-weather road for a seventy eight thousand (78,000) pound fire
apparatus.
   SOILS DESCRIPTIONS/DEFINITIONS
Major Divisions Letter Symbol Typical Descriptions
Major Divisions                                   Letter Symbol Typical
                                                                Descriptions
                                                                Well graded
                                                                gravels,
                                                  GW            gravel- sand
                                                                mixtures,
                                  Clean Gravels:                little or no
               Gravel And                                      fines
               Gravelly Soils:    Little or no                  Poorly graded
                                 fines                         gravels,
               More than 50                       GP            gravel- sand
               percent of coarse                                mixtures,
               fraction retained                                little or no
               no. 4 sieve                                      fines
Coarse Grained                    Gravels With                  Silty gravels,
Soils:                            Fines:          GM            gravel-sand
                                                              silt mixtures
More than 50                      Appreciable                   Clayey gravels,
percent of                        amount of fines GC            gravel-sand
material is                                                     clay mixtures
larger no. 200                                                  Well graded
sieve size                                        SW            sands, gravelly
                                  Clean Sand:                   sands, little
                  Sandy And                                 or no fines
                  Sandy Soils: Little or no                  Poorly graded
                                 fines           SP            sands, gravelly
               More than 50                                     sands, little
               percent of coarse                                or no fines
               fraction passing   Sands With                    Silty sands,
               no. 4 sieve        Fines:          SM            sand- silt
                                                               mixtures
                                  Appreciable                   Clayey sands,
                                  amount of fines SC            sand-clay
                                                                mixtures
                                                                Inorganic silts
                                                                and very fine
                                                                sands, rock
               Silts And Clays:                                 flour silty or
                                                 ML            clayey fine
               Liquid limit less than 50                        sands and
                                                                clayey silts
                                                                with slight
                                                                plasticity
                                                                Gravelly,
                                                                clays, sandy
Fine Grained                                      CL            clays, silty
Soils:                                                          clays, lean
                                                               clays
More than 50                                                    Organic silts
percent of                                        OL            and organic
material is                                                     silty clays of
smaller than                                                    low plasticity
no. 200 sieve                                                   Inorganic
size           Silts And Clays:                                 silts, micaeous
                                                 MH            or diatomaceous
               Liquid limit greater than 50                     fine sand or
                                                                silty soils
                                                                Inorganic clays
                                                  CH            of high
                                                                plasticity, fat
                                                                clays
                                                                Organic clays
                                                                of medium to
                                                  OH            high
                                                                plasticity,
                                                                organic silts
                                                                Peat, humus,
                                                                swamp, soils
Highly organic soils                              PT            with high
                                                                organic
                                                                contents
 
Soil Type (USCS) r Value Ballast Top Course
Soil Type (USCS)   r Value Ballast Top Course
                   5        
OH, OL, CL, CH, MH 10      Design Required
                   15
SC                 20      12"     4"
ML                 25      12"     4"
                  30      12"     4"
**GM, GL           35      12"     4"
SM                 40      12"     4"
SP                 45      12"     4"
                  50      12"     4"
GP                 55      12"     4"
SW                 60      12"     4"
GW                 65      12"     4"
 
** GM and GC soils are highly dependent on the % silt or clay, a 35 r value is
on the conservative side.
Subgrade R value may require the minimum road section design to be increased
under the direction of the project engineer.
   3.5 Top Course
   A.   Top course material shall meet the following gradation requirements:
 
Sieve Size Percent Passing
1 inch     100
3/4 inch   90-100
#4         40-65
#8         30-50
#200       3-9
 
   B.   At least sixty percent (60%) of the crushed aggregate particles
retained on the no. 4 sieve shall have at least one fractured face.
   C.   The Los Angeles abrasion test may be required to ensure the top course
aggregate does not show more than a loss of thirty five percent (35%) and the
sand equivalent not less than thirty (30).
   D.   The material shall be placed in loose lifts not to exceed six inches
(6") in depth and compacted to the approved design depth. The material shall be
mechanically compacted by rolling to ninety five percent (95%) of the ASTM D-
698 proctor density. The aggregate shall be placed in such a manner that it
will have a uniform mixture throughout.
   E.   Prior to placing top course material on the ballast, the project
engineer is responsible for ensuring that all testing, required inspections and
standards outlined herein are adhered to.
   3.6 Road Signage
   A.   Road Name: No new private road or existing renovated or reconstructed
private roads shall be considered completed until a road name sign has been
installed. It shall be the responsibility of the developer/landowner to
purchase, erect and maintain the road name signs. All road name signs shall
conform to the standards contained in the latest edition of the manual on
uniform traffic control devices and Bonner County Revised Code.
   B.   Stop Sign: A stop sign shall be installed at the intersection with all
public roads. Stop sign dimensions, installation and location shall conform to
the latest edition of the MUTCD. It shall be the responsibility of the
developer/landowner to purchase, erect and maintain the stop signs.
   3.7 Standards For New Bridge Construction
The standard for bridge design within private roads shall at a minimum be HB-
16-1996, as described in the AASHTO standard specification for highway bridges,
16th edition.
   3.8 Engineering Requirements
Inspections Required:
The project engineer shall, at a minimum, conduct on site inspections of the
new private road construction at the following stages of construction:
   A.   Completion of any construction surveying and staking.
   B.   Completion of subgrade, prior to the placement of any ballast material.
   C.   Completion of ballast, prior to the placement of any top course
material.
   D.   Completion of installation of road signs, installation of any
appurtenant structures, and reseeding of disturbed area and slopes.
   3.9 Final Report And As Built Drawings
At the completion of the road construction, and following the last required
inspection, the project engineer shall submit two (2) copies of the final
report and as built drawings for the new road and any appurtenant structures to
the planning department. The planning department shall provide one copy to the
local fire agency official. The final report shall include complete information
related to the road construction and at a minimum, include the following
information:
   A.   Dates of inspection, work performed and inspected, changes or repairs
ordered.
   B.   Weather conditions, unusual or unexpected site conditions.
   C.   Engineering operations performed.
   D.   The appropriate inspection and information checklist.
   REQUIRED INSPECTION & INFORMATION CHECKLIST
Check off when completed & submit to Bonner County Planning Department
PROJECT NAME:                                                   
ASSIGNED PLANNING DEPARTMENT NUMBER:                            
ASSIGNED PUBLIC WORKS ENCROACHMENT PERMIT NUMBER:            (if applicable)
For all private roads:
      Project engineer shall submit construction inspection notes
      Verify placement of any approved geotextile fabric, ballast and 3/4"
minus
      Verify the gradation of 3/4" minus and ballast, submit sieve analysis
      Verify the section depth
      Submit nuclear density gauge field data sheets
      Submit subgrade density test results
      Density tests are required for every lift at a minimum frequency of 300
linear feet, for all materials, special attention shall be paid to curve
returns, cul-de-sacs/hammerhead turnarounds or sensitive areas
      Submit proctor tests results on subgrade, ballast, 3/4" minus
      (Other requirements-verified by engineer)
CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION/ACCEPTANCE:
I CERTIFY THE PROJECT IS COMPLETED IN GENERAL ACCORDANCE WITH THE APPROVED
PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
                                                                
Project Engineer Signature    Date
                                     Seal
Project Engineer Name Printed
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
APPENDIX B OF TITLE 12
NORTH IDAHO NATIVE AND BENEFICIAL PLANT LIST
PART I - NATIVE PLANT LANDSCAPING LIST
   Plants that are native to North Idaho
Codes:
Soil - D = dry; M = moist; W = wet
Light - S = sun; PS = part sun or shade; Sh = Shade
*Keep away from sewer and septic lines
TREES
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name  Scientific   Height  Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
             Name
                          40-60                                  Fixes nitrogen
Alder, Red*  Alnus rubra  feet          M/W      S/PS            in the soil;
                                                                 catkins
                                                       Interior  Improves soil
Alder,       Alnus                                     Rain      by adding
Sitka*       viridis      30 feet       M/W      S     Forest/   organic matter
                                                       Riparian  and nitrogen;
                                                                 catkins
                                                                 Golden fall
                                                                 color; spreads
Aspen*,      Populus      90 feet       M/D      S     Aspen     by root
Quaking      tremuloides                               Grove     runners; gray-
                                                                 white smooth
                                                                 bark
Birch,       Betula       50-70                                  Yellow fall
Paper*       papyrifera   feet          M        S     Wetland   foliage; white
                                                                 peeling bark
                                                                 Stream bank
Birch,       Betula       13-26                                  stabilization;
Water*       occidentalis feet          W        S/PS  Wetland   pinkish,
                                                                 nonpeeling
                                                                 bark
                                                                 Sticky, red
                                                                 seed cases;
Cottonwood*, Populus      150-180                                good for
Black        trichocarpa  feet          M/W      S               erosion
                                                                 control on
                                                                 banks;
                                                                 attracts birds
                                                                 Shade
Fir,         Pseudotsuga  150                                    tolerant; well
Douglas; Red menziesii    feet          D/M      S/PS            drained soil;
                                                                 pyramidal
                                                                 shape
                                                                 Fragile erect
Fir, Grand;  Abies        100                                    cones at top
White        grandis      feet          M/D      S/PS            of tree;
                                                                 fragrant
                                                                 foliage
                                                                 Dark green
                                                                 needles with
                                                                 whitish lines;
                                                                 drought and
Fir,         Abies        60-105        M        S/Sh  Subalpine heat
Subalpine    lasiocarpa   feet                                   intolerant;
                                                                 narrow, slow
                                                                 growing; red-
                                                                 purple cones
                                                                 at top
                                                       Interior  Needs shade
Hemlock,     Tsuga        120-150       M        Sh    Rain      when young;
Western      heterophylla feet                         Forest    thick, acidic,
                                                                 humus soil
Larch,                                                           Golden fall
Western;     Larix        100-200       D/M      S     Young     color;
Tamarack     occidentalis feet                         Forest    deciduous,
                                                                 erect, slender
                                                                 Shrubby multi-
                                                                 trunk tree;
Maple, Rocky Acer glabrum 20-30         M/D      S/PS  Young     fall and
Mountain                  feet                         Forest    winter color;
                                                                 attractive all
                                                                 year
Pine,                                                            3 needles per
Ponderosa;   Pinus        140           D/M      S     Young     sheaf; dry
Yellow, Bull ponderosa    feet                         Forest    open sites;
                                                                 fire resistant
                                                                 Idaho state
Pine,        Pinus        230                          Young     tree; five
Western      monticola    feet          D/M      S     Forest    needles per
White                                                            sheaf; good
                                                                 specimen tree
                                                                 Evergreen
                                                                 scale-like
Redcedar,    Thuja        100-120                      Moist     leaves;
Western      plicata      feet          M        PS/Sh Forest    aromatic; red-
                                                                 brown bark;
                                                                 rich, moist
                                                                 soil
                                                                 Blue-green,
Spruce,      Picea        75-120                                 stiff,
Engelmann    engelmannii  feet          M        PS    Subalpine evergreen
                                                                 needles; slow
                                                                 growing
 
SHRUBS
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name  Scientific     Height Bloom  Moisture Light Arboretum  Notes
             Name
                                                                    Forms
Alder, Wavy  Alnus viridis  10     May-                             thicket; fast
leaf*        ssp. Sinuata   feet   July   M        S/PS             growing;
                                                                    fixes
                                                                    nitrogen
                                                                    Deep orange
Birch, Bog,  Betula nana    3-10   Feb-   W        S/PS             in the fall;
Scrub*                      feet   June                             acidic soil;
                                                                    spreading
                                                                    Small yellow
                                                                    flowers;
Buffalo      Shepherdia     3-13   May-   D/M      S/PS  Dry Forest orange to red
Berry        canadensis     feet   July                             berries;
                                                                    fixes
                                                                    nitrogen
                                                                    Small, yellow
                                                                    flower
Cascara,     Frangula       Up to  Jun-                             clusters;
Buckthorn    purshiana      30     July   M/W      Sh               black fruit;
                            feet                                    silvery gray
                                                                    bark;
                                                                    deciduous
                                                                    Small white
Ceanothus,   Ceanothus                                              flowers in
Shiny Leafed velutinus var. 2 feet        D/M      S                pyramidal
                                                                    clusters;
                                                                    good browes
                                                                    White
                                                                    flowers;
                                                                    grows in
Chokecherry, Prunus         3-12   Apr-   D        S     Meadow/    rocky soil;
Common       virginiana     feet   May                   Medicinal  fast growing;
                                                                    showy fruit;
                                                                    attracts
                                                                    birds
                                                                    Clusters of
                                                                    white
Cranberry,   Vibumum edule  1.5-10        M/W      PS/Sh            flowers; red
Highbrush                   feet                                    berries;
                                                                    likes rich
                                                                    organic soil
                                                                    Creamy white
                                                         Interior   flowers;
Devil's club Oplopanax      3-10   May-   M        Sh    Rain       beautiful red
             horridus       feet   June                  Forest     berries in
                                                                    fall; very
                                                                    spiny
                                                                    Greenish-
                                                         Interior   white flower
Dogwood, Red Comus sericea  3-     May-   M/W      S/PS  Rain       clusters;
Osier                       6 feet July                  Forest     white
                                                                    berries; red
                                                                    twigs
                                                                    Clusters of
                                                                    white
                                                                    flowers;
Elderberry,  Sambucus nigra 6-12          M        S     Riparian   grows along
Blue         var. cerulea   feet                                    watercourses;
                                                                    powdery blue
                                                                    edible fruit;
                                                                    fast growing
                                                                    White flower
                                                                    cluster;
Hawthorn,    Crataegus      6-25   May-                             small black
Black        douglasii var. feet   June   D/W      S                fruit;
                                                                    thorny; soil
                                                                    and stream
                                                                    stabilization
                                                                    Edible nuts;
Hazelnut,                   3-12                                    yellow, fall
Beaked       Corylus comuta feet          M        S/Sh             color; stream
                                                                    banks; well
                                                                    drained soil
                                                                    Tiny,
                                                                    pinkish-
                                                                    yellow
                                                                    flowers,
Huckleberry, Menziesia      Up to                                   blue-green
Fool's;      ferruginea     9 feet        M        S/Sh             foliage;
False Azelea                                                        crimson-
                                                                    orange fall
                                                                    foliage;
                                                                    acidic, humus
                                                                    soil
                                                                    White to pink
                                                                    flowers;
Huckleberry, Vaccinium      To 6          M/W      S     Subalpine  edible blue-
Oval-leaf    ovalifolium    feet                                    black
                                                                    berries; red
                                                                    fall foliage
                                                                    White to pink
                                                                    flowers;
Huckleberry, Vaccinium      To 4.5                                  purple to
Thinleaf     membranaceum   feet          M/D      S     Subalpine  reddish-
                                                                    black
                                                                    berries; red
                                                                    fall foliage
                                                                    Grayish-
                                                                    green, gray-
Juniper,     Juniperus      3-30                                    blue berries;
Rocky        scopulorum     feet          D        S                knotty,
Mountain                                                            twisted
                                                                    trunk; rocky
                                                                    sites
                                                                    Urn-shaped
             Arctostaphylos 6-10                                    flowers, red
Kinnikinnick uva- ursi      inches        D        S/PS  Paths      berries;
                                                                    evergreen
                                                                    shiny leaves
                                                                    Shrubby
                                                                    multi-trunk
Maple, Rocky Acer glabrum   20-30                        Young      tree; fall
Mountain     var.           feet          M/D      S/PS  Forest     and winter
                                                                    color;
                                                                    attractive
                                                                    all year
                                                                    White flower
                                                                    clusters;
             Sorbus                                                 grows on
Mountain     sitchensis     3-15   June-  M        S/PS             slopes;
Ash, Sitka   var.           feet   July                             excellent
                                                                    fall color
                                                                    leaves and
                                                                    berries
                                                                    White flower
                                                                    clusters;
             Sorbus                                                 grows on
Mountain     scopulina var. 3-13   May-   D/M      S/PS             slopes;
Ash, Western scopulina      feet   July                             excellent
                                                                    fall color
                                                                    leaves and
                                                                    berries
Mountain
Lover,                                                              Tiny maroon
Myrtle       Pachistima     1-     May-   M        PS    Berm       flowers; good
Boxwood,     myrsinites     2 feet June                             deer browse;
False                                                               evergreen
Boxwood
                                                                    White
                                                                    flowers;
Ninebark,    Physocarpus    To 6   May-                             leaves hairy
Mallow       malvaceus      feet   June   D/M      S     Dry Rock   on both
                                                                    sides;
                                                                    peeling bark;
                                                                    rocky soil
                                                                    Foamy, creamy
                                                                    white flower
             Holodiscus     3-10   June-                            clusters;
Ocean Spray  discolor       feet   Aug    D/M      S/PS  Dry Forest arching
                                                                    stems; sandy
                                                                    to gravelly
                                                                    soil
                                                                    Yellow
Oregon       Mahonia        6-24                                    flowers;
Grape,       nervosa        inches Spring D/M      PS/Sh Path       shiny leaves;
Cascade                                                             evergreen;
                                                                    dark berries
                                                                    Bright yellow
                                                                    flower
Oregon                      6-12   Apr/                             clusters;
Grape,       Mahonia repens inches June   D/M      S     Path       blue berries;
Creeping                                                            holly-like,
                                                                    evergreen
                                                                    leaves
                                                                    Yellow flower
                                                                    clusters;
                                                                    prickly,
Oregon       Mahonia        8-48   May/                             evergreen
Grape, Tall  aquifolium     inches June   D/M      S     Path       leaves; blue
                                                                    berries;
                                                                    drought
                                                                    resistant;
                                                                    rich soil
                                                                    Flowers blue-
Penstemon,   Penstemon      To 15  June-  D        S     Dry Rock   lavender to
Shrubby      fruticosus     inches Aug                              purple; rocky
                                                                    soil
             Rosa                                                   Small pink
Rose,        gymnocarpa     1-     June-  D/M      S                flowers;
Baldhip      var.           4 feet July                             small scarlet
                                                                    hips
                                                                    Large pastel
Rose, Nootka Rosa nutkana   3-     May-   M        S     Dry Rock   pink flowers;
             var.           6 feet July                             large, red
                                                                    hips
                                                                    Pink flowers;
Rose,        Rosa woodsii   3-     May-   D        S     Dry Rock/  large, dark
Pearhip      var.           6 feet July                  Medicinals red hips,
                                                                    spreads well
Rose,        Rosa           3-     June-                            Pink flowers;
Prickly      acicularis     6 feet Aug    M        S                very spiny
             var.
                                                                    White
Service      Amelanchier    6-30   May-                  Young      flowers; dark
Berry;       alnifolia var. feet   June   M/D      S     Forest     blue berries;
Saskatoon                                                           attracts
                                                                    birds
                                                                    Pink flowers;
                                                                    white berries
Snowberry    Symphoricarp   4 feet May-   D        S     Path       (poisonous)
             os albus              Aug                              persist
                                                                    through
                                                                    winter
             Spiraea                                     Meadow/    White flowers
Spiraea,     betulifolia    10-24  June-  M/D      S     Moist      in dense flat
Birch-Leaved var.           inches July                  Forest     clusters;
                                                                    easy to grow
                                                                    Pink to deep
Spiraea,     Spiraea               June-                 Riparian/  rose, dense,
Douglas,     douglasii var. 4 feet July   M/W      S     Rain       elongate
Pink                                                     Forest     clusters;
                                                                    easy to grow
                                                                    White flower
                                                                    clusters;
                                                                    grows on
Sumac;       Rhus glabra    3-     June-  D        S     Dry Rock   slopes;
Smooth                      9 feet July                             excellent
                                                                    fall color
                                                                    leaves and
                                                                    berries
                                                                    White,
                                                                    fragrant
Syringa,     Philadelphus   3-     May-                  Young      flowers;
Mockorange   lewisii        9 feet July   M        S/PS  Forest     Idaho state
                                                                    flower; grows
                                                                    in open
                                                                    forests
                                                                    White
             Rubus          11/2-  May-                             flowers;
Thimbleberry parviflorus    7 feet July   D/M      PS/Sh Dry Rock   edible fruit;
                                                                    spreads by
                                                                    rhizomes
                                                                    Yellow
Twinberry,                                                          flowers
Black;       Lonicera       3-     June-  M/W      S/PS             clusters;
Bearberry    involucrata    9 feet July                             black berries
                                                                    in fall;
                                                                    boggy soil
                                                                    Twin, yellow
Twinberry,   Lonicera       3-     May-                  Moist      flowers
Red; Utah    utahensis      6 feet July   M        S/PS  Forest     followed by
Honeysuckle                                                         twin red
                                                                    berries
                                                                    White
Willow,      Salix bebbiana 1-15          W        S/PS             catkins;
Bebb's*                     feet                                    grows in
                                                                    seeps
                                                                    Long, oval
                                                                    shaped
Willow,      Salix          6-12                                    leaves;
Drummond*    drummondiana   feet          M        S/PS             tolerates
                                                                    poor soil;
                                                                    moist,
                                                                    water's edge
Willow,      Salix          4-15                                    Catkins;
Geyer's*     geyeriana      feet          M        S                holds
                                                                    shorelines
                                                                    Pale yellow
                                                                    calkins;
Willow,      Slix lasiandra 3-27          W        S                medium shrub
Pacific*                    feet                                    or small
                                                                    tree; holds
                                                                    shorelines
Willow,      Salix exigua   To 12  May-   W        S                Grows on
Sandbar*                    feet   June                             sandbars
Willow,      Salix          7-33                         Young      Erect,
Scouler*     scouleriana    feet          D/M      S     Forest     clumped
                                                                    growth
 
PERENNIALS
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name   Scientific    Height  Bloom  Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
              Name
              Heuchera                                              Cream
Alumroot,     cylindrica    6-20    May-   D        S     Dry Rock/ flowers on
Round-Leafed  var.          inches  Aug                   Meadow    spike-like
                                                                    clusters
Arnica,       Amica         3-20    All                   Medicinal Bright
Broadleaf     latifolia     inches  Summer M        S/PS  Garden    yellow ray
              var.                                                  flowers
                                                                    Yellow,
                                                                    daisy-like
Arnica,       Amica         3-20    May-   M        S/PS  Medicinal flowers;
Heart-Leaved  cordifolia    inches  Aug                   Garden    leaves
                                                                    similar to
                                                                    trail plant
                                                                    Blue to
                                                                    violet ray
                                                                    flowers with
Aster, Showy  Eurybia       1-      July-  D/M      PS/Sh Young     yellow
              conspicua     3 feet  Sept                  Forest    centers;
                                                                    loamy soil;
                                                                    grows under
                                                                    pines
                                                                    Rose-purple
Aster, Smooth               4-10    July-                           to blue or
Blue          Aster laevis  inches  Sept   D/M      S               violet,
                                                                    yellow
                                                                    center
                                                                    Very showy,
Balsamroot,   Balsamorhiza  12-18   May-                            daisy type
Arrowleaf     sagittata     inches  June   D        S/PS  Dry Rock  yellow
                                                                    flower; well
                                                                    drained soil
                                                                    Creamy
                                                                    flower
                            Stems                                   cluster on
Beargrass     Xerophyllum   to 4.5  May-   M        S     Subalpine tall stem;
              tenax         feet    Aug                             grass- like
                                                                    leaves in
                                                                    clumps; lily
                                                                    family
                                                                    Tiny white
Bedstraw,     Galium        8-39    May-   M/W      PS/Sh           flowers;
Fragrant      triflorum     inches  June                            reseeds;
                                                                    peat soil
                                                                    Pink/purple
                                                                    flowers;
Bergamot,     Monarda       8-28    June-                           large
Wild Beebalm  fistulosa     inches  Aug    M/D      S/PS            clumps,
                                                                    rhizomes; a
                                                                    mint; sand
                                                                    to loam soil
                                                                    Yellow or
Biscuitroot,  Lomatium      To 5    Apr-   D        S/PS            purple
Fern-leaved   dissectum     feet    June                            flowers;
                                                                    rocky soil
                                                                    Yellow
Biscuitroot,  Lomatium      8-32    Spring D        S               flowers;
Nine-leaf     tritematum    inches                                  likes rocky
                                                                    soil
                                                                    Small white
Biscuitroot,                                                        flowers
Salt &                                                              (salt) w/
Pepper;       Lomatium      4-10    Early  D/M      PS              purple
Gorman's      gormanii      inches  Spring                          anthers
Desert-                                                             (pepper);
Parsley                                                             east
                                                                    exposure
                            2-                                      Showy pink
Bitterroot    Lewisia       3       Apr-   D/M      S               flower; well
              rediviva      inches  July                            drained
                                                                    rocky soil
                                                                    Flowers
                                                                    yellow to
                                                                    maroon;
Blanketflower Gaillardia    8-27    June-  D        S     Young     reseeds;
              aristata      inches  July                  Forest    well drained
                                                                    soil;
                                                                    tolerates
                                                                    heat
                                                                    Pink,
Bluebell,     Mertensia     5-      Apr/                            clustered,
Long-flowered longiflora    8       June   M        S/PS            bell shaped
or Mountain                 inches                                  flowers turn
                                                                    blue
                                                                    Purplish-
                                                                    blue, bell
              Campanula     6-20    All                             shaped
Bluebells     rotundifolia  inches  Summer D        S     Dry Rock  flowers on
                                                                    thin, wiry
                                                                    stems; well
                                                                    drained soil
                                                                    Creamy white
                            2-                                      flower
Buckwheat,    Eriogonum     6       May-   D        S               cluster; mat
Cushion       ovalifolium   inches  Aug                             forming,
                                                                    gray-green
                                                                    leaves
                                                                    Creamy white
                                                                    flower
                                                                    cluster
Buckwheat,    Eriogonum     2-12    June-                           often tinged
Sulphur       umbellatum    inches  Aug    D        S               with red or
                                                                    purple; mat
                                                                    forming,
                                                                    gray-green
                                                                    leaves
Buttercup,    Ranunculus    6-24    Early                           Small pale
Little        uncinatus     inches  Summer M/W      S/Sh            yellow
                                                                    flowers
                                                                    Yellow
              Ranunculus    2-                                      flowers;
Buttercup,    glaberrimus   8       Early  D/M      S/PS            coniferous
Sagebrush     var.          inches  Spring                          forests;
                                                                    vanishes in
                                                                    midsummer
                                                                    Several
                                                                    blue-purple
                                                                    flowers per
              Camassia      12      Apr/                            stem; like
Camas, Common quamash       inches  July   M        S/PS  Riparian  coarse
                                                                    grass; wet
                                                                    spring and
                                                                    dry summer
                                                                    soil
                                                                    Dark brown
                                                                    blossoms
                                                                    become
Cattail,      Typha         Stems                                   cottony when
Common        latifolia     to 6           W        S     Riparian  mature;
                            feet                                    organic
                                                                    soil; wet
                                                                    feet;
                                                                    rhizomes
                                                                    Yellow
                                                                    flowers; 5-
Cinquefoil,   Potentilla    1-      Late                            fingered
Graceful      gracilis var. 2 feet  Spring D        S/PS            leaves;
                                                                    looks like
                                                                    "marijuana
                                                                    leaf"
              Potentilla                                            Pale yellow
Cinquefoil,   glandulosa    6-16    June-  D/M      S/PS            flowers; 5-
Sticky        var.          inches  Aug                             fingered
                                                                    leaves
                                                                    Pink
                            2-                                      flowers;
Clarkia, Pink Clarkia       8       May-   M/D      S               well drained
Fairies       pulchella     inches  June                            soil;
                                                                    annual;
                                                                    reseeds
                                                                    Small
Collomia,     Collomia      4-15    May-                            tubular pink
Narrow-leaved linearis      inches  Aug    D/M      S               flowers in
                                                                    dense
                                                                    cluster
                                                                    Drooping red
Columbine,    Aquilegia     8-28    May-   D/M      S/PS  Dry Rock  sepals,
Red           formosa       inches  Aug                             yellow
                                                                    petals
                                                                    Yellow
                                                                    petals,
                                                                    yellow
Columbine,    Aquilegia     8-30    June-  M        S/PS            sepals may
Yellow        flavescens    inches  Aug                             be tinged
                                                                    with pink;
                                                                    mountain
                                                                    meadows
                                                                    White flower
                                                                    clusters 4-
Cow Parsnip   Heracleum     3-      June   M/W      S/Sh  Wetland   12 inches
              maximum       7 feet                                  across;
                                                                    maplelike,
                                                                    showy leaves
                                                                    Large rose
                                                                    to purple
              Chamerion                                             flowers.
Fireweed      angustifolium 1-      June-  M        S     Dry Rock  First to
              ssp.          7 feet  Aug                             grow after a
              angustifolium                                         fire;
                                                                    spreads by
                                                                    rhizomes
                                                                    Blue flowers
                                                                    replace
Flax, Blue    Linum lewisii 2 feet  May-   D/M      S/PS  Young     daily;
                                    Sep                   Forest    reseeds;
                                                                    very easy to
                                                                    grow
                                                                    Blue ray
                                                                    flowers with
Fleabane,     Erigeron      4-24    May-                            yellow
Daisy         speciosus     inches  Aug    D/M      S/PS  Subalpine center.
                                                                    Blooms
                                                                    before the
                                                                    asters
                                                                    Tiny,
              Tiarella      6-20    June-                           delicate
Foamflower    trifoliata    inches  July   W/M      Sh/PS           white
              var.                                                  flowers on
                                                                    wiry stalks
Geranium,     Geranium      16-35   May-                            White to
Cranesbill    richardsonii  inches  Sept   M        PS/Sh           pinkish
                                                                    flowers
                                                                    Pinkish-
Geranium,     Geranium      16-35   May-                            purple
Sticky        viscosissimum inches  Sept   D        S/Sh            flowers;
                                                                    grassy
                                                                    meadows
              Solidago                                              Dense
Goldenrod     canadensis    12-70   July-  D/M      S/PS  Meadow    clusters of
              var.          inches  Oct                             showy yellow
              salebrosa                                             flowers
              Olsynium                                              Purple-blue
Grass Widow   douglasii     6-10    Early  M        S/PS            flowers;
              var. inflatum inches  Spring                          iris-like
                                                                    leaves
                                                                    Yellow
Groundsel,    Senecio       1-      June-                           composite
Arrowleaf     triangularis  5 feet  Sept   W        S/PS            flowers in
                                                                    flat topped
                                                                    heads
                                                                    Showy spikes
                                                                    of pink to
                                                                    white
Hollyhock,    lliamna       3-      June-  M        S               flowers;
Mountain      rivularis     6 feet  Aug                             large,
                                                                    maple-like
                                                                    leaves; well
                                                                    drained soil
                                                                    2-3 creamy
                                                                    flowers hang
Hooker's      Disporum      1-      Late   M/W      S/Sh  Moist     from stem
Fairybells    hookeri       3 feet  Spring                Forest    ends; red
                                                                    berries in
                                                                    fall
                                                                    Blue flowers
Hyancinth,    Brodiaea      6-10    Apr-   D        S/PS            clumped at
Wild          douglasii     inches  June                            the end of a
                                                                    long stem
                                                                    Blue
                                                                    flowers; in
Jacob's       Polemonium    2-15    May-   D/M      S               the Phlox
ladder        pulcherrimum  inches  Aug                             family;
                                                                    reseeds
                                                                    readily
                                                                    Stalk of
                                                                    blue/purple,
                            3-15                                    showy
Larkspur,     Delphinium    inches/ Apr-   D/M      S               flowers;
Montana       bicolor       6-24    July                            grassy
                            inches                                  prairies,
                                                                    coniferous
                                                                    forests
                                                                    Showy blue
Larkspur,     Delphinium    6-16           D        S/PS            to violet
Nuttall's     nuttallianum  inches                                  flowers;
                                                                    open forest
                                                                    Orange
                                                                    flowers with
                                                                    red-purple
Lily,         Lilium                Jul/                            dots; loose
Columbia;     columbianum   2 feet  Aug    3        3     Dry Rock  fertile
Tiger lily                                                          soil;
                                                                    purchase as
                                                                    seed or
                                                                    corms
                                                                    Purple-brown
Lily,                                                               flowers
Leopard;      Fritillaria   21/     April- M        S/PS            mottled with
Chocolate     lanceolata    2 feet  June                            green.
Lily                                                                Purchase
                                                                    corms
                                                                    Deep blue/
Lupine, Silky Lupinus       8-24    Spring D        S     Meadow    purple
              sericeus      inches                                  flowers on
                                                                    erect stems
                                                                    Violet/blue
Lupine,       Lupinus       4-16    Spring D/M      S/PS  Meadow    flowers on
Silvery       argenteus     inches                                  erect stems;
                                                                    clumps
                                                                    Small white
Meadowrue,    Thalictrum    1-                                      flowers in
Western       occidentale   3 feet         M        S               loose
                                                                    clusters at
                                                                    top of stems
                                                                    White to
              Claytonia                                             pink nodding
Miner's       perfoliata    2-12    Apr-   M        PS/Sh           flowers in a
Lettuce       (Montia       inches  July                            cluster
              perfoliata)                                           above leaf
                                                                    disk
                                                                    Small white
Miner's       Claytonia     4-12    May-                  Moist     flowers with
lettuce,      cordifolia    inches  Sept   W        PS    Forest    pink veins;
Heart- leaved                                                       grows along
                                                                    streams
Monkey                                                              Yellow
Flower,       Mimulus       3-36    Summer W        S/Sh            flowers;
Yellow        guttatus      inches                                  grows along
                                                                    streams
                                                                    Tiny
                                                                    flowers;
Nightshade,                                                         showy
Dwarf         Circaea       4-20           M/W      Sh              leaves;
Enchanter's   alpina        inches                                  cool, damp
                                                                    forest or
                                                                    wetland
                                                                    sites
                                                                    Pink to rose
Onion, Pink                 4-20    June-                           purple
nodding       Allium cemuum inches  July   D        S/PS  Medicinal flowers;
                                                                    spreads by
                                                                    clumping
                                                                    White
                                                                    flowers in
Pearly        Anaphalis     1-      July-  D/M      S     Dry Rock  dense
Everlasting   margaritacea  3 feet  Oct                             clustered
                                                                    heads; good
                                                                    dried flower
                                                                    Lavender-
Phalicia,     Phacelia      3-20    May-                            blue
Threadleaf    linearis      inches  July   D        S               flowers;
                                                                    annual;
                                                                    reseeds
                                                                    Pink to red
                                                                    flowers,
              Geum          4-12    May-                            lacy leaves;
Prairie Smoke triflorum     inches  July   D/M      S/Sh  Dry Rock  plumed seed
                                                                    pods;
                                                                    gravelly
                                                                    soil
                                                                    Pink flowers
                                                                    on top of
Prince's Pine Chimaphila    1 foot  June-  M        S/PS            long stem;
              umbellata             Aug                             evergreen,
                                                                    rosette
                                                                    leaves
                                                                    2-15 pink
Shooting      Dodecatheon   6-16    Apr-                            flowers per
start,        pulchellum    inches  Aug    M        S/Sh            stem; likes
Woodland                                                            moist humus
                                                                    rich soil
                                                                    Spike of
                                                                    tiny yellow
Skunk Cabbage Lysichiton    1-      Apr-   W        PS/Sh Wetland   flowers
              americanus    3 feet  July                            surrounded
                                                                    by a yellow
                                                                    hood; bogs
                                                                    White
Solomon's-    Maianthemum   1-      Apr-                            flowers; red
Seal, False   racemosum     3 feet  July   M        PS/Sh           berries;
                                                                    spreads by
                                                                    rhizomes
                                                                    Small white
Solomon's-    Maianthemum   8-24    May-                            flowers;
Seal, Star-   stellatum     inches  June   M        S/PS            rhizomes;
flowered                                                            moist, open
                                                                    forest
                                                                    Star shaped,
                                                                    bright
              Sedum         2-      May-                            yellow
Stonecrop     stenopetalum  8       Aug    D        S/PS            flowers;
                            inches                                  grows on
                                                                    well drained
                                                                    rocky slopes
                                                                    Yellow or
                                                                    white
                                                                    flowers in
              Osmorhiza                                             groups;
Sweet Cicely, berteroi,     16-48   Apr-                            black,
Western       Osmorhiza     inches  July   M        Sh              needle
              purpurea                                              shaped
                                                                    seeds;
                                                                    licorice
                                                                    aroma; rich
                                                                    soil
                                                                    Tiny white
                                                                    flowers on
Trailplant,   Adenocaulon   Up to 3 June-                           multiple
Pathrinder    bicolor       feet    Sept   M        Sh              wispy stems;
                                                                    leaves light
                                                                    color
                                                                    underneath
                                                                    Three broad
              Trillium              Mar-                  Moist     white petals
Trillium      ovatum        1 foot  June   M/W      Sh/PS Forest    on showy
                                                                    flower;
                                                                    three leaves
                                                                    Greenish-
                                                                    white, bell
                                                                    shaped
              Streptopus    1-      May-                            flowers hang
Twisted Stalk amplexifolius 3 feet  June   M        PS/Sh           down from
                                                                    underside of
                                                                    leaves; red
                                                                    berries in
                                                                    fall
                                                                    Pale pink
                                                                    fading to
Valerian,     Valeriana     1-      June-                           white
Sitka         sitchensis    3 feet  Aug    M        S/PS            flowers;
                                                                    feathery
                                                                    seed plumes;
                                                                    rhizomes
Violet, Early Viola adunca  4       Apr-                            Blue or
Blue          var.          inches  Aug    D/M      S/PS  Dry Rock  purple
                                                                    flower
Violet,       Viola         To 2    Apr-   M        S/PS  Moist     Yellow
Round-leaf    orbiculata    inches  July                  Forest    flower
Violet,                                                             Yellow
Stream or     Viola         2-7.5   Apr-   M/W      S/PS  Moist     flower;
Pioneer       glabella      inches  July                  Forest    streams and
                                                                    seeps
                                                                    Large,
                                                                    yellow
                                                                    flowers and
Waterlily,    Nuphar lutea  4-18                                    large leaves
Yellow        ssp.          inches  Summer W        S/Sh            float on the
              polysepala                                            surface of
                                                                    ponds 2-10
                                                                    feet deep or
                                                                    slow streams
Woodland      Lithophragma  8-20    Apr-                            Small, white
Star; Prairie parviflorum   inches  June   M        S/PS            flower
Star          var.
                                                                    White
                                                                    flowers;
              Achillea      6-24    Aug-                            leaves
Yarrow        millefolium   inches  Oct    D/M      S               fernlike;
                                                                    reseeds
                                                                    agressively;
                                                                    fragrant
                                                                    Nodding
              Fritillaria   3-12    Apr-                            yellow
Yellow Bell   pudica        inches  June   D        S/PS            flowers;
                                                                    purchase
                                                                    corms
 
FERNS
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common     Scientific     Height   Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum   Notes
Name       Name
Brittle                                                             Rocky
Bladder    Crystopteris   4-12           D        S                 sites;
(Fragile)  fragilis       inches                                    foothills
Fern                                                                to alpine
                                                                    Rocky soil;
Cliff Fern Woodsia        To 10          D        PS                dry cliffs;
           scopulina      inches                                    talus
                                                                    slopes
Crested    Dryopteris     12-25          M/W      PS/Sh Interior    Wet woods;
Shieldfern cristata       inches                        Rain Forest evergreen
                                                                    Leaves in
                                                                    vase-like
Lady Fern  Athyrium       2-5 feet       M        PS/Sh Interior    clusters;
           filixfemina                                  Rain Forest spreads
                                                                    well by
                                                                    rhizomes
                                                                    Spreads
                                                                    well by
Oak Fern   Gymnocarpium   3-14           M        Sh                rhizomes;
           dryopteris     inches                                    well
                                                                    drained,
                                                                    acidic soil
                                                                    Rocky soil;
Oregon                                                              dry cliffs;
Woodsia;   Woodsia        To 7.5         D        PS                rocky
Western    oregana        inches                                    slopes;
Cliff Fern                                                          clusters of
                                                                    leaves
                                                                    Open, well
                                                                    drained,
Parsley    Cryptogramma   4-12                                      rocky sites
Fern,      acrostichoides inches         M        S                 parsley-
Rockbreak                                                           like leaf
                                                                    clusters;
                                                                    evergreen
                                                                    Rich soil;
Sword                                                               large
Fern,      Polystichum    2-4 feet       D/M      Sh    Interior    clumps of
Common     munitum                                      Rain Forest leathery,
                                                                    deep green
                                                                    fronds
 
GRASSES, RUSHES, SEDGES, REEDS
Check with local veterinarians for appropriate species where livestock may
graze.
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name   Scientific Name Height Bloom   Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
                                                                      Common at low
                                                                      to mid
              Poa juncifolia;                                         elevations in
Alkali        P. secunda ssp.                                         alkaline
bluegrass     Juncifolia                                              meadows,
                                                                      grasslands and
                                                                      dry open
                                                                      forests
                                                                      High
                                                                      elevations in
Alpine        Poa alpine                                              meadows,
bluegrass                                                             disturbed
                                                                      sites and
                                                                      rocky slopes
                                                                      Cool season
                                                                      annual or
                                                                      short lived
                                                                      perennial
                                                                      grass commonly
                                                                      found in
                                                                      shallow
                                                                      marshes or
                                                                      sloughs.
American      Beckmannia                                              Frequently
sloughgrass   syzigachne                                              colonizes
                                                                      denuded
                                                                      wetland soils
                                                                      resulting from
                                                                      mud flat
                                                                      exposure. Seed
                                                                      units provide
                                                                      food for
                                                                      migratory
                                                                      waterfowl.
                                                                      Perennial
Blue-Bunch    Pseudoregneria  2-                                      bunch grass,
Wheatgrass    spicata         3 feet         D        S               leaves hairy
                                                                      above; dought
                                                                      tolerant
                                                                      Blue-green
                                                                      blades in
                              2-     June-                            small clumps;
Blue Wildrye  Elymus glaucus  3 feet Aug     M/D      S     Meadow    deciduous
                                                                      forest;
                                                                      wildlife
                                                                      forage
                                                                      Grayish-brown
Bulrush,                      2-10   June-                            spiklets and
Hardstem      Scirpus acutus  feet   Sept    W        S               stems;
                                                                      rhizomes;
                                                                      grows in water
                                                                      Wetland -
Bulrush,                                                              roots need to
Small-        Scirpus         To 4   Late    W        S               be in water;
flowered      microcarpus     feet   Summer                           triangular
                                                                      stems; forage
                                                                      for waterfowl
                                                                      Wetland -
                                                                      roots need to
Bulrush,      Schoenoplectus  2-     Late    W        S               be in water;
Softstem      tabernaemontani 4 feet Summer                           triangular
                                                                      stems; forage
                                                                      for waterfowl
                                                                      Organic soil
                                                                      by lakes and
                                                                      streams;
Cattail,                      Stems  June-                            rhizomes;
Common        Typha latifolia to 6   Aug     W        S     Riparian  blossoms
                              feet                                    become cottony
                                                                      when mature;
                                                                      invasive;
                                                                      water purifier
Columbia      Bromus vulgaris                                         Similar and
brome                                                                 common
                                                                      (Name varies
                                                                      in U.S.; grows
                                                                      in all
Common        Hierochloe                                              Canadian
sweetgrass    odorata                                                 provinces) low
                                                                      to high
                                                                      elevations in
                                                                      wetlands
                                                                      Widespead at
Cusick's                                                              low to high
bluegrass     Poa cusickii                                            elevations in
                                                                      grasslands and
                                                                      alpine meadows
                                                                      Loosly tufted
                                                                      perennial
Fringed brome Bromus ciliatus                                         common in mid
                                                                      to subalpine
                                                                      moist forests
                                                                      and wetlands
                                                                      Densley tufted
                                                                      perennial
                                                                      common at low
Hair                                                                  to mid
bentgrass     Agrostis scabra                                         elevations in
(Ticklegrass)                                                         meadows,
                                                                      forest
                                                                      openings and
                                                                      disturbed
                                                                      sites
                                                                      Bluish-green,
              Festuca         1-                                      densely tufted
Idaho Fescue  idahoensis      3 feet         D/M      S/PS  Meadow    bunchgrass;
                                                                      cool, well
                                                                      drained soil
                                                                      Tufted
                                                                      perennial
                                                                      bunchgrass,
                                                                      common at low
                                                                      to mid
                                                                      elevations in
Needle-and-   Stipa comata                                            grasslands and
thread grass                                                          on south
                                                                      facing slopes
                                                                      in dry forest
                                                                      openings (good
                                                                      forage before
                                                                      sharp seeds
                                                                      form)
                                                                      Moist forests,
                                                                      clearings and
Nodding       Trisetum cemuum                                         stream banks
trisetum                                                              from low to
                                                                      subalpine
                                                                      elevations
                                                                      Increases
                                                                      "tremendously"
                                                                      on moist
Nodding wood- Cinna latifolia                                         disturbed
reed                                                                  sites. Moist
                                                                      forests, low
                                                                      to mid
                                                                      elevations
                                                                      Wetlands, low
                                                                      to mid
Nuttall's     Puccinellia                                             elevation,
alkaligrass   nuttaliana                                              often where
                                                                      alkaline.
                                                                      Forage
                                                                      Yellow-green
                                                                      to purple seed
Pinegrass     Calamagrostis   2-     June-   D        S/PS            heads; dry
              rubescens       3 feet Aug                              coniferous
                                                                      forests;
                                                                      rhizomes
                                                                      Rhizomatous,
                                                                      sod forming
                                                                      perennial;
                                                                      scattered at
                                                                      low to
              Bromus inermis                                          subalpine
Pumpelly      ssp.                                                    elevations on
brome         Pumpellanus                                             grassy slopes
                                                                      and edge of
                                                                      dry forests
                                                                      (not Bonner
                                                                      County but in
                                                                      Shoshone
                                                                      County)
                                                                      Var. major
                                                                      common at low
                                                                      to mid
              Festuca                                                 elevations in
Rough fescue  campestris;                                             dry to moist
              Festruca                                                forests and
              scabrella                                               grasslands
                                                                      (county level
                                                                      not avail on
                                                                      USDA)
                                                                      Prostrate or
                                                                      spreading
                                                                      stems, low to
Rough-leaved  Oryzopsis                                               mid elevations
ricegrass     asperifolia                                             in dry to
                                                                      moist forest
                                                                      openings and
                                                                      clearings
                                                                      J. Presl
                                                                      widespread at
                                                                      low to mid
Sandberg      Poa secunda; P.                                         elevations on
bluegrass     sandbergii; Poa                                         well drained
              secunda                                                 soils; common
                                                                      in low
                                                                      elevation
                                                                      grasslands
                              6-45                                    Large clumps;
Sedge, Beaked Carex rostrata  inches         W        S               rhizomes; wet
                                                                      feet
                                                                      Forms a dense
Sedge, Water  Carex aquatilis 3 feet         W        S/PS            sod; rhizomes;
                                                                      wet feet
                                                                      Perennial
Spike         Trisetum                                                bunchgrass,
trisetum      spicatum                                                open dry sites
                                                                      at low to high
                                                                      elevations
                                                                      Round stems;
                                                                      rhizomes;
Spikerush,    Eleocharis      4-50                                    alkaline soil;
Creeping      palustris       inches         M/W      S               forms dense
                                                                      stands;
                                                                      tufted; wet
                                                                      feet
                                                                      Tufted
                                                                      perennial
                                                                      common at low
                                                                      to mid
Spreading     Stipa                                                   elevations in
needlegrass   richardsonii                                            grasslands and
                                                                      forest
                                                                      openings often
                                                                      forming solid
                                                                      stands at
                                                                      forest edges
                                                                      Scattered in
                                                                      dry to moist
              Elymus                                                  sites in open
Squirreltail  elymoides;                                              forests and
grass         Sitanion                                                grasslands,
              hystrix                                                 all elevations
                                                                      (Kootenai
                                                                      County and
                                                                      others south)
                                                                      Dry areas, low
                                                                      to mid
                                                                      elevations,
              occidentalis;                                           open forests,
Stiff         Achnatherum                                             ridges,
needlegrass   occidentale                                             grasslands
                                                                      (distribution
                                                                      on USDA in
                                                                      Idaho
                                                                      unconfirmed)
                                                                      Mid to high
                                                                      elevations,
Timber        Danthonia                                               grasslands,
oatgrass      intermedia                                              meadows,
                                                                      wetlands and
                                                                      open forests
                                                                      Showy plumes
                                                                      in late summer
Tufted        Deschampsia     11/2-  Spring- D/M      S/PS  Riparian  and fall;
Hairgrass     cespitosa       2 feet Summer                           dense clumps;
                                                                      reseeds; deer
                                                                      resistant
                                                                      Widespread and
                                                                      common at low
Western       Festuca                                                 to mid
fescue        occidentalis                                            elevations in
                                                                      dry to moist
                                                                      forests and
                                                                      clearings
 
GROUND COVER
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name  Scientific     Height Bloom    Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
             Name
                                                                     White
                                                                     flowers;
                                                                     ground
Blackberry,                 2-                                       hugging
Dewberry     Rubus ursinus  3      June     D/M      S               trailing
                            inches                                   shrub;
                                                                     edible
                                                                     berries;
                                                                     prickles
                                                                     White
                                                                     flowers;
                                                                     bright red
                            2-                                       berries;
Bunchberry   Comus          8      Spring   M        PS    Moist     evergreen;
             canadensis     inches                         Forest    cool
                                                                     acidic
                                                                     soils;
                                                                     spreads by
                                                                     rhizomes
                                                                     Hidden
                                                                     maroon
                            2-                                       flowers;
Ginger, Wild Asarum         4      Apr-July M        Sh    Moist     fragrant;
             caudatum       inches                         Forest    moist,
                                                                     rich,
                                                                     organic
                                                                     soil
                                                                     Urn-shaped
                                                                     pink
Kinnikinnick Arctostaphylos 6-10            D        S/PS  Paths     flowers,
             uva- ursi      inches                                   red
                                                                     berries;
                                                                     evergreen
                                                                     Yellow
                                                                     flower
Oregon                      6-                                       clusters;
Grape,       Mahonia repens 2      Apr-June D/M      S     Path      blue
Creeping                    inches                                   berries;
                                                                     red leaves
                                                                     in fall;
                                                                     evergreen
                                                                     Pink/white
                                                                     flowers in
                                                                     tight
Pussytoes,   Antennaria     2-18                                     heads;
Rosy         microphylla    inches June-Aug M        PS    Subalpine gray-green
                                                                     leaves
                                                                     form mats;
                                                                     moist
                                                                     forest
                                                                     White
                                                                     flowers;
Pussytoes,   Antennaria     4-24                                     gray-green
Woods        racemosa       inches May-Aug  D/M      PS/Sh           leaves
                                                                     form a
                                                                     mat;
                                                                     rhizomes
                                                                     Pink to
                                                                     purple
                                                                     flowers in
Self-Heal,   Prunella       4-20   May-Sept M        PS/Sh           a dense
Heal-All     vulgaris       inches                                   head on
                                                                     short
                                                                     stems;
                                                                     spreads
                                                                     White
                                                                     flowers;
             Fragaria       2-                                       tasty,
Strawberry,  virginiana and 6      May-Aug  D/M      Sh/PS           edible
Wild         F. vesca       inches                                   fruit;
                                                                     spreads
                                                                     easily by
                                                                     runners
Sweet-                      1-                                       Vanilla
scented      Galium         4                        PS    Low       fragrance;
bedstraw     triflorum      inches                         subalpine small
                                                                     flowers
                                                                     Trumpet-
                                                                     like
                                                                     nodding
Twinflower   Linnaea        4      June-    M        S/PS  Moist     pink
             borealis       inches Sept                    Forest    flowers;
                                                                     fragrant;
                                                                     organic
                                                                     soil
 
VINES
 
Common Name  Scientific     Height  Bloom    Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
             Name
                                                                      Blue to
                                                                      lavender
                                                                      flowers;
Clematis,                   2-15                                      feathery,
Western      Clematis       feet    May-July M        Sh    Moist     plumed
Virgin's     columbiana     long                            Forest    seed
Bower                                                                 pods;
                                                                      plant
                                                                      seed in
                                                                      fall
                                                                      Cream
                                                                      colored
                                                                      open
                                                                      flower
                                                                      clusters;
Clematis,                   Up to                                     silvery
White        Clematis       60 feet May-Aug  D/M      S/PS  Dry Rock  plumed
Virgin's     ligusticifolia long                                      seed
Bower                                                                 pods;
                                                                      woody
                                                                      vine;
                                                                      well
                                                                      drained
                                                                      soil
                                                                      Orange-
                                                                      yellow
Honeysuckle, Lonicera       6-18                                      flowers;
Orange       ciliosa        feet    May-July D/M      PS    Arbor     climbs;
                                                                      orange-
                                                                      red
                                                                      berries
                                                                      Cream
                                                                      colored
                                                                      flowers;
                                                                      rhizomes;
Peavine,     Lathyrus       12-40   May-July M/D      S/PS            rocky,
Creamy       ochroleucus    inches                                    open
                                                                      forests;
                                                                      fixes
                                                                      nitrogen;
                                                                      deciduous
 
PART II - ADDITIONAL PLANT LIST
   Nonnative plants considered beneficial because they are:
   noninvasive, low water users, locally available
   and use no or low insecticides or pesticides
Codes:
Soil - D = dry; M = moist; W = wet
Light - S = sun; PS = part sun or shade; Sh = Shade
*Keep away from sewer and septic lines
TREES
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name       Scientific Name  Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Arborvitae
Austrian Pine     Pinus nigra
Bristlecone Pine  Pinus aristata
Burr oak          Quercus
                  macrocarpa
Colorado blue     Picea pungens
spruce
Common hackberry  Celtis
                  occidentalis
Gingko tree       Gingko biloba
Goldenrain Tree   Koelreuteria
                  paniculata
Green Ash         Fraxinus
                  pennsylvanica
Hawthorn          Crataegus
                  douglasii
Limber Pine       Pinus flexilis
Narrowleaf        Populus
Cottonwood        angustifolia
Oak               Quercus sp.
Parrotia          Parrotia persica
Plains Cottonwood P. deltoides
Red Maple         Acer rubrum
Scotch Pine       Pinus sylvestris
 
SHRUBS
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Aboretum Notes
Common Name       Scientific Name    Height Bloom Moisture Light Aboretum Notes
American          Viburnum sp.
Cranberry Bush
American Plum     Prunus americana
Blue Mist         Caryopteris sp.
Chokeberry        Aronia sp
Common juniper    Juniperus communis
Common lilac      Syringa vulgaris
Fothergilla       Fothergilla sp.
Juniper           Juniperus sp.
Oakleaf sumac     Rhus trilobata
Pine              Pine sp.
Redstem ceanothos Ceanothus
                  sanguinus
Shrubby           Dasiphora
cinquefoil        floribunda
Silver buffalo    Sheperdia argentea
berry
Staghorn sumac    Rhus typhina
Virginia          Itea virginica
Sweetspire
Western           Prunus pumila
sandcherry
 
PERENNIALS
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Aboretum Notes
Common Name       Scientific Name    Height Bloom Moisture Light Aboretum Notes
American vetch    Vicia americana
Beardtongue       Penstemon sp.
Black-eyed Susan  Rudbeckia fulgida
Blanket Flower    Gaillardia
                  grandiflora
Blazing Star      Liatrus sp.
Bluestar          Amsonia sp.
Butterfly Weed    Asclepias tuberose
Coastal           Fragaria
strawberry        chiloensis
Cone Flower       Echinacea
Hyssop            Agastache
                  rupestris
Indian paintbrush Castilleja
                  angustifolia
Larkspur          Delphinium sp.
Lupine            Lupinus sp.
Maximilian's      Helianthus
Sunflower         maximiliana
Oregon Iris       Iris tenax
Prairie           Ratibida
Coneflower        columnifera
Yarrow            Achillea sp.
Yucca             Yucca glauca
 
GRASSES, RUSHES, SEDGES, REEDS
Check with local veterinarians for appropriate species where livestock may
graze.
Common Name Scientific Name Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Common Name      Scientific Name    Height Bloom Moisture Light Arboretum Notes
Baltic Rush      Juncus balticus                                      
Beaked Sedge     Carex utriculata                                     
Big-leaf Sedge   Carex amplifolia                                     
Common or Soft   Juncus effusus                                       
Rush
Green needle     Nassella viridula                                    
grass
Hard Fescue      Festuca                                              
                 trachyphylla
Inflated Sedge   Carex vesicaria                                      
Jointed Rush     Juncus articulatis                                   
Nebraska Sedge   Carex nebraskensis                                   
Prairie june     Koeleria macrantha                                   
grass
Sheep fescue     Festuca ovina                                        
Small-winged     Carex microptera                                     
Sedge
Softstem Bulrush Scirpus validus                                      
Thickspike       Elmus lanceolatus                                    
wheatgrass
Three-square     Scirpus pungens                                      
Bulrush
Western          Pascopyrum smithii                                   
wheatgrass
Woolgrass        Scirpus cyperinus                                    
Wooly sedge      Carex lanuginosa                                     
 
(Ord. 501, 11-18-2008)
TITLE 13
PRIVATE ROAD STANDARDS MANUAL
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
13-101: Purpose
13-110: Scope
13-120: Definitions
13-130: Administration
13-101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Title is to establish a system of assigning and correcting
addresses in unincorporated Bonner County to facilitate the locating of
structures in order to protect the public health and safety by prompting
reduced response times by police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency
services; to provide for more efficient delivery of County services, such as
building inspections, soil evaluations, health inspections, property tax
administration, property mapping, and other county affairs; and to provide for
efficient U.S. mail and parcel delivery in unincorporated Bonner County. (Ord.
604, 6-15-2020)
13-110: SCOPE:
This Title shall be effective and enforceable throughout unincorporated Bonner
County. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
13-120: DEFINITIONS:
 
                     The combination of a set of numbers, a street prefix
                     (i.e., N., S., E., or W., if applicable), a street name, a
                     street suffix (e.g., Ave., Rd., St., Dr., Cir., or Ct.), a
ADDRESS:             street post-directional (i.e., N., S., E., or W., if
                     applicable), an apartment or suite designation if
                     applicable, and an apartment or suite number if
                     applicable.
                     A set of numbers based upon the formula that begins at 0
                     base points along the East-West baseline and North- South
                     meridian as assigned by the Address Administrator as part
                     of an address. Numbering systems currently in effect in
ADDRESS NUMBER:      incorporated and unincorporated villages would be changed
                     or modified only at the request of local units of
                     government or to the extent necessary to correct numbering
                     errors found during the process of mapping unincorporated
                     Bonner County.
                     Any vehicular way which is a state, county, or municipal
STREET or ROAD:      roadway, or is shown on an approved and recorded
                     subdivision plat or site plan, or is a private road that
                     serves more than two existing lots.
                     Shall include but not be limited to: residential
                     buildings, office buildings, commercial buildings,
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: industrial buildings, public buildings, utility
                     structures, and buildings used for storage, including, but
                     not limited to garages, pole barns, utility meters and
                     other accessory structures. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
 
13-130: ADMINISTRATION:
The Board of County Commissioners shall appoint a person as the Address
Administrator. The Address Administrator shall have overall responsibility for
administration and coordination of this Ordinance and the Bonner County Road
Naming and Addressing Policy, including enforcement. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
CHAPTER 2
STREET NAMES AND ADDRESSING
SECTION:
13-201: Incorporation Of Policy
13-210: Display Of Address
13-220: Road Names
13-230: Posting Of Street Signs
13-240: Assigned Number And Address Corrections
13-201: INCORPORATION OF POLICY:
   A.   The Bonner County Addressing Policy Document is incorporated by
reference herein in its entirety. This Policy may be changed from time to time
by approval of the Address Administrator. This Policy can generally be found on
the Bonner County GIS website and may also be available by email or physical
copy by request to the Bonner County GIS Department.
   B.   The County Address Administrator shall coordinate all numeric
addressing, including the assignment of numeric address corrections that
require naming of easements and renaming of private roads. The Bonner County
GIS Department shall be responsible for coordinating new road names with
developers and property owners and sign identification of all county roads
within the County, pursuant to the Bonner County Road Naming and Addressing
Policy as adopted and from time to time amended by Resolution of the County
Board of Commissioners, which Policy is incorporated by reference. (Ord. 604,
6-15-2020)
13-210: DISPLAY OF ADDRESS:
The property owners or residents of all principal structures on each parcel of
land are required to display an address number in the manner prescribed in the
Bonner County Road Naming and Addressing Policy, incorporated by reference. In
the event an address number has been corrected by administrative action of the
property owner or resident shall so notify the U.S. Postal Service, and display
the new correct address, within 60 days of receipt of a Notice of Address
Correction. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
13-220: ROAD NAMES:
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to both public and private roads.
Every road, public or private, that exists in unincorporated Bonner County on
or after the effective date of this ordinance shall be posted or signed with, a
name that shall be registered with and approved by the Bonner County GIS
Department in the manner prescribed in the Bonner County Road Naming and
Addressing Policy, incorporated by reference. The Bonner County Address
Administrator shall be the sole final authority for street or road naming. The
Bonner County GIS Department shall maintain the county-wide repository of
street names. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
13-230: POSTING OF STREET SIGNS:
The property owners or residents with addresses on a private road shall erect
and maintain a suitable sign identifying the private road at the intersection
of the private road and the adjoining public road in the manner prescribed in
the Bonner County Road Naming and Addressing Policy which is incorporated by
reference herein. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
13-240: ASSIGNED NUMBER AND ADDRESS CORRECTIONS:
Existing, or previously assigned or displayed address numbers, public road and
private road names that do not comply with this Ordinance and the Bonner County
Road Naming and Addressing Policy, incorporated by reference, may be corrected
either (1) at the request of the property owner(s) or his/her agent(s), but
only upon approval of the Address Administrator, or (2) such change may be
initiated by the County Address Administrator. When a correction is initiated
by the Address Administrator, the property owner(s) shall be notified, in
writing, that a new number has been assigned. Address corrections become
effective upon distribution of the weekly Bonner County Address Report to
recipients identified by the Address Administrator and in a manner determined
by the Address Administrator. (Ord. 604, 6-15-2020)
TITLE 14
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-101: Authority
14-102: Findings Of Fact
14-103: Statement Of Purpose
14-104: Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
14-101: AUTHORITY:
The Legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 46-1020
through 46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain management
ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development
standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health, and
property. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Bonner County, Idaho does
hereby ordain as follows: (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-102: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Bonner County are subject to periodic
inundation that results in:
      1.   Loss of life and property;
      2.   Health and safety hazards;
      3.   Disruption of commerce and governmental services;
      4.   Extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection;
and
      5.   Impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
   C.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-103: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life, health, safety and property;
   B.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
   C.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
   D.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   E.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   F.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   G.   Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
   H.   Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-
2023)
14-104: OBJECTIVES AND METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purpose, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions to:
   A.   Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
   C.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
   D.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
   E.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers which carry and store flood waters. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017;
amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-200: Definition Overview
14-201: Definitions - A
14-202: Definitions - B
14-203: Definitions - C
14-204: Definitions - D
14-205: Definitions - E
14-206: Definitions - F
14-207: Definitions - G
14-208: Definitions - H
14-209: Definitions - I
14-210: Definitions - J
14-211: Definitions - K
14-212: Definitions - L
14-213: Definitions - M
14-214: Definitions - N
14-215: Definitions - O
14-216: Definitions - P
14-217: Definitions - Q
14-218: Definitions - R
14-219: Definitions - S
14-220: Definitions - T
14-221: Definitions - U
14-222: Definitions - V
14-223: Definitions - W
14-224: Definitions - X
14-225: Definitions - Y
14-226: Definitions - Z
14-200: DEFINITION OVERVIEW:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
title its most reasonable application. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-
18-2023)
14-201: DEFINITIONS - A:
 
ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE    A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of
(APPURTENANT which is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
STRUCTURE):
ADDITION (TO An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or
AN EXISTING  structure.
BUILDING):
APPEAL:      A request for review of the Planning Director or designee’s interpretation of
             provisions of this title or request for a variance.
             A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate
AREA OF      Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an
SHALLOW      average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does
FLOODING:    not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow
             may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF
SPECIAL      See Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-
FLOOD        2023)
HAZARD:
 
14-202: DEFINITIONS - B:
 
BASE FLOOD:                 The flood having a one (1) percent (1%) chance of
                            being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
                            A determination by the Federal Insurance
                            Administrator of the water surface elevations of
                            the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a
                            one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any
                            given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): Special Flood Hazard Area, it may be obtained from
                            engineering studies available from a Federal,
                            State, or other source using FEMA-approved
                            engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
                            combined with the Freeboard, establishes the Flood
                            Protection Elevation.
BASEMENT:                   Any area of the building having its floor sub grade
                            (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING:                   See Structure. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690,
                            4-18-2023)
 
14-203: DEFINITIONS - C:
 
                     Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or
                     critical to the health and safety of the public before,
                     during, and after a flood, such as a hospital, emergency
                     operations center, electric substation, police station,
                     fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
CRITICAL FACILITIES: storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if
                     flooded, would make the flood problem and its impacts much
                     worse, such as a hazardous materials facility, power
                     generation facility, water utility, or wastewater
                     treatment plant. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-
                     2023)
 
14-204: DEFINITIONS - D:
 
                                  The vertical datum is a base measurement
                                  point (or set of points) from which all
                                  elevations are determined. Historically,
                                  that common set of points was the
DATUM:                            National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
                                  (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently
                                  adopted by the federal government as a
                                  basis for measuring heights is the North
                                  American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
                                  Any man-made change to improved or
                                  unimproved real estate, including but not
                                  limited to buildings or other structures,
DEVELOPMENT:                      mining, dredging, filling, grading,
                                  paving, excavation or drilling
                                  operations, or storage of equipment or
                                  materials.
                                  Any activity defined as Development which
                                  will necessitate a Floodplain Development
                                  Permit; such as: the construction of
                                  buildings, structures, or accessory
                                  structures; additions or substantial
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY:             improvements to existing structures;
                                  bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and
                                  pools; the placement of mobile homes; or
                                  the deposition or extraction of
                                  materials; the construction or elevation
                                  of dikes, berms and levees.
                                  The digital official map of a community,
                                  issued by the Federal Emergency
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP  Management Agency, on which both the
(DFIRM):                          Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk
                                  premium zones applicable to the community
                                  are delineated. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd.
                                  Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-205: DEFINITIONS - E:
ELEVATED      For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
BUILDING:     floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
              pilings, or columns.
              The Elevation Certificate is an important administrative tool of the NFIP. It is
ELEVATION     used to determine the proper flood insurance premium rate; it is used to
CERTIFICATE:  document elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community
              floodplain management regulations; and it may be used to support a request for a
              Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
              An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed when any
ENCLOSURE:    space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or partitions. Insect
              screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below the BFE/FPE is not
              considered an enclosure.
              The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or
ENCROACHMENT: development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a
              floodplain.
              For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of
EXISTING      construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January
CONSTRUCTION: 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also
              be referred to as “existing structures.”
EXISTING      A manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for
MANUFACTURED  servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including,
HOME PARK OR  at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
MANUFACTURED  final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
HOME          effective date of the original floodplain management regulations adopted by
SUBDIVISION:  Bonner County, August 14, 1984.
EXISTING      See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
STRUCTURES:
EXPANSION TO  The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
AN EXISTING   servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including
MANUFACTURED  the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
HOME PARK OR  site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord.
SUBDIVISION:  690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-206: DEFINITIONS - F:
               a.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
               dry land areas from:
                  1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
                  2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
               source.
                  3.   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as
               defined in paragraph a.2. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and
FLOOD OR       flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by
FLOODING:      a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
               b.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
               water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
               exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water
               level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
               unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
               some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined
               in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
               Any building product [material, component or system] capable of withstanding direct
               and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining significant damage. The
               term “prolonged contact” means at least 72 hours, and the term “significant damage”
FLOOD DAMAGE-  means any damage requiring more than cosmetic repair. “Cosmetic repair” includes
RESISTANT      cleaning, sanitizing, and resurfacing (e.g., sanding, repair of joints, repainting)
MATERIALS:     of the material. The cost of cosmetic repair should also be less than the cost of
               replacement of affected materials and systems. In addition to these requirements,
               individual materials that are considered flood damage-resistant must not cause
               degradation of adjacent materials or the systems of which the material is a part.
FLOOD
ELEVATION      See BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
DETERMINATION:
FLOOD
ELEVATION      See FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
STUDY:
FLOOD HAZARD   An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator, where
BOUNDARY MAP   the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having
(FHBM):        special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD          An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has
INSURANCE RATE delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
MAP (FIRM):    the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital
               Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD          An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
INSURANCE      corresponding water surface elevations; or an examination, evaluation and
STUDY (FIS):   determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD ZONE:    A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or Flood Insurance
               Rate Map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
FLOODPLAIN OR  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
FLOOD-PRONE    definition of “flooding”).
AREA:
FLOODPLAIN     Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this
DEVELOPMENT    title, prior to the commencement of any development activity.
PERMIT:
FLOODPLAIN     The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
MANAGEMENT:    reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans,
               flood control works, and flood plain management regulations.
               Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
FLOODPLAIN     special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance, and
MANAGEMENT     erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term
REGULATIONS:   describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
               standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
               Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments
FLOODPROOFING: to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
               property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOD          The Base Flood Elevation plus the Freeboard.
PROTECTION     a.   In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been
ELEVATION      determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one (1) foot of freeboard; and
(FPE):         b.   In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where no BFE has been established, this
               elevation shall be at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
               Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
               and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in
FLOOD          order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a “special
PROTECTION     flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system
SYSTEM:        typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood
               modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
               standards.
               The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
FLOODWAY:      reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
               water surface elevation.
               A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of
               floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors
               that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
               selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge
FREEBOARD:     openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a
               watershed. The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the Flood
               Protection Elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be one (1) foot in “Special Flood Hazard
               Areas” where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been determined and two (2) feet
               above the highest adjacent grade in “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where no BFE has
               been established.
               A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or
FUNCTIONALLY   carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility
DEPENDENT USE: necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or
               ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture,
               sales, or service facilities. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-207: DEFINITIONS - G:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-208: DEFINITIONS - H:
HIGHEST    The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction,
ADJACENT   adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation
GRADE      Certificate for HAG related to building elevation information.
(HAG):
           A structure that is:
           a.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
           maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
           Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
           the National Register;
           b.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
           contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
           to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
HISTORIC   historic district;
STRUCTURE: c.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as
           eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
           the Secretary of the Interior; or
           d.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as
           eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been
           certified either:
              1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
           Interior, or
              2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
           programs. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-209: DEFINITIONS - I:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-210: DEFINITIONS - J:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-211: DEFINITIONS - K:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-212: DEFINITIONS - L:
         A general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments to
         FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment
         (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill
         (LOMR-F)
         1.   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): an official amendment, by letter, to an
         effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a
         property’s location in relation to the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). LOMAs are
         usually issued because a property has been inadvertently mapped as being in the
         floodplain but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood elevation.
         2.   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA’s modification to an effective Flood
         Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or a Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) or both.
         LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect
         the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
LETTER   the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood
OF MAP   Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The LOMR officially
CHANGE   revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
(LOMC):  (FBFM), and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and when appropriate,
         includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by
         an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
         3.   Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA’s modification of the
         Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based
         on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. The LOMR-F does
         not change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
         4.   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to
         whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the
         minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special
         flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
         (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon submission and approval of certified
         as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to
         revise the effective FIRM. Building Permits and/or Flood Development Permits cannot
         be issued based on a CLOMR, because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
         A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed
LEVEE:   according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or divert the flow
         of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE    A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
SYSTEM:  structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and
         operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST
ADJACENT The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to the FEMA
GRADE    Elevation Certificate for LAG related to building elevation information.
(LAG):
         The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
         flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
LOWEST   or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s
FLOOR:   lowest floor; Provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
         structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44
         CFR § 60.3 and this title. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-213: DEFINITIONS - M:
 
             A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent
MANUFACTURED chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
HOME:        connected to the required utilities. The term “Manufactured Home” does not
             include a “Recreational Vehicle.”
MANUFACTURED A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
HOME PARK OR home lots for rent or sale.
SUBDIVISION:
             The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory
MARKET       structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established
VALUE:       by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of
             building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax
             assessed values.
             For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National
MEAN SEA     Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum (such as North America
LEVEL:       Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown
             on a community’s FIRM are referenced.
             Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid
             mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush
MUDSLIDE     cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a
(I.E.,       period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may
MUDFLOW):    occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be
             recognized as such by the Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the
             landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE     The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
(I.E.,       reducing mudslide (i.e., mudflow) damage, including but not limited to
MUDFLOW)     emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and flood plain
AREA         management regulations.
MANAGEMENT:
MUDSLIDE     An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the
(I.E.,       history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow. (Ord. 565, 5-
MUDFLOW)     3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
PRONE AREA:
 
14-214: DEFINITIONS - N:
 
                                  The NFIP is a Federal program created by
                                  Congress to mitigate future flood losses
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM  nationwide through sound, community-
(NFIP):                           enforced building and zoning ordinances
                                  and to provide access to affordable,
                                  federally backed flood insurance
                                  protection for property owners.
                                  For floodplain management purposes, a
                                  structure for which the start of
                                  construction commenced on or after the
                                  effective date of a floodplain
                                  management regulation adopted Bonner
                                  County and includes any subsequent
                                  improvements to such structures.
NEW CONSTRUCTION:                 Any construction started after August
                                  14, 1984 and before the effective start
                                  date of this floodplain management
                                  ordinance is subject to the ordinance in
                                  effect at the time the permit was
                                  issued, provided the start of
                                  construction was within 180 days of
                                  permit issuance.
                                  A place where the construction of
                                  facilities for servicing the lots on
                                  which the manufactured homes are to be
                                  affixed (including at a minimum the
                                  installation of utilities, the
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR     construction of streets, and final site
SUBDIVISION:                      grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
                                  is completed on or after the effective
                                  date of floodplain management
                                  regulations adopted by Bonner County on
                                  August 14, 1984. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017;
                                  amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-215: DEFINITIONS - O:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-216: DEFINITIONS - P:
 
PLANNING
DIRECTOR  The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain
OR        management regulations.
DESIGNEE:
POST-     Construction or other development for which the “start of construction”
FIRM:     occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate
          Map (FIRM).
          Construction or other development for which the “start of construction”
PRE-FIRM: occurred before August 1, 1984, the effective date of the initial Flood
          Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-217: DEFINITIONS - Q:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-218: DEFINITIONS - R:
             A vehicle that is:
             a.   Built on a single chassis, and
             b.   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
RECREATIONAL and
VEHICLE:     c.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck,
             and
             d.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
             living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY   See FLOODWAY
FLOODWAY:
             To bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local
             flood plain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the
REMEDY A     impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include
VIOLATION:   protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages,
             implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring
             future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to
             the structure or other development.
REPETITIVE   An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least two paid flood losses of more
LOSS         than $1,000 each in any 10-year period since 1978.
STRUCTURE:
RIVERINE:    Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream,
             brook, etc. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-219: DEFINITIONS - S:
SPECIAL FLOOD The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or
HAZARD AREA   greater chance of flooding in any given year. For purposes of these regulations,
(SFHA):       the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase
              “area of special flood hazard”.
              Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
              issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
              rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
              the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
              construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
              the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
              stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
START OF      Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
CONSTRUCTION: grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
              walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
              foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
              installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
              occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
              improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
              wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
              alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE:    A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
              principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
              Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
              structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent (50%)
SUBSTANTIAL   of its market value before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial
DAMAGE:       improvement”. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a
              structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of
              repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25
              percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
              Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure,
              the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the
              structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term
              includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the
              actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
SUBSTANTIAL   1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
IMPROVEMENT:  state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
              identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
              necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
              2.   Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will
              not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure” and
              the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this ordinance. (Ord.
              565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-220: DEFINITIONS - T:
 
            FEMA publications that provide guidance concerning the building performance
            standards of the NFIP, which are contained in Title 44 of the U S Code of
            Federal Regulations § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use
            primarily by State and local officials responsible for interpreting and
            enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development community, such as
TECHNICAL   design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of
BULLETINS   existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not
AND         create regulations. Rather they provide specific guidance for complying with
TECHNICAL   the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
FACT        It should be noted that Technical Bulletins and Technical Fact Sheets provide
SHEETS:     guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
            community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design
            professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more
            restrictive State or local regulations apply to the building or site in
            question. All applicable standards of the State or local building code must
            also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
TEMPERATURE Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or cooling system, built-in
CONTROLLED: or appliance. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-221: DEFINITIONS - U:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-222: DEFINITIONS - V:
 
VARIANCE:  A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this ordinance.
           The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
           community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure or other
           development without the properly completed Finished Construction Elevation
VIOLATION: Certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in
           44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
           presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
           (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-223: DEFINITIONS - W:
 
                         The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
                         Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified
                         datum), of floods of various magnitudes and
                         frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine
                         areas.
                         A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
                         topographic feature on or over which waters flow at
WATERCOURSE:             least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically
                         designated areas in which substantial flood damage may
                         occur. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
 
14-224: DEFINITIONS - X:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-225: DEFINITIONS - Y:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
14-226: DEFINITIONS - Z:
None at this time. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
14-301: Lands To Which This Title Applies
14-302: Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas
14-303: Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit
14-304: Compliance
14-305: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
14-306: Interpretation
14-307: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
14-308: Penalties For Violation
14-301: LANDS TO WHICH THIS TITLE APPLIES:
This title shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the
jurisdiction of Bonner County, Idaho. Nothing in this title is intended to
allow uses, development or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the
zoning ordinance. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-302: BASIS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bonner County, Idaho &
Incorporated Areas, dated July 7, 2014, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), and other supporting
data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this title. The FIS and
the FIRM are on file at the office of the Planning Department, at 1500 US
Highway 2, Sandpoint, Idaho. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-303: ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this title prior to the commencement of any development
activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of BCRC
14-402. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-304: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered,
or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this title
and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-
2023)
14-305: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This title shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other laws, ordinances, regulations,
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, etcetera. However, where this title
and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or greater
restrictions shall control. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-306: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this title all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-307: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This title does not imply that land
outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability
on the part of Bonner County or by any officer or employee thereof for flood
damages that result from reliance on this title or an administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-308: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered,
or developed in any way unless in full compliance with the terms of this title
and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1000
or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both. Each day the violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Bonner County from taking such other lawful actions as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord.
690, 4-18-2023)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
14-401: Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator
14-402: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Planning Director Or Designee
14-403: Floodplain Development Application, Permit, And Certification
Requirements
14-404: Corrective Procedures
14-405: Variance Procedures
14-401: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR:
The Planning Director or designee is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-402: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PLANNING DIRECTOR OR DESIGNEE:
The Planning Director or designee shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   A.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) to assure
that the requirements of this title have been satisfied.
   B.   Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to
assure that all necessary Local, State, and Federal permits have been received,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 USC 1334.
   C.   Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources
State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   D.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   E.   Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood areas unless the
certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of this title are met.
   F.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-403.C.
   G.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-403.C.
   H.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions BCRC
14-403.C.
   I.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect in
accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-403.C. and
14-502.B.
   J.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the Special Flood Hazard Areas or floodways, make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
title.
   K.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-302, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data
developed pursuant to BCRC
14-503.A.2., in order to administer the provisions of this title.
   L.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway data
has been provided in accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-302, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data available from
a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this
title.
   M.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this title and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing
that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
   N.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a
floodplain development permit progresses, the Planning Director or designee or
authorized representative shall make as many inspections of the work as may be
necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of
the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
Planning Director or designee or authorized representative has a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
   O.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof
is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this
title, or where any other development is occurring in violation of this title,
the Planning Director or designee may order the work to be immediately stopped.
The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in
charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be
stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under
which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a
misdemeanor.
   P.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Planning
Director or designee may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason
(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure
from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or
failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false
statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain
development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or
local law may also be revoked.
   Q.   Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard Areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Planning Director or designee and
each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   R.   Follow through with corrective procedures of BCRC
14-404.
   S.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   T.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-302 of this title, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map
Change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of your
community’s mapping needs.
   U.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map
Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs). (Ord.
565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-403: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT, AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain Development
Permit shall be made to the Planning Director or designee prior to any
development activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following
items shall be presented to the Planning Director or designee to apply for a
floodplain development permit:
      1.   A stamped plot plan drawn to engineering scale which shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed
floodplain development:
         a.   The nature, location, and dimensions, of the area of development/
disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/
pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other
development;
         b.   The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in BCRC
14-302, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard
Area;
         c.   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in BCRC
14-302;
         d.   The boundary of the floodway(s) as determined in BCRC
14-302;
         e.   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
BCRC
14-302;
14-303; or
14-503;
         f.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         g.   The certification of the plot plan by a licensed land surveyor,
architect, landscape architect, or licensed professional engineer.
         h.   Any additional material needed for a complete review of the
application, as determined by the Planning Director or designee.
      2.   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
         a.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
         c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      3.   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      4.   Stamped building and foundation plans, as applicable, for all
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area, drawn to scale and certified by
a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect. These plans shall be
prepared to demonstrate project compliance with all applicable requirements of
the General Standards (BCRC
14-501) and Specific Standards (BCRC
14-502) of this title, or to demonstrate compliance with the General Standards
and Specific Standards of this title as hereafter amended. These plans shall
include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of
this title are met. These details include but are not limited to:
         a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation,
or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with BCRC
14-501.H.2.a.-f. when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE,
AH, AO, and A1-30.
      5.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      6.   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      7.   Certification that all other Local, State, and Federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      8.   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of BCRC
14-502.F. and
14-502.G. of this title are met.
      9.   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when
applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and
      10.   A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
   B.   Permit Requirements. The Floodplain Development Permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      1.   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials, etcetera).
      2.   The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in BCRC
14-302.
      3.   The Flood Protection Elevation required for the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities.
      4.   The Flood Protection Elevation required for the protection of all
public utilities.
      5.   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      6.   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway of any watercourse, as applicable.
      7.   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-
30.
      8.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
start of construction of work within one (1) year. A floodplain development
permit shall expire one (1) year after issuance unless the permitted activity
has commenced as per the Start of Construction definition.
      9.   A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant
materials.
      10.   A certification from a licensed engineer or licensed architect that
the proposed project meets all applicable requirements of the General Standards
(BCRC
14-501) and Specific Standards (BCRC
14-502) of this title, or to demonstrate compliance with the General Standards
and Specific Standards of this title as hereafter amended. For projects or
portions of projects that do not involve buildings or structures, these
required certifications may be provided by a licensed landscape architect.
Landscape architects may not certify buildings or structures.
   C.   Certification Requirements.
      1.   Elevation Certificates:
         a.   A properly completed Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit applicant to submit to the Planning Director or designee a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation to mean sea
level. The Planning Director or designee shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit applicant prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit.
         b.   A properly completed final as-built Finished Construction
Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is
completed and prior to occupancy of the structure. It shall be the duty of the
permit applicant to submit to the Planning Director or designee a certification
of final as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities. The Planning Director or designee shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit applicant immediately and prior to Occupancy of the
structure. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the approval of a
floodplain development permit.
The Finished Construction Elevation Certificate certifier shall provide at
least two (2) photographs showing the front and rear of the building taken
after completion of construction and within 90 days from the date of
certification. The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building
description and diagram number provided in Section A. To the extent possible,
these photographs should show the entire building including foundation. If the
building has split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two (2)
additional photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when
applicable, provide a photograph of the foundation showing a representative
example of the flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and
measure at least 3" × 3". Digital photographs are acceptable.
      2.   Floodproofing Certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the Flood Protection Elevation requirements, a Floodproofing
Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan,
and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start
of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to submit
to the Planning Director or designee a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the lowest floor and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean
sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Planning Director or designee shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit. Failure to
construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to deny the
right to occupy the structure.
      3.   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of BCRC
14-502.D.2.
      4.   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall
all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit:
         a.   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; and
         b.   A professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
         c.   a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration
or relocation; and
         d.   an Idaho Stream Channel Alteration Permit approval shall be
provided by the applicant to the Planning Director or designee.
      5.   Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/
floodproofing certification requirements specified in items “C.1.” and “C.2.”
of this subsection:
         a.   Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of BCRC
14-502.F.1.;
         b.   Temporary Structures meeting requirements of BCRC
14-502.G.; and
         c.   Accessory Structures less than 200 square feet meeting
requirements of BCRC
14-502.H.
      6.   Final Inspection and Certification. For all structures, an
inspection report certified by an International Code Council (ICC) certified
building inspector confirming compliance with all applicable flood damage
prevention standards of Title 14 of Bonner County Revised Code is required.
   D.   Determinations for Existing Buildings and Structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Planning Director or designee, in coordination with the
Building Official, shall:
      1.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      4.   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho
Building Code and this title is required.
   E.   Permit Abandonment. An application that has been filed under the terms
of this title which has received a notice of incompleteness from the planning
department and has remained incomplete for one hundred twenty (120) days
minimum may be considered abandoned by the planning department; provided,
however, that a written notice has been sent by certified mail by the planning
department to the applicant, wherein the applicant is notified that the
application will be considered abandoned by the planning department if not
determined complete by the planning department within thirty (30) days
thereafter. If no response is provided by the applicant or the application
remains incomplete after the thirty (30) day period, the application may be
considered abandoned. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-404: CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Violations to be Corrected. When the Planning Director or designee
finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her
duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The
owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited
in such notification.
   B.   Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Planning Director or designee shall give the owner written notice, by certified
or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      1.   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      2.   That a hearing will be held before the Hearing Examiner, or before
the Planning and Zoning Commission if no Hearing Examiner is available, at a
designated place and time, not later than thirty (30) days after the date of
the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      3.   That following the hearing, the Hearing Examiner, or the Planning
and Zoning Commission if no Hearing Examiner is available, may issue an order
to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill; or to correct
the code violation by other means, as applicable.
   C.   Order to Take Corrective Action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Hearing Examiner, or the Planning and Zoning
Commission if no Hearing Examiner is available, shall find that the building or
development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he or she
shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the
violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar
days, nor more than one-hundred-eighty (180) calendar days. Where the Planning
Director or designee finds that there is imminent danger to life or other
property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser
period as may be feasible.
   D.   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Hearing Examiner, or the Planning and Zoning
Commission if no Hearing Examiner is available, and the clerk within ten (10)
days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the
order of the Hearing Examiner, or the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall be
final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time
and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
   E.   Failure to Comply with Order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-405: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The Hearing Examiner, or the Planning and Zoning Commission should no
Hearing Examiner be available, as established by Bonner County, hereinafter
referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this title.
   B.   Variances may be issued for:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures on national,
state, or local registers of historic places, or equivalent, and upon the
determination that the repair or rehabilitation will be consistent with the
historic preservation standards of the U.S. Secretary of the Interior, and upon
the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, and that the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure;
      2.   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the
definition as stated in Chapter 2 of this title, provided provisions of BCRC
14-405.H.2-4. have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety; or
      3.   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of
this Section.
   C.   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this title, and:
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under Chapter 2 of this title as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   D.   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
title, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this title.
   E.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.
   F.   The Planning Director or designee shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the State of Idaho upon request.
   G.   Conditions for Variances:
      1.   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if the
variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   H.   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      1.   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      2.   No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area.
      3.   The lowest floor of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at
least the Flood Protection Elevation.
      4.   The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local
laws.
   I.   Bonner County will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of the Idaho
Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at least
thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
   J.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the Court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535. (Ord. 565, 5-3-
2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
CHAPTER 5
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
SECTION:
14-501: General Standards
14-502: Specific Standards
14-503: Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations
14-504: Standards For Riverine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But
Without Established Floodways
14-505: Standards For Floodways
14-506: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, Or AR/AH)
14-507: Critical Facilities
14-501: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
   A.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and other development
shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
   B.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and other development
shall be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials as defined herein,
and with utility equipment resistant to flood damage, in accordance with FEMA
Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, or as
hereafter amended, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   C.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and other development
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   D.   All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the Flood Protection Elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   F.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   G.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   H.   A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved
structures, which is below the lowest floor shall:
      1.   be constructed entirely of flood damage-resistant materials to at
least to the Flood Protection Elevation; and
      2.   include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a licensed engineer or licensed architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum design criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         b.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1)
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         c.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area
must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
         d.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than
one (1) foot above grade;
         e.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions;
         f.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   I.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this title, shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this title.
   J.   Nothing in this title shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a lawfully constructed building or structure legally existing on
the effective date of this title and located totally or partially within the
floodway, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below
the Flood Protection Elevation in the floodway, or stream setback, and provided
that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other
requirements of this title.
   K.   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in BCRC
14-405.H. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the Flood
Protection Elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-403.C.
   L.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   M.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   N.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   O.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
   P.   When a structure or development is partially located in a Special Flood
Hazard Area, the entire structure or development shall meet the requirements of
this Title, including but not limited to the standards for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   Q.   When a structure or development is located in multiple flood hazard
zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) shall apply. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-
2023)
14-502: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in BCRC
14-302 or
14-504, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of BCRC
14-501, are required:
   A.   Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the
Base Flood Elevation, as defined in Chapter 2 of this title, except as provided
in this section. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject
to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, and must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings located on different walls of the
structure, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices; provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      4.   All structural and nonstructural building materials at or below the
flood protection elevation shall be flood damage-resistant materials. A “flood
damage-resistant material” is defined as any building material capable of
withstanding direct and prolonged contact of at least seventy-two (72) hours
with floodwaters without sustaining significant damage, meaning any damage
requiring more than low cost cosmetic repair such as painting.
      5.   In unnumbered A zones where a base flood elevation has not been
established, the applicant may submit a site-specific engineering analysis to
determine BFE, or plans shall be provided demonstrating the structure shall be
elevated at minimum two feet (2') above highest adjacent grade (HAG) at the
building site or to the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) whichever is higher,
as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title.
   B.   Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one
foot above the Base Flood Elevation, as defined in Chapter 2 of this title.
Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 may be floodproofed to one
foot above the Base Flood Elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all
areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the Flood Protection Elevation are watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be
in accordance with BCRC
14-506.B. A licensed professional engineer or licensed architect shall certify
that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Planning Director or designee as set
forth in BCRC
14-403.C., along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   C.   Below Grade Crawl Space Construction for Residential and Nonresidential
Buildings: In addition to the standards provided herein, below grade crawl
space construction shall be designed and certified by a licensed engineer or
licensed architect to meet the following:
      1.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the base flood elevation
shall not be greater than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
      2.   The height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation
wall, shall not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
      3.   An adequate drainage system shall be designed and installed to
remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within seventy-two
(72) hours after a flood event. The system may include perforated pipes,
drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical
means, and shall meet the minimum construction practices outlined by the
national flood insurance program guidelines.
      4.   Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the velocity
of floodwaters exceeds five feet (5') per second, as established by the flood
insurance study.
      5.   All building utility systems within the crawl space shall be
elevated above base flood elevation or be designed so that floodwaters cannot
enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions.
Ductwork shall be placed above the base flood elevation or shall be sealed from
floodwaters.
      6.   All structural and nonstructural building materials at or below the
flood protection elevation shall be flood resistant material as defined herein.
      7.   Below grade crawl spaces constructed in accordance with the
requirements listed in this subsection shall not be considered basements.
However, applicants who construct buildings that have below grade crawl spaces
are hereby advised that such buildings will have higher flood insurance
premiums than buildings that have crawl spaces with interior elevations at or
above the lowest adjacent grade.
   D.   Manufactured Homes.
      1.   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is no lower than the Flood Protection
Elevation, as defined in Chapter 2 of this title.
      2.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety’s “Idaho Manufactured
Home Installation Standard” in accordance with Idaho Code § 44-2201(2).
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis
thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation
of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.
      3.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of BCRC
14-501.H.
      4.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents
of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured home
parks or subdivisions located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. This plan
shall be filed with and approved by the Planning Director or designee and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   E.   Additions/Improvements.
      1.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         a.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure; or
         b.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      2.   Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement
with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in
the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards
for new construction.
      3.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         a.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
         c.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      4.   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a four (4) year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, must
comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure,
the four (4) year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair
of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this title.
If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
requirement does not, however, include either:
         a.   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
         b.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   F.   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be either:
      1.   Temporary Placement:
         a.   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
      2.   Permanent Placement.
         a.   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations of
Temporary Placement shall meet all the requirements for new construction, as
set forth in BCRC
14-501.
   G.   Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Planning Director or designee a plan for the removal of such
structure(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Planning Director or designee for review and written approval:
      1   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable once, for up
to one (1) year in total;
      2.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      3.   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
      4.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      5.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   H.   Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, elevation
or floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures in
accordance with BCRC
14-403.C., and the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
      2.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      3.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      4.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      5.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the
provisions of BCRC
14-501.A.;
      6.   All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of BCRC
14-501.D.; and
      7.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below Flood Protection Elevation in conformance
with the provisions of BCRC
14-501.H.
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 200 square feet and is a
minimal investment of $7,500 or less and satisfies the criteria outlined in a -
g above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards of
BCRC
14-502.A. and
14-502.B.
   I.   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
Special Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of
buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
      2.   Elevated above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached
to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
      3.   Non-elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation
requirements of BCRC
14-502.A. and
14-502.B. of this title shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the
tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads
during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy
assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
      4.   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
         a.   At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
         b.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
   J.   Other Development in regulated floodways.
      1.   Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters,
such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated Special Flood Hazard
Areas shall meet the limitations of BCRC
14-505 of this title.
      2.   Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve
the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of BCRC
14-505 of this title.
      3.   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts,
low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel
from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated
floodways, shall meet the limitations of BCRC
14-505 of this title.
      4.   Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks,
apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways
shall meet the limitations of BCRC
14-505 of this title.
      5.   Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking
facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that
encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of BCRC
14-505 of this title. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-503: STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
   A.   Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A (also known
as Unnumbered A Zones) and established in BCRC
14-302, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of BCRC
14-501, shall apply:
The BFE used in determining the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) shall be
determined based on the following criteria:
      1.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this title and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in BCRC
14-501 and
14-502.
      2.   When floodway data is available from a Federal, State, or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of BCRC
14-501,
14-502 and
14-505.
      3.   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development
proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home
sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in
accordance with BCRC
14-302 and utilized in implementing this title. The applicant/developer shall
submit an application for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) prior to
Preliminary Plat approval and have obtained a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)
prior to any building permits for structures being issued.
See FEMA 480 and/or FEMA 265 for further information.
      4.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the applicant may submit a
site-specific engineering analysis to determine BFE or the lowest floor shall
be elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to two feet (2.0 ft.) above the
highest adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the Flood Protection
Elevation (FPE) whichever is higher, as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title. All
other applicable provisions of BCRC
14-501 and
14-502 shall also apply. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-504: STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS:
   A.   Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is
provided by FEMA or is available from another source but floodways are not
identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
      1.   Standards of BCRC
14-501 and
14-502; and
      2.   Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical
data by a licensed professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood at any point within the community. (Ord. 565, 5-3-
2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-505: STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAYS:
Areas designated as floodways are located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas
established in BCRC
14-302. The floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential
projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
BCRC
14-501 and
14-502, shall apply to all development within such areas:
   A.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
      1.   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood,
based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Planning Director or
designee prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
      2.   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six months
of completion of the proposed encroachment.
   B.   If BCRC 14-505.A. is satisfied, all development shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this title.
   C.   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions
are met:
      1.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of BCRC
14-501 and
14-502; and
      2.   The encroachment standards of BCRC 14-505.A. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017;
amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-506: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO, AH, AR/AO, OR AR/AH):
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in BCRC
14-302, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3)
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to BCRC
14-501 and
14-502, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
   A.   The lowest floor shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of
one (1) foot, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two(2) feet above
the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
   B.   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed
to the same level as required in BCRC 14-506.A. so that the structure, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in
accordance with BCRC
14-403.C. and
14-502.B.
   C.   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 565, 5-3-
2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-507: CRITICAL FACILITIES:
Construction of new critical facilities shall be located outside the limits of
the special flood hazard area. Construction of new critical facilities shall be
permissible within the special flood hazard area, if no feasible alternative is
available, only if authorized by an approved variance. Critical facilities
constructed within the special flood hazard area shall have the lowest floor
elevated three feet (3') or more above the level of the base flood elevation at
the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Ingress and
egress routes elevated to or above the base flood elevation shall be provided
to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd.
Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
CHAPTER 6
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-601: Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance
14-602: Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits
14-603: Severability
14-601: EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE:
This title, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of
the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted November 18, 2008 as amended, and
it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of this title shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding
instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
of Bonner County enacted on November 18, 2008, as amended, which are not
reenacted herein are repealed.
(Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
14-602: EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a
Floodplain Development Permit has been granted by the Planning Director or
designee or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this
title. Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of 180 days subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-
2023)
14-603: SEVERABILITY:
The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this
title be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry
out the purpose(s) of the ordinance before the declaration of partial
invalidity. (Ord. 565, 5-3-2017; amd. Ord. 690, 4-18-2023)
TITLE 15
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
ARTICLE A: SHORT TITLE, APPLICABILITY, EXEMPTIONS, AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
15-101: Short Title
15-102: Findings
15-103: Authority
15-104: Applicability
15-105: Purpose
15-101: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter 1 of Title 15 shall be known and may be cited as the Bonner County
Fire District Development Impact Fee Ordinance. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-102: FINDINGS:
The Board of Bonner County Commissioners finds that:
   A.   Within unincorporated Bonner County, the County is experiencing
considerable growth and development.
   B.   The new growth and development occurring within unincorporated Bonner
County will place ever-increasing demands on any Fire District whose boundaries
include land in unincorporated Bonner County to provide, improve and expand
existing public safety facilities to serve that new growth and development and
the tax revenues generated from that new growth and development often does not
generate sufficient funds to provide the necessary improvements and expansion
of the public safety facilities to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. Those users that create the increased demand should bear their
proportionate share of the cost of public safety facilities needed to serve the
new growth and development.
   C.   Fire Districts organized pursuant to Idaho Code § 31-1401 et seq. do
not have authority to make and adopt ordinances as a method of carrying out
their statutory duties.
   D.   The Idaho Development Impact Fee Act (Act) at Idaho Code § 67-8201 et
seq. requires an entity to adopt an ordinance in order to impose and collect
development impact fees.
   E.   The Act does provide, pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8204A, in
circumstances where the County and the Fire District are both affected by the
considerable growth and development as is occurring within the County, that the
County and the Fire District may enter into an intergovernmental agreement for
the purpose of agreeing to collect and expend Development Impact Fees for
System Improvements which provides for a new funding mechanism for those System
Improvements Costs incurred by the Fire District to meet the demand and growth
occurring within the County and which promotes and accommodates orderly growth
and development and protects the public health, safety and general welfare of
the people, residential and non-residential establishments within the
boundaries of the County.
   F.   The County has statutory authority to make and adopt ordinances
pursuant to Idaho Code § 31-714. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-103: AUTHORITY:
This Chapter 1 of Title 15 is enacted pursuant to the County's general police
powers, its authority to enact ordinances, and its authority as provided by the
Act and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho to impose and collect
development impact fees on behalf of the Fire District; and the County's and
the Fire District's authority to enter into an Intergovernmental Agreement as
provided for in Idaho Code § 67-8204A when jointly affected by growth and
development for the purpose of agreeing to impose, collect and expend
Development Impact Fees in order for new growth and development to pay their
proportionate share of the cost of public facilities to serve that new growth
and development. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-104: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter shall apply to the Development of property located within the
boundaries of the Northside Fire District and; Spirit Lake Fire Protection
District in unincorporated Bonner County. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021; amd. Ord. 679,
9-21-2022)
15-105: PURPOSE:
The intent of this Chapter 1 of Title 15 is to ensure that new residential and
non-residential development bears a proportionate share of the cost of System
Improvements; to ensure that such proportionate share does not exceed the cost
of such System Improvements required to accommodate new Development; and to
ensure that funds collected from new Development are actually used for System
Improvements in accordance with the Act. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE B: DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15-201: Definitions
15-201: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter 1 of Title 15, the following words and terms shall have
the following meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended and words
and terms appearing in the singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular:
               To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to the expenditure of funds
APPROPRIATE:   by appropriation or other official act of the Board of Commissioners of any Fire
               District.
BOARD OF       The Board of Commissioners of the Fire District, which is its governing board.
COMMISSIONERS:
BUILDING       The permit required for foundations, new construction and additions pursuant to
LOCATION       Chapter 1, Title 11 of Bonner County Revised Code.
PERMIT:
CAPITAL        Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction or
IMPROVEMENTS:  other action, which increases the service capacity of the Fire District's Capital
               Facilities.
CAPITAL        A component of the Capital Improvements Plan adopted by the Fire District and the
IMPROVEMENTS   County pursuant to Chapters 65 and 82 of Title 67, Idaho Code, as they may be
ELEMENT:       amended, which component meets the requirements of the capital improvements plan
               required by the Act.
CAPITAL        The Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Plan recommended by the Impact Fee
IMPROVEMENTS   Advisory Committee and adopted by the Fire District and the County that
PLAN:          identifies the Fire District Capital Facilities for which the Fire District's
               Impact Fees may be used as a funding source.
CAPITAL        Shall mean and refer to the Fire District's Development Impact Fee Capital
PROJECTS FUND  Projects Fund established by action of the Board of Commissioners of the Fire
(the "Capital  District as set forth respectively in the Board of Commissioners' Resolutions and
Projects       pursuant to Article K of this Chapter and Idaho Code § 67-8210(1) is the
Fund"):        respective Capital Projects Fund into which the Fire District's Impact Fees shall
               be deposited and maintained by the Fire District.
COUNTY:        Bonner County, Idaho.
COUNTY BOARD
OF             The Board of Commissioners of Bonner County.
COMMISSIONERS:
DEVELOPER:     Any person or legal entity undertaking Development and/or the subdivision of
               property pursuant to Idaho Code § 50-1301 through § 50-1334, as may be amended.
               Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use
               of a building or structure, or any change in the use, character or appearance of
DEVELOPMENT:   land, which creates additional demand and need for public facilities and/or
               subdivision of property that would permit any change in the use, character or
               appearance of land.
DEVELOPMENT    Any written duly authorized document from the County which authorizes the
APPROVAL:      commencement of a Development.
               A requirement attached to a Developmental approval or other County governmental
DEVELOPMENT    action approving or authorizing a particular Development project including, but
REQUIREMENT:   not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or
               contribution of goods, services, land or money as condition of approval.
               Any structure, or portion thereof, providing living facilities for one family as
DWELLING UNIT: herein defined, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
               sanitation.
EXTRAORDINARY  Those costs incurred as result of an extraordinary impact.
COSTS:
               An impact which is reasonably determined by the Fire District to:
               A.   Result in the need for Fire District system improvements, the cost of which
EXTRAORDINARY  will significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated
IMPACT:        from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development agreement
               as allowed by Idaho Code § 67- 8214(2), as it may be amended; or
               B.   Result in the need for Fire District system improvements which are not
               identified in the Capital Improvements Plan.
               Shall mean:
               A.   A person living alone or two (2) or more persons related by blood or
               marriage.
               B.   A group of not more than ten (10) persons who need not be related by blood
FAMILY:        or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
               C.   Eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped or
               elderly persons residing in a dwelling unit who are supervised at the dwelling in
               connection with their handicap or age-related infirmity, provided that no more
               than two (2) staff members reside in the dwelling unit at any one time. (Resident
               staff shall not be counted toward the "8 or fewer" criterion.)
FEE PAYER:     The person who pays or is required to pay the Fire District's Impact Fee. A fee
               payer may include a Developer.
               Shall mean and refer to a Fire District organized and existing by virtue of the
FIRE DISTRICT: Fire District Law, Chapter 14, Title 31, Idaho Code and which has entered into an
               intergovernmental agreement with the County for the collection and expenditure of
               development impact fees.
FIRE DISTRICT  The Fire District Administrator of the Fire District, and their designee.
ADMINISTRATOR:
               Shall mean stations, apparatus, vehicles and equipment of the Fire District which
               is identified in Exhibit III-2 of the Fire District's Capital Improvements Plan
               as adopted by the County, and specifically including those related costs
               including System Improvement Costs, but not including maintenance, operations, or
               improvements that do not expand their capacity.
               FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed as condition of Development
               Approval to pay for a proportionate share of the costs of System Improvements
               needed to serve the Development. The term does not include the following:
FIRE DISTRICT  A.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative plan review, or inspection cost
CAPITAL        associated with permits required for Development;
FACILITIES:    B.   Connection or hookup charges;
               C.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation charges
               for services provided directly to the development; or
               D.   Amounts collected from a Developer in a transaction in which the Fire
               District has incurred expenses in constructing Capital Improvements for the
               Development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible
               for the construction or installation of those Capital Improvements, unless a
               written agreement is made, pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8209(3) as it may be
               amended, for credit or reimbursement.
INTER-         Shall mean and refer to the Fire District's intergovernmental agreement with the
GOVERNMENTAL   County pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8204A for the collection and expenditure of
AGREEMENT:     Fire District Impact Fees established pursuant to this Chapter.
IMPACT FEE     The Fire District's Joint Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee ("Impact Fee
ADVISORY       Advisory Committee") formed and staffed by the Fire District pursuant to Idaho
COMMITTEE:     Code § 67-8205 to prepare and recommend the Fire District's Capital Improvements
               Plan and any amendments, revisions or updates of the same.
LAND USE       A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities,
ASSUMPTIONS:   intensities and population in the service area over at least a ten (10) year
               period.
LEVEL OF       A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for
SERVICE:       public facilities.
               A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home construction and safety
               standards, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling
               mode, is eight (8) feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in
               length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square
               feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
MANUFACTURED/  dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
MOBILE HOME:   utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
               systems contained in such structure, except that such term shall include any
               structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size
               requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
               certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and
               complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.
               Any building or building component other than a manufactured/mobile home, which
MODULAR        is constructed according to the International Building Code, as adopted or any
BUILDING:      amendments thereto, which is of closed construction and is either entirely or
               substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site.
               The total current monetary value of past, present or future payments,
PRESENT VALUE: contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction or
               money.
PROJECT:       A particular Development on an identified parcel of land.
               In contrast to System Improvements, shall mean site improvements and facilities
PROJECT        that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular Development
IMPROVEMENTS:  Project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or
               users of the Project.
PROPORTIONATE  That portion of System Improvement Costs determined pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-
SHARE:         8207 which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the Project.
PUBLIC         Land, buildings, apparatus, vehicles and equipment used for fire, emergency
FACILITIES:    medical and rescue, and water supply production, storage and distribution
               facilities which have a useful life of ten (10) years or more.
RECREATIONAL   A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational,
VEHICLE:       camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or
               drawn by another vehicle.
               Land within the boundaries of the Fire District within unincorporated Bonner
               County as established pursuant Chapter 14, Title 31, Idaho Code, in which
SERVICE AREA:  specific Public Facilities provide service to Development on the basis of sound
               planning or engineering principles or both as identified in the Fire District's
               Capital Improvements Plan.
               A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable
               to an individual unit of Development calculated in accordance with generally
SERVICE UNIT:  accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of Capital
               Improvements. As specifically used in this Chapter 1 of Title 15, service units
               include all dwelling units as defined herein and includes, on the square foot
               basis, nonresidential Development.
               In contrast to Project Improvements, shall mean Capital Improvements to Public
SYSTEM         Facilities which are designed to provide service to a Service Area. For the
IMPROVEMENTS:  purpose of this Chapter, System Improvements are for Fire District Capital
               Facilities designed to provide both fire protection and emergency medical
               services.
               Shall mean costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of System
               Improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs, and
               also including, without limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code §
               50-1702(h), as it may be amended, to provide additional Public Facilities needed
               to service new growth and Development.
               For clarification, System Improvement Costs do not include:
               A.   Construction, acquisition or expansion of Public Facilities other than
               Capital Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements Plan;
               B.   Improvements, repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital;
SYSTEM         C.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing Capital Improvements to
IMPROVEMENT    serve existing Development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
COSTS:         environmental or regulatory standards;
               D.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing Capital Improvements to
               provide better service to existing Development;
               E.   Administrative and operating costs of the Fire District and/or the County
               unless such costs are attributable to Development of the Capital Improvements
               Plan, as provided in Idaho Code § 67-8208, as it may be amended; and
               F.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other
               indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the Fire
               District to finance Capital Improvements identified in the Capital Improvements
               Plan.
TRUST ACCOUNT: The interest-bearing account within the Fire District's Impact Fee Capital
               Projects Fund as established in this Chapter. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
 
ARTICLE C: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT SERVICE AREAS; IMPOSITION OF FIRE
DISTRICT IMPACT FEE; FEE SCHEDULE; EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
15-301: Establishment Of Fire District Service Areas
15-302: Imposition Of Fire District Impact Fees
15-303: Fee Schedule
15-304: Developer’s Election
15-305: Procedures
15-306: Exemptions
15-307: Exemption Claim Process
15-301: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT SERVICE AREAS:
There is hereby established a Service Area for the Fire District which includes
all land in unincorporated Bonner County within the boundaries of the Fire
District as established pursuant to Chapter 14, Title 31, Idaho Code. (Ord.
648, 9-22-2021)
15-302: IMPOSITION OF FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEES:
Fire District Impact Fees for the Fire District are hereby imposed on all new
Development located within the boundaries of the Fire District in
unincorporated Bonner County. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-303: FEE SCHEDULE:
Fire District’s Impact Fees shall be calculated in accordance with the fee
schedule set forth below providing for standard fees based on the total number
of Dwelling Units or square feet of nonresidential space in the Development,
unless (a) the Fee Payer requests an individual assessment pursuant to Article
F of this Chapter; or (b) the Fire District finds the Development will have an
Extraordinary Impact pursuant to Article I of this Chapter. The methodology for
determining the costs per service unit provided for in the fee schedule is set
forth in the Fire District’s Capital Improvements Plan as adopted by the County
pursuant to Idaho Code§ 67-8208, as it may be amended.
   A.   Northside Fire District Impact Fee Schedule:
         Residential (per Dwelling Unit):   $ 785.00
         Non-Residential (per square foot):   $ 0.39
   B.   Spirit Lake Fire Protection District Impact Fee Schedule:
         Residential (per Dwelling Unit):   $ 1,725.00
         Non-Residential (per square foot)   $ 0.86
(Ord. 648, 9-22-2021; amd. Ord. 679, 9-21-2022)
15-304: DEVELOPER’S ELECTION:
A Developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate
share of System Improvement Costs by payment of Impact Fee according to the fee
schedule as full and complete payment of the Development project's
proportionate share of System Improvements Costs, except as provided in Idaho
Code § 67-8214(3), as it may be amended. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-305: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Building Location Permit: Upon submittal of complete building location
permit plans for the Development to the County, the County shall calculate the
Fire District Impact Fee for the Development within thirty (30) days of
submittal unless:
      1.   The Fee Payer had previously requested and been granted an
individual assessment pursuant to this Chapter; or
      2.   The Fire District has previously determined the Development may have
an Extraordinary Impact pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-306: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which is
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
   B.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number
of Service Units;
   C.   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured/mobile home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that, the number of
Service Units does not increase;
   D.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
   E.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of Service Units;
   F.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as
tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of System Improvements; or
   G.   The installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle if the Fee Payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either: (a) a modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle was legally in place on the
lot or space prior to the effective date of this Chapter; or (b) a Fire
District Impact Fee has been paid previously for the modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space.
(Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-307: EXEMPTION CLAIM PROCESS:
A Fee Payer shall claim an exempt development activity upon application of a
Building Location Permit or manufactured/mobile home installation permit, or if
no building permit or manufactured/mobile home installation permit required,
prior to the time construction commences. Any exemption not so claimed shall be
deemed waived by the Fee Payer. Claims for exemption shall be determined by the
County within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the claim for exemption. (Ord.
648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE D: COLLECTION OF FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEES; ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
15-401: Payment Of Fees
15-402: Enforcement
15-403: Fee Paid To Fire Protection District
15-404: Fee Paid To County
15-401: PAYMENT OF FEES:
The Fire District Impact Fee shall be paid to the County at the following
times:
   A.   If a Building Location Permit is required, then before or at the time
the permit is issued;
   B.   If no Building Location Permit is required, then at the time that
construction commences; or
   C.   At such other time as the Fee Payer or Developer and the Fire District
have agreed upon in writing with notice to the County. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-402: ENFORCEMENT:
When any Fire District Impact Fee is due pursuant to this Chapter, or pursuant
to the terms of any written agreement between a Fee Payer and the Fire
District, and such Fire District Impact Fee has not been paid in a timely
manner, the County may exercise any or all of the following powers as
applicable to its authority, in any combination, to enforce the collection of
the Fire District Impact Fee:
   A.   Withhold Building Location Permits, manufactured home installation
permits, or other County Development Approval related to the Development for
which the Fire District Impact Fee is due until all Fire District Impact Fees
due have been paid, and issue stop work orders, and revoke or suspend a
Building Location Permit;
   B.   Withhold utility services from the Development for which the Fire
District Impact Fee is due until all Fire District Impact Fees due have been
paid;
   C.   Add interest to the Fire District Impact Fee not paid in full at the
legal rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104, as it may be amended, plus
five percent (5%) beginning on the date at which the payment of the Fire
District Impact Fee was due until paid in full;
   D.   Impose a penalty of five percent (5%) of the total Fire District Impact
Fee (not merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per month
beginning on the date at which the payment of the Fire District Impact Fee was
due until paid in full; and
   E.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code § 67-8213(4) for
failure to timely pay a Fire District Impact Fee following the procedures
contained in Idaho Code Title 45, Chapter 5. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-403: FEE PAID TO FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT:
In the event a Fire District Impact Fee is paid to the Fire Protection
District, then the Fire District Administrator shall immediately notify the
County of said payment. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-404: FEE PAID TO COUNTY:
All Fire District Impact Fees paid to the County shall be transferred to the
Fire District Administrator on a once-a-month basis. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE E: CERTIFICATION
SECTION:
15-501: Request For Written Certification
15-502: Request For Certification Requirements
15-501: REQUEST FOR WRITTEN CERTIFICATION:
A Fee Payer may request a written certification of the impact fee schedule or
individual assessment which shall establish the impact fee for that
Development. Such certification shall establish the Fire District Impact Fee so
long as there is no material change to the particular Development as identified
in the individual assessment application, or the impact fee schedule. A
certification may be applied for in the manner established in
15-502. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-502: REQUEST FOR CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Requests for certification shall be in writing and made to the Fire District
Administrator. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such request, the Fire
District Administrator shall issue a written certification of the amount of the
Fire District Impact Fee due for the proposed Development. The certification
shall include an explanation of the calculation of the Fire District Impact Fee
including an explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code § 67-8207 and
shall also specify the System Improvement(s) for which the Fire District Impact
Fee is intended to be used. The Fire District Administrator shall provide the
certification to the Fee Payer and the County. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE F: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT
SECTION:
15-601: Individual Assessment
15-601: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT:
In lieu of calculating the amount of the Fire District Impact Fee using the
impact fee schedule in Article C of this Chapter 1 of Title 15, an individual
assessment of Impact Fees is permitted when the Fee Payer demonstrates by clear
and convincing evidence that the established Impact Fee is inappropriate.
   A.   Individual Assessment Process: A Fee Payer may file a written request
for an individual assessment of the Development by the Fire District with the
Fire District Administrator prior to the receipt of a Building Location Permit
or other necessary approvals or entitlements from Bonner County. A request for
an individual assessment process shall involve consideration of studies, data,
and any other relevant information submitted by the Fee Payer to adjust the
amount of the Fire District Impact Fee. If a Fee Payer files a request for the
use of an individual assessment, the Fee Payer shall be responsible for
retaining a qualified professional to prepare the individual assessment that
complies with the requirements of this Chapter 1 of Title 15, at the Fee
Payer's expense. The Fee Payer shall bear the burden of proving by clear and
convincing evidence that the resulting individual assessment is a more accurate
measure of its proportionate share of the cost of System Improvements, based on
the Fire District's adopted Level of Service, than the development impact fees
that would otherwise be due pursuant to the fee schedule.
   1.   Each individual assessment request and supporting documentation
submitted by the Fee Payer shall be based on the same level of service
standards and unit costs for System Improvements used in the Fire District's
Capital Improvements Plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost)
methodology, and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions
used.
      2.   Each individual assessment request delivered to the Fire District
Administrator may then be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by
the Fire District Administrator as the basis for calculating the Fire District
Impact Fee. The criteria for acceptance, rejection or acceptance with
modifications shall be whether the individual assessment is a more accurate
measure of demand for System Improvements element(s) created by the proposed
Development, or the costs of those facilities, than the applicable fee shown in
the fee schedule.
      3.   The Fire District Administrator shall issue a written decision
within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed request for individual
assessment together with all supporting information from the Fee Payer, so as
not to unreasonably delay the Developer's (Fee Payer's) subsequent applications
to the County for Building Location Permits.
      4.   The decision by the Fire District Administrator on an application
for an individual assessment shall include an explanation of the calculation of
the Fire District Impact Fee, shall specify the System Improvement(s) for which
the Fire District Impact Fee is intended to be used, and shall include an
explanation of those factors identified in Idaho Code § 67-8207.
      5.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with
modifications by the Fire District Administrator then the Fire District Impact
Fee due under this Chapter 1 of Title 15 for such Development shall be
calculated according to such individual assessment.
      6.   The Fire District Administrator shall provide notice of final
determination of an individual assessment to the Fee Payer and Bonner County.
(Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE G: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
15-701: Conflict Of Interest
15-702: Credits Against Fee
15-703: Valuation Of Credit At Present Value
15-704: When Credits Become Effective
15-705: Credit Request Process
15-701: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
When a Developer or their predecessor in title or interest has constructed
System Improvements of the same category as a Fire District's Capital
Improvements Element, or contributed or dedicated land or money towards the
completion of System Improvements of the same category as the Fire District's
Capital Improvements Element, and the Fire District has accepted such
construction, contribution or dedication, the Fire District shall issue a
credit against the Fire District's Impact Fees otherwise due for the same Fire
District's Capital Improvements Element in connection with the proposed
Development, as set forth in this Article G, credit shall be issued regardless
of whether the contribution or dedication to System Improvements was required
by the Fire District as a condition of Development Approval or was offered by
the Developer and accepted by the Fire District in writing, and regardless of
whether the contribution or dedication was contributed by the Developer or by a
local improvement District controlled by the Developer. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-702: CREDITS AGAINST FEE:
Credits against a Fire District Impact Fee shall not be given for: (a) Project
Improvements; or (b) any construction, contribution or dedication not agreed to
in writing by the Fire District prior to commencement of the construction,
contribution, or dedication. Credits issued for one Fire District Capital
Improvements Element may not be used to reduce Fire District Impact Fees due
for a different capital improvement. No credits shall be issued for System
Improvements contributed or dedicated prior to the effective date of this
Chapter 1 of Title 15. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-703: VALUATION OF CREDIT AT PRESENT VALUE:
   A   Land: Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the Fee Payer's
option, be valued at the present value of: (a) one hundred percent (100%) of
the most recent assessed value for such land as shown in the records of the
county assessor; or (b) that fair market value established by a private
appraiser acceptable to the Fire District in an appraisal paid for by the Fee
Payer.
   B.   Improvements: Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall be valued by the Fire District at the present value
of such improvements based on complete engineering drawings, specifications,
and construction cost estimates submitted by the Fee Payer to the Fire
District. The Fire District Administrator shall determine the amount of credit
due based on the information submitted, or, if it determines that such
information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or
construction costs acceptable to the Fire District as a more accurate measure
of the value of the offered System Improvements to the Fire District. (Ord.
648, 9-22-2021)
15-704: WHEN CREDITS BECOME EFFECTIVE:
   A.   Land: Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when
the land has been conveyed to the Fire District in a form acceptable to the
Fire District, at no cost to the Fire District, and has been accepted by the
Fire District. Upon request of the Fee Payer, the Fire District shall issue a
letter stating the amount of credit available.
   B.   Improvements: Approved credits for acquisition or construction of
System Improvements shall generally become effective when (a) all required
construction has been completed and has been accepted by the Fire District, (b)
a suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the
Fire District, and (c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding,
and acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the Fire District and the state of Idaho. Upon request of the
Fee Payer, the Fire District shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit
available. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-705: CREDIT REQUEST PROCESS:
   A.   Request: In order to obtain a credit against a Fire District Impact Fee
otherwise due, a Fee Payer shall submit to the Fire District Administrator a
written offer of request to dedicate to the Fire District specific parcels of
qualifying land or a written offer to contribute or construct specific System
Improvements to the Fire District Capital Facilities in accordance with all
applicable State or County design and construction standards, and shall
specifically request a credit against the type of Fire District Impact Fee for
which the land dedication or System Improvements is offered.
   B.   Review: After receipt of the written offer of request for credit, the
Fire District Administrator shall review the request and determine whether the
land or System Improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of
providing Fire District Capital Facilities by an amount at least equal to the
value of the credit. If the Fire District Administrator determines that the
offered credit satisfies that criteria and will be acceptable to the Fire
District's Board of Commissioners, then the credit shall be issued. The Fire
District shall complete its review and determination of an application within
thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for credit.
   C.   Credits Exceeding Fee Amounts Due: If the credit due to a Fee Payer
pursuant to Section
15-703 exceeds the Fire District Impact Fee that would otherwise be due from
the Fee Payer pursuant to the Chapter 1 of Title 15 (whether calculated through
the Impact Fee schedule in Article C of this Chapter 1 or through an individual
assessment), the Fee Payer may choose to receive such credit in the form of
either: (a) a credit against future Fire District Impact Fee due for the same
System Improvements; or (b) a reimbursement from Fire District Impact Fees paid
by future Development that impacts the System Improvements contributed or
dedicated by the Fee Payer. Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the
Fee Payer, the Fire District shall be under no obligation to use any of the
Fire District funds - other than Fire District Impact Fees paid by other
Development for the same System Improvements - to reimburse the Fee Payer for
any credit in excess of Fire District Impact Fees that are due.
   D.   Written Agreement Required: If credit or reimbursement is due to the
Fee Payer pursuant to this Article G, the Fire District shall enter into a
written agreement with the Fee Payer, negotiated in good faith, prior to the
contribution, dedication, or funding of the System Improvements giving rise to
the credit. The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount,
time and form of reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10)
years.
   E.   The Fire District Administrator's determination on the written offer of
request for credit shall be provided to the Fee Payer and the County. (Ord.
648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE H: METHODOLOGY FOR THE CALCULATION OF FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
15-801: General Provisions
15-802: Methodology; Proportionate Methodology
15-803: Proportionate Share Determination
15-801: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Accounting Principles: The calculation of the Fire District Impact Fee
shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
development impact fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee
may result in an incidental benefit to owners or Developers within the service
area other than the Fee Payer.
   B.   Levels Of Service: The Fire District Impact Fee shall be calculated on
the basis of levels of service for Public Facilities in the adopted Capital
Improvement Plan that are applicable to existing Development as well as new
growth and Development. The construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement
of new or existing Public Facilities for which the Fire District Impact Fee is
imposed must be attributable to the capacity demands generated by the new
Development. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-802: METHODOLOGY; PROPORTIONATE METHODOLOGY:
The Fire District Impact Fee shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost
of the System Improvements determined in accordance with Idaho Code § 67-8207,
as it may be amended. Fire District Impact Fees shall be based on actual System
Improvements Costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. The amount of the
Fire District Impact Fee shall be calculated using the methodology contained in
the adopted Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-803: PROPORTIONATE SHARE DETERMINATION:
   A.   The Fire District Impact Fee shall be based on a reasonable and fair
formula or method under which the Fire District Impact Fee imposed does not
exceed a proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the
Fire District in the provision of System Improvements to serve the new
Development. The proportionate share is the costs attributable to the new
Development after the Fire District considers the following:
      1.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money, dedication
of land or construction of System Improvements;
      2.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new Development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
      3.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated by the Fire
District to System Improvements; and
      4.   All other available sources of funding such System Improvements.
   B.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of System
Improvements to be paid by the Developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the Fire District and accounted for in the calculation of the
Fire District's Impact Fee:
      1.   The costs of existing System Improvements within the Service area;
      2.   The means by which existing System Improvements have been financed;
      3.   The extent to which the new Development will contribute to System
Improvements Costs through taxation, assessments, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to System Improvements Costs
through Developer or landowner contributions;
      4.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to
the cost of existing System Improvements in the future;
      5.   The extent to which the new Development should be credited for
providing System Improvements, without charge to other properties within the
Service Area;
      6.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
Development;
      7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
      8.   The availability of other sources of funding System Improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers and special taxation. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE I: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT
SECTION:
15-901: Initial Determination
15-902: Process
15-901: INITIAL DETERMINATION:
A Fire District may make an initial determination that Development may impose
an Extraordinary Impact due to a review of a development application
transmitted by the County to a Fire District pursuant to the County's zoning
authority under the Local Land Use Planning Act, Chapter 65, Title 67, Idaho
Code. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-902: PROCESS:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after Fire District Administrator's receipt
from the County of the development application, the Fire District Administrator
will notify the Fee Payer and the County of the Fire District Administrator's
initial determination that the Development may impose an Extraordinary Impact.
Such notice shall include that a supplemental study, at the Fee Payer's expense
will be required.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a Development with
Extraordinary Impact, the Fire District Administrator shall meet with the Fee
Payer to discuss whether the Fee Payer wants to: (a) pay for the supplemental
study necessary to determine the System Improvements Costs related to the
proposed Development; (b) modify the proposal to avoid generating Extraordinary
Impact; or (c) withdraw the application for certification, or Development
approval.
   C.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to
document the proposed Development's proportionate share of System Improvements
Costs, then the Fire District and the Fee Payer shall jointly select an
individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such study. The Fee
Payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization
to pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental
study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless
the Fee Payer agrees to a longer time.
   D.   Once the study has been completed, the Fee Payer may choose to: (a) pay
the proportionate share of System Improvements Costs documented by the
supplemental study; or (b) modify the proposed Development to reduce such
costs; or (c) withdraw the application. The Fire District Administrator shall
notify the County of the Fee Payer's choice within fifteen (15) days of the Fee
Payer's decision.
   E.   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay the System Improvements Costs documented
in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to writing between
the Fire District and the Fee Payer prior to review and consideration of any
application for any Development approval or Building Location Permits related
to the proposed Development. The Fire District Administrator shall provide a
copy of the agreement to the County within fifteen (15) days after the
agreement has been signed by both parties.
   F.   Notwithstanding any agreement by the Fee Payer to pay the proportionate
share of System Improvements Costs documented by the supplemental study,
nothing in this Chapter 1 of Title 15 shall obligate the County to approve
Development that results in an Extraordinary Impact to the Fire District. (Ord.
648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE J: FEE PAYER REFUNDS
SECTION:
15-1001: Duty To Refund
15-1002: Process
15-1001: DUTY TO REFUND:
   A.   A Fire District's Impact Fee shall be refunded to a Fee Payer, or
successor in interest, or a property owner in the following circumstances:
      1.   Service is available but never provided;
      2.   A Building Location Permit, or permit for installation of a
manufactured home, is denied or abandoned;
      3.   The Fee Payer pays a Fire District Impact Fee under protest and a
subsequent review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment
determines that the fee paid exceeded the proportionate share to which the Fire
District was entitled to receive;
      4.   The Fire District has collected a Fire District Impact Fee and the
Fire District has failed to appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant
to
15-1001.B below; or
      5.   Failure of the Fire District to commence construction or encumber
the fund in the Fire District's Development Impact Fee Capital Projects Fund.
   B.   Any Fire District Impact Fee paid shall be refunded if the Fire
District has failed to commence construction of System Improvements in
accordance with this Chapter 1 of Title 15, or to appropriate funds for such
construction, within eight (8) years after the date on which such fee was
collected by the Fire District. Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of
record of the parcel for which the Fire District's Impact Fee was paid. The
Fire District may hold Fire District Impact Fees for longer than eight (8)
years but in no event longer than eleven (11) years from the date collected if
the Fire District identifies in writing: (a) a reasonable cause why the fees
should be held longer than eight (8) years; and (b) an anticipated date by
which the fees will be expended. If the Fire District complies with the
previous sentence, then any Fire District Impact Fees so identified shall be
refunded to the Fee Payer if the Fire District has failed to commence
construction of System Improvements in accordance with the written notice, or
to Appropriate Funds for such construction on or before the date identified in
such writing.
   C.   After a Fire District Impact Fee has been paid pursuant to this Chapter
and after a Notice of Completion has been issued by the County, no refund of
any part of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid is
later demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so
as to reduce the size of the project or the number of units in the project.
   D.   Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half the legal
rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
originally paid. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1002: PROCESS:
The Fire District shall make a determination of whether a refund is due within
thirty (30) days after receipt of a written request for a refund from the Fee
Payer, successor in interest, or an owner of record of the property for which
the fee was paid. When the right to a refund exists, the Fire District shall
send the refund within ninety (90) days after the Fire District determines that
a refund is due. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE K: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND; TRUST ACCOUNTS
SECTION:
15-1101: Capital Projects Funds Established
15-1102: Deposit Of Fire District Impact Fees
15-1101: CAPITAL PROJECTS FUNDS ESTABLISHED:
The Capital Projects Fund established by the Fire District will be maintained
by the Fire District for the purpose of ensuring that all Fire District Impact
Fees collected, pursuant to this Chapter 1 of Title 15, are used to address
impacts reasonably attributable to new Development for which the Fire District
Impact Fees are paid. The Capital Projects Fund shall have its own interest-
bearing account. The interest earned on the account pursuant to Idaho Code §
67-8210(1) shall not be governed by Idaho Code § 57-127, as it may be amended,
but shall be considered funds of the Capital Projects Fund and shall be subject
to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the Fire District Impact Fees on
which the interest is generated. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1102: DEPOSIT OF FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEES:
All monies paid by a Fee Payer, pursuant to this Chapter 1 of Title 15, shall
be identified as Fire District Impact Fees and upon receipt by the Fire
District shall be promptly deposited by the Fire District Administrator in the
Capital Projects Fund Account.
   A.   Monies in the Capital Projects Fund Account shall be spent in the order
collected, on a first-in/first-out basis.
   B.   The Fire District shall maintain and keep accurate financial records
for the account which records shall:
      1.   Show the source and disbursement of all revenues;
      2.   Account for all monies received;
      3.   Ensure that the disbursement of funds from the account shall be used
solely and exclusively for the provisions of projects specified in the Capital
Improvements Plan; and
      4.   Provide an annual accounting for the Fire District Impact Fee
Capital Projects Fund Account showing the source and amount of all funds
collected and the projects that were funded, which annual accounting shall be
provided to the County as part of the annual audit process of this Chapter 1 of
Title 15. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE L: EXPENDITURE OF FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
15-1201: Expenditures
15-1202: Capital Improvements Plan Reimbursement; Surcharge
15-1201: EXPENDITURES:
Expenditures of Fire District Impact Fees collected and deposited in the
Capital Projects Fund shall be made only for System Improvements within the
Service Area for which the Impact Fee was collected in accordance with the
Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1202: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN REIMBURSEMENT; SURCHARGE:
A portion of each Impact Fee collected may be designated as a surcharge for
reimbursement of the Fire District for the cost of preparing the Capital
Improvements Plan in accordance with Idaho Code § 67-8208. The surcharge shall
not exceed the Development's proportionate share of the cost of preparing the
Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE M: APPEALS, PROTEST AND MEDIATION
SECTION:
15-1301: Appeals
15-1302: Appeal Process
15-1303: Payment Under Protest
15-1304: Mediation
15-1301: APPEALS:
Any Fee Payer that is or may be obligated to pay a Fire District Impact Fee,
individual assessment or an Extraordinary Impact, or that claims a right to
receive a refund, reimbursement, exemption or credit under this Chapter 1 of
Title 15, and who is dissatisfied with a decision made either by the County or
by the Fire District Administrator in applying this Chapter, may appeal such
decision. The Fee Payer shall have the burden on appeal of proving by clear and
convincing evidence that the decision was in error. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1302: APPEAL PROCESS:
   A.   Appeals of denials of an exemption from Impact Fees under Article C of
this Chapter 1 of Title 15.
      1.   A Fee Payer shall file a written notice of the appeal with the
Bonner County Planning Department within thirty (30) days after the date of a
denial of an exemption. Such notice of appeal shall include a statement
describing why the Fee Payer believes that the appealed decision was in error,
together with copies of any documents that the Fee Payer believes support the
claim.
      2.   The Bonner County Planning Department shall schedule a hearing in
front of the County Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days of receiving
the appeal. The Fee Payer or its representative shall have a right to be
present and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The County personnel
who made the decision under appeal or their representatives shall likewise have
the right to be present and to present evidence in support of the decision.
      3.   The County Board of Commissioners shall consider the decision
denying the exemption and also consider any additional evidence that may be
offered by the Fee Payer and County staff. The County Board of Commissioners
may affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or in part the decision appealed from
and issue a written decision within thirty (30) days.
      4.   A final decision of the County Board of Commissioners may be
judicially reviewed pursuant to Idaho Code § 31-1506.
   B.   Appeals of impact fee schedule assessments, refunds, reimbursements,
credits, individual assessments, or extraordinary impacts under this Chapter.
      1.   The Fee Payer shall file a written notice of the appeal with the
Fire District Administrator within thirty (30) days after the date of the Fire
District Administrator's decision, or the date on which the Fee Payer submitted
a payment of the Fire District Impact Fee under protest, whichever is later.
Such written application shall include a statement describing why the Fee Payer
believes that the appealed decision was in error, together with copies of any
documents that the Fee Payer believes support the claim.
      2.   The Fire District's Board of Commissioners, shall hear the appeal
within sixty (60) days after receipt of a written notice of appeal. The Fee
Payer or its representative shall have a right to be present and to present
evidence in support of the appeal. The Fire District Administrator who made the
decision under appeal or its representatives shall likewise have the right to
be present and to present evidence in support of the decision. The criteria to
be used by the Fire District's Board of Commissioners in considering the appeal
shall be whether: (a) the decision or interpretation made by the Fire District
Administrator; or (b) the alternative decision or interpretation offered by the
Fee Payer, more accurately reflects the intent of this Chapter 1 of Title 15
that new development in the Service Area pay its proportionate share of the
costs of system improvements to Fire District facilities necessary to serve new
development and whether the Chapter has been correctly applied. The Fire
District's Board of Commissioners shall issue a decision upholding, reversing,
or modifying the decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing
the appeal. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1303: PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST:
A Fee Payer may pay a Fire District Impact Fee under protest in order not to
delay in the issuance of a Building Location Permit by the County. A Fee Payer
making a payment under protest shall not be estopped from exercising the right
to appeal provided herein, nor shall such Fee Payer be estopped from receiving
a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. (Ord. 648, 9-
22-2021)
15-1304: MEDIATION:
   A.   Any Fee Payer that has a disagreement with a decision made by the
County or a decision made by the Fire District Administrator regarding a Fire
District Impact Fee determination that is or may be due for a proposed
Development pursuant to this Chapter 1 of Title 15, may enter into a voluntary
agreement with the County, or the Fire District, as the case may be, to subject
the disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent party acceptable to
both parties to the mediation.
   B.   Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a timely
appeal, or as an alternative to such appeal, provided that the request for
mediation is filed no later than the last date on which a timely appeal could
be filed pursuant to this Article M.
   C.   Participation in mediation does not preclude the Fee Payer from
pursuing other remedies provided for in this Article M.
   D.   If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be shared
equally by the parties to the mediation, the Fire District, or the County, and
a written agreement regarding the payment of such costs shall be executed prior
to the commencement of mediation.
   E.   In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues, the Fee Payer
retains all rights of appeal as set forth in this Article M. (Ord. 648, 9-22-
2021)
ARTICLE N: PERIODIC REVIEWS; ANNUAL BUDGET
SECTION:
15-1401: Review And Modification Of Capital Improvements Plan
15-1402: Annual Budget
15-1401: REVIEW AND MODIFICATION OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN:
Unless the Board of Commissioners of a Fire District deems some other period is
appropriate, the Board of Commissioners of a Fire District shall, at least once
every five (5) years, commencing from the date of the original adoption of the
Capital Improvements Plan, review the Development potential and update the
Capital Improvements Plan in cooperation with the County and in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Idaho Code § 67-8206, as it may be amended. Each
update shall be prepared by the Fire District Administrator in consultation
with the Impact Fee Advisory Committee. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1402: ANNUAL BUDGET:
The Fire District shall annually adopt a capital budget and deliver a copy to
the County within thirty (30) days of adoption. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE O: AUDIT
SECTION:
15-1501: Audit
15-1501: AUDIT:
As part of its annual audit process, the Fire District shall prepare and
forward to the County an annual report: (a) describing the amount of all Fire
District Impact Fees collected, appropriated or spent during the preceding
year; and (b) describing the percentage of taxes and revenues from sources
other than the Fire District Impact Fees collected, appropriated or spent for
System Improvements during the preceding year. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE P: IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
15-1601: Purpose
15-1602: Membership
15-1603: Meetings
15-1604: Continuation Of Existing Committees
15-1601: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8205, there is an Impact Fee Advisory Committee
whose purpose is to carry out the duties as set forth in Idaho Code § 67-8205
(3), as it may be amended. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1602: MEMBERSHIP:
The Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall be composed of not fewer than five (5)
members. Two (2) or more members shall be active in the business of
development, building or real estate. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1603: MEETINGS:
Meetings may be called by the Impact Fee Advisory Committee by giving
reasonable notice of the time and place of the meeting in accordance with the
Open Meetings Law, Idaho Code § 74-201 et seq., as may be amended. The Impact
Fee Advisory Committee shall adopt reasonable rules as are necessary to carry
out the duties and responsibilities of the committee subject to the joint
approval of the Fire District and County, and elect such officers as deemed
necessary. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
15-1604: CONTINUATION OF EXISTING COMMITTEES:
Any Impact Fee Advisory Committee established as part of the preparation of the
respective Capital Improvements Plans shall become the Impact Fee Advisory
Committee and shall continue in existence. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE Q: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-1701: Miscellaneous Provisions
15-1701: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Nothing in this Chapter 1 of Title 15 shall prevent the Fire District
from requiring a Developer to construct reasonable Project Improvements, as are
required by the fire codes and other rules that are adopted by the state fire
marshal, in conjunction with a Development.
   B.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit
private agreements between property owners or developers, the Idaho
Transportation Department and governmental entities in regard to the
construction or installation of System Improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for System Improvements Costs incurred by a Developer including
inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for Project
Improvements which are used or shared by more than one (1) Development project.
   C.   Nothing in this Chapter shall obligate the County to approve
Development which results in an Extraordinary Impact.
   D.   Nothing in this Chapter 1 of Title 15 shall obligate the Fire District
to approve any Development request which may reasonably be expected to reduce
levels of service below minimum acceptable levels established in this Chapter.
   E.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to create any additional
right to develop real property or diminish the County in regulating the orderly
development of real property within its boundaries.
   F.   Nothing in this Chapter shall work to limit the use by the County of
the power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or
procedures authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement District or
general obligation bond issues.
   G.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter 1 of Title 15, that
portion of a Project for which a complete application for a Building Location
Permit has been received by the County, prior to the effective date of this
Chapter, shall not be subject to the Fire District Impact Fee imposed by this
Chapter. If the resulting Building Location Permit is later revised or replaced
after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, and the new
Building Location Permit(s) reflects a development density, intensity,
development size or number of Service Units more than ten percent (10%) higher
than that reflected in the original Building Location Permit, then the Fire
District Impact Fee may be charged on the difference in density, intensity,
development size or number of Service Units between the original and the
revised or replacement Building Location Permit.
   H.   Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific
System Improvements within such Capital Improvements Plan and not expended or
refunded pursuant to this Chapter shall be retained in the same account until
the next Fire District fiscal year.
   I.   If the Fire District discovers an error in the Capital Improvements
Plan that results in assessment or payment of more than a proportionate share
of System Improvement Costs on any proposed Development, the Fire District
Administrator shall:
      1.   Adjust the Fire District Impact Fee to collect no more than a
proportionate share; or
      2.   Discontinue the collection of any Fire District Impact Fees until
the error is corrected by ordinance.
   J.   If Fire District Impact Fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake
or misrepresentation, they shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a Fee
Payer shall be refunded by the Fire District within thirty (30) days after the
Fire District's acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the
legal rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the
fee was paid. Any amounts underpaid by the Fee Payer shall be paid to the Fire
District within thirty (30) days after the Fire District Administrator's
acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided
for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. In the
case of an underpayment to the Fire District, the Fire District Administrator
may request the County and the County may withhold issuance of the Building
Location Permit or Development Approval for the project for which the Fire
District Impact Fee was paid until such underpayment is corrected, and if
amounts owed to the Fire District are not paid within such thirty-day (30)
period, the Fire District Administrator may also ask the County to and the
County may revoke any Building Location Permit or Development Approval issued
in reliance on the previous payment of such Fire District Impact Fee and refund
such fee to the Fee Payer. (Ord. 648, 9-22-2021)
ARTICLE R: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
15-1801: Rules Of Construction
15-1801: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Chapter 1 of
Title 15 shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning
of the Act and the Bonner County Board of Commissioners and the Board of
Commissioners of the Fire District may be fully carried out. (Ord. 648, 9-22-
2021)
TITLE 16
AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREAS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE, APPLICATION, AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
16-101: Purpose
16-102: Applicability
16-103: Creation and Designation Of APA
16-104: Application Requirements
16-105: Review And Approval Procedure
16-106: Appeal
16-107: Expansion Or Modification Of An APA
16-108: Renewal Or Termination Of An APA
16-109: Duration Of Designation
16-110: Prohibition Of Uses
16-101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a voluntary process through which
agricultural and timber producers located within Bonner County may make
application to commit lands actively devoted to agriculture for long-term
future agriculture use. The agricultural protection area (APA) designation
process aims to protect productive farmland, rangeland, and forest land;
promote farm viability; support the local agricultural economy; and provide for
long-term planning stability. This title sets out the process for creation of
agricultural protection areas. (Ord. 728, 9-10-2025)
16-102: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this title shall apply to any person or legal entity that
owns five (5) contiguous acres or more of land which has been in active
agricultural or forest production for the previous three (3) consecutive years,
consistent with the provisions of Idaho Code section 63-604 or section 63-1701
as applicable, and who voluntarily applies for that land to be designated as an
agricultural protection area. (Ord. 728, 9-10-2025)
16-103: CREATION AND DESIGNATION OF APA:
An agricultural protection area shall be designated as an "APA." An APA
designation is a voluntary land use designation available to landowners who
wish to protect their agricultural land from future nonagricultural
development. To qualify for an APA designation, the land must be:
   A.   At least five (5) contiguous acres;
   B.   Actively devoted to an agricultural or forest purpose;
   C.   Assessed as agriculture or forest land; and
   D.   Located within a zone that allows for agricultural or forest use. (Ord.
728, 9-10-2025)
16-104 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Landowners wishing to establish an APA must submit an application to the
planning department. At a minimum, the application shall include the following:
   A.   Application Form: A completed application form must be submitted with
the property owner's signature, or with the applicant's signature together with
a notarized letter from the property owner authorizing the applicant to file
the permit application.
   B.   Fees: An application fee shall be required to cover administrative
costs, including, but not limited to, reviewing materials, conducting public
meetings and hearings, processing and recording documents, and updating the
county APA maps. The application fee shall not exceed the actual costs of
processing the application, in compliance with section 67-9704(e) of Idaho
Code. Fees as adopted by resolution of the board of county commissioners.
   C.   Site Plan: A site plan must be submitted which is drawn to scale
showing a north arrow, lot boundaries, location of all structures and
utilities, the location, dimension and purpose of existing easements, the
location of future structures, and other relevant information regarding the
site and the request.
   D.   Proof of property ownership.
   E.   A legal description of the property proposed to be included in the APA.
   F.   A narrative which describes in detail the existing conditions of the
property and the nature of the proposal, including the following:
      1.   A statement outlining the current contiguous acreages of land, land
use, agricultural productivity, and other relevant characteristics of the land
to be included in the APA.
      2.   The number of years the land has been in agricultural or forest
production, the types of agricultural or forest commodities produced, and the
applicant's plan to continue using the land for agricultural or forest
purposes.
      3.   The reasons for seeking an APA designation.
      4.   Any other information that may be relevant to the application.
   G.   Relevant soil surveys, documentation of water rights, and any other
environmental assessments which have been completed with respect to that
property. (Ord. 728, 9-10-2025)
16-105: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Upon receipt of a complete and sufficient application, the APA
commission shall review the proposal and make a recommendation to the planning
director within sixty (60) days after the application has been determined to be
complete and sufficient.
   B.   Evaluation of the application shall be based on the following criteria:
      1.   The total contiguous acreage of the property is at least five (5)
acres in size and is actively devoted to agricultural or forest production.
      2.   Whether the property that is the subject of the application is
within or adjacent to an existing area of city impact.
      3.   Possible conflicts with existing city annexation or development
plans or agreements.
      4.   Proximity to existing public rights of way.
      5.   Proximity to planned transportation corridors or future public
rights of way.
      6.   Proximity to planned airport expansion or development.
      7.   Proximity to planned development with existing entitlements.
      8.   Agricultural production capability of the land within the proposed
APA.
      9.   Other local impacts relevant to the proposed APA.
   C.   Within sixty (60) days of receiving a recommendation from the
agricultural protection area commission to support or reject an application,
the planning director shall approve or deny the application to include land in
an agricultural protection area in a written decision. The decision shall
specify, at a minimum:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The agricultural protection area commission's recommendation;
      3.   A reasoned explanation for the decision reached by the administrator
or other administrative officer, if appointed; and
      4.   If applicable, the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
obtain approval.
   D.   If the planning director fails to issue a written decision within sixty
(60) days of receiving a recommendation from the agricultural protection area
commission, the recommendation of the agricultural protection area commission
shall become the decision of the administrator or other administrative officer,
if appointed. (Ord. 728, 9-10-2025)
16-106: APPEAL:
   A.   An aggrieved applicant may appeal the decision to the board of county
commissioners within thirty (30) days of receiving the written decision
pursuant to subsection (1) of this section or recommendation that has become
final pursuant to subsection (3) of this section.
   B.   Within sixty (60) days of receiving an appeal, the board of county
commissioners shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures described in section Idaho Code 67-6509 regarding the
appeal.
   C.   In reviewing an appeal, the board of county commissioners shall
consider the recommendation of the agricultural protection area commission, the
written decision of the planning director, all written and oral public comment
received at the public hearing, and any other information the board of county
commissioners determines to be relevant.
   D.   Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the board of
county commissioners shall issue a final decision approving or denying the
agricultural protection area application. If the board of county commissioners
fails to act within the sixty (60) day period, the decision of the
administrator or other administrative officer, if appointed, shall become the
final decision of the board of county commissioners.
   E.   The board of county commissioners' final decision shall be subject to
judicial review.
   F.   If the agricultural protection area application is approved, the
agricultural protection area shall be created.
16-107: EXPANSION OR MODIFICATION OF AN APA:
   A.   An expansion, modification, or removal of an existing APA shall comply
with the same application, review, and hearing procedures outlined in this
chapter.
   B.   Any expansion of an APA shall be contiguous to an existing APA. (Ord.
728, 9-10-2025)
16-108: RENEWAL OR TERMINATION OF AN APA:
   A.   Twenty (20) years after the creation of an agricultural protection
area, if the landowner desires to continue with the agricultural protection
area, no action on the part of the landowner is necessary and the board of
county commissioners shall automatically renew the agricultural protection area
for another twenty (20) years, in accordance with Idaho Code 67-9708.
   B.   If the landowner desires to terminate the agricultural protection area,
written notice to the board of county commissioners, along with the applicable
fee, are required at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the
agricultural protection area before the board of county commissioners
terminates the designation, in accordance with Idaho Code 67-9708.
   C.   Early termination of the APA may be requested via application and the
applicable fee, in accordance with Idaho Code 67-9709, and shall only be
approved upon proof of a hardship by clear and convincing evidence. The owner
seeking to terminate an APA shall bear the burden of proof, including the
burden of going forward with evidence and the burden of persuasion. The request
for early termination shall be in accordance with Idaho Code 67-9709. (Ord.
728, 9-10-2025)
16-109: DURATION OF DESIGNATION:
Lands designated as an APA shall remain so designated for a period of no less
than twenty (20) years unless terminated pursuant to section
16-108 of this title. A property owner who intends to end an approved APA
designation after twenty (20) years must notify the planning department in
writing prior to the end of the then-current period. Failure of the owner to so
notify the planning department will result in the continuation of the APA
designation for another period of twenty (20) years. (Ord. 728, 9-10-2025)
16-110: PROHIBITION OF USES:
   A.   Unless otherwise approved by the board of county commissioners, the
following land uses shall be prohibited within an APA:
      1.   The siting of residential, commercial, manufacturing, industrial,
solar or wind energy structures, or any other non-agricultural land use on
lands included within an agricultural protection area shall be prohibited
unless such uses are also contributing to agricultural production. Such non-
agricultural uses are subject to applicable county zoning ordinances. (Ord.
728, 9-10-2025)
CHAPTER 2
AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA COMMISSION AND MEETINGS
SECTION:
16-201: Agricultural Protection Area Commission
16-202: Agricultural Protection Area Meetings
16-201: AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA COMMISSION:
   A.   Establishment. An Agricultural Protection Area Commission ("the APA
Commission") is hereby established in and for the County pursuant to Idaho Code
Title 67, Chapter 97. The APA Commission shall consist of three (3) members
appointed by majority vote of the Board of County Commissioners. Members shall
be selected without regard to political affiliation and shall serve without
compensation, provided, however, that actual and necessary expenses shall be
allowed if approved by the Board of County Commissioners.
   B.   Qualifications. Commission members shall meet the requirements of Idaho
Code 67-9705.
   C.   Terms of Office. The terms of office for APA Commission members shall
conform to the requirements of Idaho Code section 67-9705 and shall be for
three (3) years. Position A shall first expire December 31, 2025, and then
every three (3) years thereafter. Position B shall expire December 31, 2026,
and every three (3) years thereafter. Position C shall expire December 31,
2027, and every three (3) years thereafter. Expired or vacant positions shall
be filled within ninety (90) days. Appointment to complete the term of a
vacated position or appointment to a new term shall be done by motion and order
of the Board of Bonner County Commissioners.
   D.   Removal of Members. Any member of the APA Commission may be removed for
cause by a majority vote of the Board of County Commissioners. Any member who
is absent from any series of three (3) consecutive regular and/or special
meetings and study sessions, without the formal consent of the APA Commission,
or who fails to attend at least seventy five percent (75%) of such regular and
special meetings and study sessions, in any one calendar year, may be removed
by the Board of County Commissioners.
   E.   Chair. Once every year, at the regular meeting held in February, or the
first regular meeting thereafter, the APA Commission shall select one of its
members as Chair of the APA Commission and one of its members as Vice Chair.
   F.   Powers and Duties. The APA Commission shall act in an advisory capacity
to the Board of County Commissioners, and shall perform such duties as may be
required under Idaho Code 67-97.
   G.   Procedural Rules. The APA Commission may adopt such bylaws or rules of
procedure as it may deem necessary to properly exercise its powers and duties.
Such rules shall be kept on file with the Planning Department and a copy
thereof shall be furnished to any person upon request.
   H.   Liability. Neither the APA Commission, nor any person connected with
the APA Commission, shall incur any financial liability in the name of the
County. (Ord. 718, 2-3-2025)
16-202: AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA MEETINGS:
   A.   Time of Meetings. Once each year, the Planning Director shall publish
the APA Commission's monthly meeting schedule for the following year. Special
meetings may be called at any time by the Chair of the APA Commission or by the
Planning Director, subject to the notification requirements set forth herein.
   B.   Quorum. A majority of the filled positions on the APA Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the APA Commission's
business, provided there are at least two (2) filled positions. For purposes of
determining a quorum, a member who is present, but who cannot hear or
deliberate on an application because of a conflict of interest, shall be
counted as a member present for quorum purposes.
   C.   Record of Proceedings: Minutes shall be kept of all APA Commission
proceedings, and a recording of all APA Commission proceedings shall be kept.
Voting: Each member of the APA Commission which does not have a conflict as
defined in section 67-6506, Idaho Code, including the Chair, Chair pro tem and
Vice Chair, shall be entitled to one vote on each matter before the APA
Commission. (Ord. 718, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
16-301: General Rules For Use Of Language
16-302: Definitions
16-301: GENERAL RULES FOR USE OF LANGUAGE:
   A.   All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this title
shall be constructed in accordance with the following general rules:
      1.   In any case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration,
the more restrictive text shall control.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples
that use terms such as "including", "such as", or similar language are intended
to provide examples and not to be exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
      3.   References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
Excluding the first day and including the last day shall determine the time in
which an act is to be done. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
observed by Bonner County, that day shall be excluded.
      4.   Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute,
regulation or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent
edition or amendment of such resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation or
document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
      5.   Terms not defined within this title shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them as defined in Webster's dictionary ("The Merriam-
Webster Collegiate Dictionary", eleventh edition).
      6.   All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are
made are those of Bonner County, unless otherwise indicated.
      7.   The words "shall", "will", and "must" are always mandatory. The
words "may" and "should" are advisory and discretionary terms.
      8.   The words used in one tense (past, present, or future) include all
other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      9.   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular (including numeric values), i.e., truck vs. trucks.
      10.   Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions
shall be interpreted as follows:
         a.   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions
or events apply.
         b.   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events may apply or be optional.
      11.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel", or "tract".
      12.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. (Ord. 718,
2-3-2025)
16-302: DEFINITIONS:
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION: Activities or conditions conducted on land actively
devoted to agriculture as defined in Idaho Code section 63-604 or on forest
land as defined in Idaho Code section 63-1701.
AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA (APA): One or more specific parcels of land in a
designated geographic area voluntarily created under the authority of this
title for the purpose of protecting and preserving agricultural land.
AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA COMMISSION (APA Commission): The advisory board to
the Board of County Commissioners created pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-
9705 and section
16-201 of this title.
APPLICANT: Anyone who owns five (5) acres or more of land that has been in
active agricultural or forest production for the previous three (3) consecutive
years, consistent with the provisions of Idaho Code sections 63-604 and 63-1701
and who voluntarily applies for that land to be part of an agricultural
protection area.
AREA OF IMPACT (AOI): An area designated by county ordinance which is adjacent
to a city and where city growth and development are expected to occur.
HARDSHIP: A situation or circumstance over which an owner of property
designated as an agricultural protection area has no control, including,
without limitation, an adverse result in litigation against the farm or
landowner, death of the owner or a family member that would lead to
unanticipated financial hardships, significant tax liabilities, bankruptcy due
to another person's fraud, or any other illegal activity.
NUISANCES:    A.   Recognizing that Idaho is a right-to-farm state and that
agricultural operations and agricultural facilities pursuant to chapter 45,
title 22, Idaho Code, are protected from nuisance actions if they follow
generally recognized farming practices, a political subdivision shall ensure
that any of its laws or ordinances that define or prohibit a public nuisance
shall exclude agricultural protection areas from its definition or from any
prohibition for any agricultural activity or operation within an agricultural
protection area as long as those agricultural activities or operations follow
generally recognized farming practices.
   B.   In a civil action for nuisance or criminal action for public nuisance,
it is a complete defense if the action involves otherwise lawful agricultural
activities that were:
      1.   Conducted within an agricultural protection area; and
      2.   Not in violation of any federal, state, or local law or regulation
relating to the alleged nuisance and were conducted using generally recognized
farming practices.
PLANNING DIRECTOR: An official appointed by the board who has knowledge in the
practice of planning and zoning or his or her designee or appointee.(Ord. 718,
2-3-2025)
