CITY CODE
of
CAMBRIDGE, IDAHO
1998
Code current through:
Ord. 2-2026, passed 1-12-2026
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Cambridge, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2-2026, passed January 12, 2026. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Cambridge. This City
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the CAMBRIDGE CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1998 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1998 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code. (1998 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to
maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be
returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
City Council. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1998 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1998 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This Section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1998 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference
therein is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part
thereof or any portion adopted by reference therein. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been
changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1998 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Cambridge, County of Washington, State of Idaho.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Cambridge.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the Council of the City of Cambridge.
COUNTY: The County of Washington, State of Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Cambridge".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City shall commence on October 1 of each
year.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
incarceration may be imposed 1 .
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State law
2 .
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Cambridge".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. §§ 18-111 and 18-113A; see subsection 1-4-1B of this Title.
2 2. I.C. §§ 18-111 and 18-113; see subsection 1-4-1A of this Title.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1998
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person
convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code deemed a
misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, and may
be confined in the county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months.
Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition
thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
   B.   Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) and no incarceration may
be imposed.
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses. (Ord. 9-2016, 11-14-2016)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (1998 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1998
Code)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Limits
1-5-2: Corporate Seal
1-5-3: Official Depository
1-5-4: Official Newspaper
1-5-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits shall be as shown and designated on the Official Map on
file in the office of the City Clerk. (1977 Code § 1-11-1)
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Description: The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form
with inner and outer circles. The outer circle shall be one and fifteen-
sixteenth inches (115/16") in diameter, and the inner circle shall be one and
four-sixteenth inches (14/16") in diameter. It shall bear upon the space
between the two (2) circles the words, "Official Seal, City of Cambridge,
Idaho". (1977 Code § 1-14-1; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Adoption: The Seal described in subsection A of this Section is hereby
adopted as the Corporate Seal of the City. (1977 Code § 1-14-2)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL DEPOSITORY:
The City shall designate the U.S. Bank, Cambridge Branch, as the official
depository for City monies and said monies shall be deposited therein in
accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code title 57, chapter 1. (Ord. 2-97,
10-14-1996)
1-5-4: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Record~Reporter (An Imprint of the Adams County Record) shall be designated
as the official newspaper for the City. (1977 Code § 1-13-1; amd. Ord. 3-2020,
3-9-2020)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election; Qualifications; Term
1-6-2: Vacancy In Office
1-6-3: Powers And Duties
1-6-4: Salary
1-6-1: ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM 1 :
   A.   Election; Qualifications: Any person shall be eligible to hold the
office of Mayor who is a qualified elector of the City at the time of his
election and remains a qualified elector during his term of office.
   B.   Term: The term of office of the Mayor shall be for a period of four (4)
years except as otherwise specifically provided. He shall take office at the
time and in the manner provided for installation of Councilmembers. (1977 Code
§
1-5-1)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 50-601.
1-6-2: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In case of a temporary vacancy in the office of Mayor due to absence or
disability, the President of the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor
during such disability or temporary absence, and until the Mayor shall return.
When a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor by reason of death, resignation or
permanent disability, the City Council shall fill the vacancy from within or
without the Council as may be deemed in the best interests of the City, which
appointee shall serve until the next general City election, at which election a
Mayor shall be elected for the full four (4) year term. (1977 Code §
1-5-2)
1-6-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Mayor, the superintending and administrative officer of
the City, shall devote so much of his time to the duties of his office as an
efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. He shall from time to
time give the Council such information and recommend such measures as he may
deem beneficial to the City. He shall examine the grounds of all complaints
against any of the officers of the City to determine existence of a violation
or neglect of duty, and report the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for
the removal of said officer, to the Council. He shall require that every
officer, on the expiration of his term of office or resignation or removal from
the same, deliver to his successor all monies, books, papers, maps, plats,
furniture, fixtures, apparatus, machinery, tools and instruments and
appurtenances belonging to such office. He shall perform all other duties
imposed by the laws of the State.
   B.   Sign Contracts: The Mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name
officially for and on behalf of the City on all contracts, including deeds,
bonds, bills, notes, obligations and other agreements, documents and papers to
which the City is a party, and to require that the conditions in the said
instruments are faithfully performed and to borrow money on the credit of the
City when authorized by the Council.
   C.   Veto Power: The Mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance
passed by the Council; provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the Mayor shall
be passed over his veto by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of
the Council elected, notwithstanding the veto, and should the Mayor neglect or
refuse to sign any ordinance and return the same with his objection in writing
at the next regular meeting of the Council, the same shall become law without
his signature.
   D.   Accounts And Reports Of Officers: The Mayor shall have the power, when
he deems it necessary, to require any officer of the City to exhibit his
accounts or other papers, and to make reports to the Council in writing
touching any subject or matter he may require pertaining to his office.
   E.   Police Power: The Mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within
five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the City for the enforcement of any
health or quarantine ordinance and regulation thereof, and shall have
jurisdiction in all matters, excepting taxation, within the City's impact area.
   F.   Require Aid: The mayor is hereby authorized to call on every inhabitant
in the city over twenty one (21) years of age to aid in enforcing the laws.
   G.   Other Powers: The mayor shall have all other powers granted by the laws
of the state of Idaho. (1977 Code §
1-5-3; amd. 1998 Code)
1-6-4: SALARY:
The mayor shall have and receive as wages and salaries for duties performed by
him as such mayor the sum of one thousand nine hundred eighty dollars
($1,980.00) per annum, payable in equal monthly installments of one hundred
sixty five dollars ($165.00); provided, however, that attendance at the council
meetings is a prerequisite to the mayor's receipt of each monthly salary. (Ord.
3-2007, 6-11-2007)
CHAPTER 7
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election; Term
1-7-2: Vacancy In Office
1-7-3: Council Meetings
1-7-4: Appointment Of Officers
1-7-5: Duties
1-7-6: Ordinances
1-7-7: Salary
1-7-1: ELECTION; TERM 1 :
There shall be elected four (4) council members from the city at large, each to
serve for a term of four (4) years, and until their successor is elected and
qualified. (1977 Code §
1-6-1)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-702.
1-7-2: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In the event an office of the council shall become vacant, through death,
moving out of the city, or for any other cause, the mayor shall appoint, with
the approval of the council, a resident to fill the unexpired portion of the
term until the next general election when the unexpired term shall be filled.
(1977 Code §
1-6-2; amd. 1998 Code)
1-7-3: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular: The city council shall hold regular meetings at least once
each month on the second Monday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   B.   Special: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by any three
(3) members of the council; provided, that a notice of such special meetings
must be delivered to the members at least twenty four (24) hours before the
scheduled time of the meeting. (1977 Code §
1-6-3)
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the council shall be open to the public;
except, that executive sessions may be closed upon a vote of one-half (1/2)
plus one of the council members recorded in the minutes of the meeting by
individual vote pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-2345. (1998 Code)
   D.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a
quorum and a majority must be present before the council may conduct business
in the name of the city.
   E.   Attendance: The mayor shall be empowered to enforce the attendance of
members at regular meetings. (1977 Code § 1-6- 4)
1-7-4: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The city council shall appoint a clerk, treasurer, attorney, auditor, city
engineer, public works superintendent and law enforcement agency, and such
other officers and employees as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the business of the city. All such appointive officers and
employees shall hold office or employment for the term of their appointment
unless sooner removed by the council. (Ord. 4-2011, 9-12-2011)
1-7-5: DUTIES:
The members of the city council, the legislative and policy making branch of
the city government, shall devote so much of their time to the duties of their
office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. They shall
attend all meetings of the council unless lawfully excused therefrom and
perform all duties which by the nature of their office they should reasonably
perform, such as the passing of ordinances, resolutions and other laws and the
investigation and study of work done for the city, according to the character
of committees upon which they may severally be appointed. (1977 Code § 1-6-6)
1-7-6: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Ordinance Passage And Style: All ordinances of the city shall be
presented and voted upon in the manner and style and shall be subject to the
terms and conditions of Idaho Code section 50-901 et seq. (1998 Code)
   B.   Publication: All ordinances shall be in force and take effect from and
after their passage, approval, and publication. Publication shall be made by
written or printed handbill posted in at least five (5) public places in the
city, or by being inserted in one issue of the official newspaper published in
the city 1  in accordance with provisions of Idaho Code section 50-213. (1977
Code § 1-13-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-5-4 of this title.
1-7-7: SALARY:
Every city council member shall have and receive as wages and salaries for
duties performed by such person as a council member the sum of one thousand two
hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per annum, payable in equal monthly installments of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) each; provided, however, that attendance at the
council meetings is a prerequisite to each council member's receipt of each
monthly salary. (Ord. 3-2007, 6-11-2007)
CHAPTER 8
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Bonds Of Officers
1-8-2: City Clerk
1-8-1: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Required: Certain officers shall give bonds in favor of the City with
two (2) or more sureties, or surety bonds may be furnished in lieu of personal
bonds as follows:
      Clerk       $10,000.00
      Treasurer   10,000.00
   B.   Furnished By City: Bonds so furnished in accordance with the provisions
of this Section shall be furnished at the expense of the City. (1977 Code §
1-8-1)
1-8-2: CITY CLERK:
   A.   Appointment: The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall
appoint a City Clerk, who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment
or until such time as he may be removed by the City Council. (1977 Code §
1-7-1)
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Custodian Of Seal: The Clerk shall be custodian of the City Seal 1
and affix the same to documents as provided by law.
      2.   Attend Council Meetings; Keep Minutes And Records: The Clerk shall
attend all sessions of the City Council, keep a correct journal and shall keep
in a separate book a record of ordinances passed by the Council and of the
titles of such ordinances; and all ordinances not published in book form shall
be carefully indexed alphabetically. The Clerk shall see that each ordinance is
properly recorded and that it is properly prepared for insertion in its proper
place in each copy of this City Code.
      3.   Report To Council:
         a.   The Clerk shall prepare and present to the Council at its regular
meeting each month a full and complete statement of the financial transactions
of his office during the month preceding, which said statement shall set forth
all receipts for licenses issued; money received with applications for licenses
which are to come before the Council; all other funds received by him as Clerk
and said report shall give a detailed explanation of disbursements including a
statement of the aggregate of warrants of each fund issued, of warrants
redeemed during the month and warrants outstanding against each fund at the
close of such month.
         b.   He shall also at the close of each fiscal year present to the
City Council an annual report covering the operations of the entire year and
shall itemize each and every expense thereof.
         c.   The Clerk shall also make such additional reports and furnish
such other data from the records and files of his office as may be required by
the Mayor or City Council.
      4.   Claims For Damages: All claims for damages against the City must be
filed with the Clerk within six (6) months after the time when such claim for
damages shall have accrued, specifying the time, place, character and cause of
said damages. No action shall be maintained against the City for any claim for
damages until the same has been presented to the City Council, and until sixty
(60) days have elapsed after such presentation. The allowance of any or all
damage claims against such City shall be by ordinance, and not otherwise. (1977
Code §
1-7-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-5-2 of this Title.
CHAPTER 9
FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Establish Fees By Resolution
1-9-1: ESTABLISH FEES BY RESOLUTION:
The city is hereby authorized from time to time to establish by resolution, the
following fees:
Rezoning requests
Annexations
Conditional uses
Variances
Building permits
Occupancy permits
Zoning permits
Subdivision permits
Home occupation permits
Mobile home permits
Other permits as conditions may require
(Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
CHAPTER 10
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Factors Considered
1-10-2: Area Of Impact Defined; Map
1-10-3: Changes In Outermost Boundary
1-10-4: Jurisdiction
1-10-5: Building Permits
1-10-6: Planning And Zoning, Subdivisions, Variances, Notice And Hearings
1-10-7: Amendment And Renegotiations Of Plan Policies And Ordinances
1-10-8: Penalty
1-10-1: FACTORS CONSIDERED:
The following factors were considered by the Washington County planning
commission and the mayor and council of the city of Cambridge, and the board of
commissioners of Washington County, Idaho, in the establishment of an area of
city impact:
   A.   Trade area.
   B.   Geological factors.
   C.   Areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed to the city of
Cambridge in the future. (Ord. 12-88, 7-11-1988)
1-10-2: AREA OF IMPACT DEFINED; MAP:
   A.   Area Defined: The “Cambridge area of impact” is defined as that
unincorporated land mass which lies contiguous to the city of Cambridge, Idaho,
having as its closest boundary to the city, the city limits of said city, as
they now exist or as they may be altered by future annexation of land to the
city of Cambridge.
   B.   Map: A map of the described area is attached to ordinance No. 13-2025
as exhibit A, on file in the office of the city clerk, and incorporated herein
the same as though set out in full. (Ord. 12-88, 7-11-1988; amd. Ord. 13-2025,
11-10-2025)
1-10-3: CHANGES IN OUTERMOST BOUNDARY:
In the event that the city of Cambridge or the county of Washington desires to
alter the outermost boundary of the city impact area, or to change the
jurisdiction over said area, they shall do so by renegotiation in accordance
with Idaho Code section 67-6526. (Ord. 12-88, 7-11-1988)
1-10-4: JURISDICTION:
Jurisdiction of zoning, subdivision, building or other matters set out in the
local planning act of 1975 pursuant to title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code remains
vested in Washington County, Idaho. (Ord. 5-2004, 1-10-2005)
1-10-5: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building shall be constructed in the Cambridge impact area without first
obtaining a building permit from the Washington County building official. (Ord.
5-2004, 1-10-2005)
1-10-6: PLANNING AND ZONING, SUBDIVISIONS, VARIANCES, NOTICE AND HEARINGS:
   A.   Excluding building permits, all permits required for planning, zoning,
subdivision, variances, conditional uses and any other matters covered by the
land use planning act of 1975, within the Cambridge city impact area, shall
first be submitted to the city of Cambridge for such action as the mayor and
council may deem appropriate. After final action by the city and upon
recommendation to the board of county commissioners by the city, the board
shall approve, disapprove or remand for further consideration any request for
action. The board of county commissioners shall act upon any recommendation
within forty five (45) days of a recommendation being forwarded. The decision
of the Washington County commissioners shall be based upon regulations and
ordinances negotiated between the city and the board and adopted by the board.
   B.   Until such time as the city of Cambridge and Washington County adopt
different regulations as to zoning, subdivision, and building requirements, the
Washington County ordinances in effect at that time shall be controlling within
the city impact area. (Ord. 5-2004, 1-10-2005)
1-10-7: AMENDMENT AND RENEGOTIATIONS OF PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   Plan Amendment: Any proposal or application which is submitted which
would alter, amend or affect the Washington County comprehensive plan in the
city impact area shall first be referred to the city for hearing and review.
The county shall hold no public hearings nor take any action upon any
application for a period of forty five (45) days after it has been submitted to
the city. The city shall be allowed that period of time to submit comment on
the proposal, and city comment shall be made part of the official record of the
county during any hearing on such proposal.
   B.   Renegotiations: In accordance with section 67-6526(d), Idaho Code, as
amended, either the city or the county may request, in writing, the
renegotiation of the plan or ordinances. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of
such request by either party, arrangements shall be made for a meeting between
the two (2) jurisdictions. (Ord. 5-2004, 1-10-2005)
1-10-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to
comply with any of the terms and conditions hereof shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or jail of not more than ninety (90) days, or both a fine and
imprisonment. The Washington County prosecuting attorney shall have the
authority and responsibility to prosecute such violations.
(Ord. 5-2004, 1-10-2005)
CHAPTER 11
MUSEUM COMMITTEE
SECTION:
1-11-1: Creation; Purpose
1-11-2: Appointment
1-11-3: Compensation
1-11-4: Vacancies
1-11-5: Bylaws
1-11-1: CREATION; PURPOSE:
   There is hereby created a Museum Committee. The purpose of the Museum
Committee is to supervise a permanent museum for the collection, preservation
and exhibition of artifacts relating to Cambridge and the surrounding area. The
committee serves as the administrative staff for the museum, making decisions
about fund raising, display, special events and other areas vital to preserving
the heritage of the area.
(Ord. 3-2025, 2-10-2025)
1-11-2: APPOINTMENT:
   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint committee
members.
(Ord. 3-2025, 2-10-2025)
1-11-3: COMPENSATION:
   All members of the committee shall serve and act without compensation,
except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed, and the city
shall purchase the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the
committee to properly transact and attend to its business as shown in the
budget.
(Ord. 3-2025, 2-10-2025)
1-11-4: VACANCIES:
   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified
person to fill the unexpired term of any at-large Commission member in the
event of a vacancy.
(Ord. 3-2025, 2-10-2025)
1-11-5: BYLAWS:
   The committee shall adopt bylaws with which to govern themselves. These
bylaws shall be ratified by the city council and shall act as the rules of the
committee.
(Ord. 3-2025, 2-10-2025)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Application For License Or Permit
3-1-2: Persons Subject To License
3-1-3: Forms
3-1-4: Signatures
3-1-5: Investigations
3-1-6: Term Of License
3-1-7: Fees
3-1-8: Posting Of License
3-1-9: Building And Premises
3-1-10: Change Of Location
3-1-11: Frontage Consents
3-1-12: Inspections
3-1-13: Nuisances
3-1-14: Revocation Of License Or Permit; Hearing
3-1-15: Appeal Procedure
33-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made
in writing to the City Clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be
paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be
required by the issuing official. (1977 Code § 5-1-1)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the City. (1977 Code § 5-1-2)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and application therefor, shall be prepared
and kept on file by the City Clerk. (1977 Code § 5-1-3)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued, in the absence of any provision to the contrary,
shall bear the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk. (1977 Code § 5-1-4)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   Investigation Of Application; Time Limit: Upon the receipt of an
application for a license or permit where laws of the City necessitate an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the
City Clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such
investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt.
   B.   Report Of Investigating Official: The officer charged with the duty of
making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable
or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof.
   C.   Authority Of Certain Officials: The Southwest District Health
Department shall make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to such
licenses in the connection with the care and handling of food and the
preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease. For the protection of
health, the Building Official shall make or cause to be made any such
inspection relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All
other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
County Sheriff or by some other officer designated by the Mayor. (1977 Code §
5-1-5; amd. 1998 Code)
3-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
   A.   Calendar Year: All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of
the calendar year, where no provision to the contrary is made. (1977 Code § 5-
1-6; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Issuance Of Statements: The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of
the City a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the
licensee, if an annual, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration.
Provided, that failure to send out such notice, or failure of the licensee to
receive it shall not excuse the licensee from failure to obtain a new license,
or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation
without a license. (1977 Code § 5-1-6)
3-1-7: FEES:
   A.   Payment Of Fees: In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary,
all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid to the City Clerk,
in advance, at the time application therefor is made.
   B.   Proration Of Fee: When an applicant has not engaged in the business
until after the expiration of more than six (6) months of the current license
year, the license fee shall be in the sum of one-half (1/2) of the fee
specified for the entire year.
   C.   General Fund: All license fees shall be deposited to the General Fund.
   D.   Specific Fees Enumerated: Licenses shall be required for the following
activities and businesses upon payment of the fee indicated for the specified
time:
      Amusements   $10.00 per day
      Peddlers and solicitors 1    25.00 per day
   (1977 Code § 5-1-14)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 4 of this Title for solicitors.
3-1-8: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City
to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business. (1977 Code § 5-1-13)
3-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
   A.   Compliance With City Requirements: No license shall be issued for the
conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing, or act,
if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply
with the requirements of the City.
   B.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: No such license or permit shall be
issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would
involve a violation of the zoning regulations of the City (Title 10 of this
Code). (1977 Code § 5-1-7)
3-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the City Clerk; and further provided
that, such location is in compliance with the building, zoning and frontage
consent requirements of this Code. (1977 Code § 5-1-8)
3-1-11: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
   A.   Filing Petition: Whenever the consent of the adjoining or neighboring
owners is required as a prerequisite to the conduct of any business or
occupation, or the location of any establishment, such consent must be obtained
by securing the necessary signatures to a written consent petition. Such
petition shall be filed with the City Clerk when signed.
   B.   Petition Renewal Not Required: Consents once given and filed shall not
be withdrawn; and such petitions need not be renewed for the continuous conduct
of the same business, whether by the same proprietor or not.
   C.   Authentic Names On Petition: It shall be unlawful to forge any name to
such a petition or to represent falsely that the names thereon have been
properly placed thereon if such is not the fact.
   D.   Affidavit Of Petitioner: Each consent when filed shall be accompanied
by the affidavit of the person securing the signatures that each signature
appearing therein was properly secured and written on; and that the petition
contains the necessary number of signatures required by this Code.
   E.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: The frontage consent requirements
contained in this Code shall not be construed to amend or change any zoning
provision of the City; and no such provision shall be construed as permitting
the erection of a structure or building, or the conduct of a business or the
commission of any act in any location where such structure, building, business
or act is or are prohibited by any zoning law of the City. (1977 Code § 5-1-9)
3-1-12: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Right Of Entry: Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided
for or required by Code, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with
any Code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
City who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable
time that admission is requested.
   B.   Provide Samples: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any Code provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is
governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
City requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for
such analysis upon request.
   C.   Refusal To Allow Inspection Or Provide Sample; License Revocation: In
addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Council may revoke the
license of any licensed business in the City whose proprietor or owner refuses
to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such
inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate
sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee
while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection. Provided, that
no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon
the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the City,
stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to
make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1977 Code § 5-1-11)
3-1-13: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to
a nuisance in fact. (1977 Code § 5-1-10)
3-1-14: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the Mayor and City
Council during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the
licensee or permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the
subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may
be in addition to any fine imposed. The Mayor and City Council shall be
authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the
premises, and the suspension of any business license or permit for a period not
to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   A.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the City officials have so acted,
the Mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not
the license or permit should be revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision and
recommendation.
   D.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the City, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Mayor
and City Council after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of
this Section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or State law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the City;
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized City officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in the City Code. (1998 Code)
3-1-15: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the City to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the City's decision to the City Council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the Mayor within five (5)
days of the action of the City which is appealed.
   B.   Council Consideration: The City Council shall consider the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be
entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The Council shall act on
the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the City or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which
the City has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the City had
revoked. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Use Of Alcoholic Beverages In Public Places
3-2-1: USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Definitions:
    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Any beverage with an alcoholic content in excess of
three percent (3%), and which said beverage shall be in either bottle, metal or
synthetic containers of any kind.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any of the roadways, intersections or other property
belonging to the City of Cambridge, including City parks, which said property
is within the corporate limits of the City of Cambridge.
   B.   Purpose: The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted in this Chapter 2 is declared as a matter of legislative
determination to be in the public interest, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted in pursuance of
and for the purpose of securing and promoting public health, convenience,
safety and welfare and the peace and quiet of the City and its inhabitants.
   C.   Use Of Alcoholic Beverages In Public Places Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any person to consume or carry in open containers, any alcoholic
beverage upon the public property hereinabove described within the corporate
limits of the City. (Ord. 4-81, 7-13-1981)
ARTICLE A. BEER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Definitions
3-2A-2: Licensing Requirements; Issuance Or Denial
3-2A-3: Investigation Of Applicant
3-2A-4: Qualifications For License
3-2A-5: Fees
3-2A-6: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-7: Restrictions Concerning Minors
3-2A-8: Revocation Of License
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the
consumer. (1977 Code § 5-5-1; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2A-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
beer without first obtaining a proper license. (1977 Code § 5-5-2)
   B.   License Term; Fee Collection: All licenses shall be granted by the
Mayor and City Council for a period of one year beginning January 1 and ending
December 31. A full year's license fee shall be collected after January 1.
   C.   Grant Or Denial Of License; Hearing: The City Council shall grant or
deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the
City Clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be
afforded a hearing according to Idaho Code section 23-1016. Whenever the Mayor
and City Council denies an application, they shall specify in writing;
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   D.   Record And Minutes Of Proceedings: In all cases where the City Council
is considering applications for licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a
transcribable verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made. If the applicant
for a license, transfer or renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record
of the proceedings shall be kept for a period of not less than six (6) months
after a final decision on the matter. Upon written request and within the time
period provided for retention of the record, any person may have the record
transcribed at his expense. The City Council shall also provide for the keeping
of the minutes of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as
otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2-84, 12-12-1983)
3-2A-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation by
the County Sheriff's Department of all applicants hereunder. After
investigation, the application will be forwarded to the City Council with a
recommendation from the County Sheriff. If the County Sheriff recommends that
the application be denied, he shall state in writing: (Ord. 2-84, 12-12-1983;
amd. 1998 Code)
   A.   The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
   B.   The reason for the denial; and
   C.   The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 2-84, 12-12-1983)
3-2A-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Nonissuance To Certain Persons: No retail license shall be issued to
any applicant who:
      1.   Is not a bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of
the United States or has not been a bona fide resident of the State for a
period of one year prior to the date of application; provided, that if the
applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens and at least
one thereof, or the actual manager therefor, shall have been such resident and
if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be qualified to do
business in the State, and the manager of such business place shall be such
citizen and shall have been such resident.
      2.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or
spouse of which has, been convicted of the violation of any laws of the State
of Idaho or of the United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale
of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years
forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer
charges of any such violation.
      3.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer of which has, been
convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed
any sentence of confinement therefor within five (5) years.
   B.   License Revocation For Noncompliance: A retail licensee must continue
throughout the license period to have all of the foregoing qualifications and
none of the foregoing disqualifications, and for failure therein upon proof
thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued,
and in writing sent by the United States registered mail notifying each of the
other issuers of the retailer's license to such licensee, stating sufficient
facts for identification of the licensee and the grounds and date of
revocation. (1977 Code § 5-5-4)
3-2A-5: FEES:
   A.   Bottled Or Canned Beer: The annual fees for the sale of bottled or
canned beer shall be as follows: (Ord. 5-85, 12-10-1985, eff. 12-10-1985; amd.
1998 Code)
      1.   Consumed Off Premises: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the sale of
bottled or canned beer, when it is not consumed on the premises where sold.
      2.   Consumed On Premises: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the sale of
bottled or canned beer, when it is consumed on the premises where sold.
      3.   Draught Beer Consumed On Premises: One hundred dollars ($100.00) for
the sale of draught, canned or bottled beer when it is consumed on the premises
where sold.
   B.   License Transfer: The fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for beer
license transfers regardless what time of the calendar year the transfer is
made. (Ord. 5-85, 12-10-1985, eff. 12-10-1985)
   C.   Proration Of Fee: If the license is purchased for less than one year,
the license fee shall be prorated to six (6) months only. (1998 Code)
3-2A-6: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (1977 Code § 5-5-6; amd. 1998
Code)
3-2A-7: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer beer to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to frequent, loiter in or about or patronize any beer
dispensary and it shall likewise be unlawful for any owner of such beer
dispensary or his employees to permit such person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to be in or to be employed in such dispensary. (1977 Code § 5-5-7;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2A-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any
license for just cause. When any license is revoked, the licensee shall have
the privilege of appearing before the City Council to appeal such revocation 1
. Any conduct or act on the part of the licensee which may be sufficient cause
for revocation of the license must be brought to the attention of the City
Council. (1977 Code § 5-5-8)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 3-2A-2C of this Article.
ARTICLE B. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Definitions
3-2B-2: License Required
3-2B-3: License Fees
3-2B-4: Application For License; Requirements
3-2B-5: Investigation Of Application
3-2B-6: Location Restrictions
3-2B-7: Sale To Licensee By State Liquor Dispensary
3-2B-8: Sale By The Drink Only
3-2B-9: Advertising Prohibited
3-2B-10: Hours Of Sale
3-2B-11: Unlawful Acts
3-2B-12: Peace Officer Access To Premises
3-2B-13: Regulations Concerning Minors
3-2B-14: Premises Operated As Restaurants
3-2B-15: Premises Requirements
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this Article shall be given the
following interpretation:
CITY COUNCIL: The Council of the City of Cambridge.
COUNTY SHERIFF: The law enforcement officer for the City of Cambridge.
GAMING: Any and all gambling or games of chance.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under the
laws of the State.
LICENSE: A license issued by the City under the provisions of the State
statutes.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued.
LIQUOR: All kinds of liquor sold by and in a State liquor store.
PREMISES: The building in which the sale of liquor by the drink at retail is
authorized.
RULES AND REGULATIONS: All rules and regulations made and promulgated by the
City Council.
STATE LIQUOR STORE: A liquor store or distributor established under and
pursuant to the laws of the State of Idaho for the package sale of liquor at
retail. (1977 Code § 5-6-1; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell liquor by the drink unless a license has been
obtained, and there is compliance with all rules and regulations concerning the
licensing and operation of a place of business where liquor is sold. (1977 Code
§ 5-6-2)
3-2B-3: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Annual Fee: Each licensee shall pay an annual license fee of two
hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) and said license shall expire at two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. on January 1 of each year. (Ord. 4-85, 12-10-1985, eff. 12-
10-1985; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Transfer Fee: All liquor license transfers shall be charged an amount
of ten dollars ($10.00) regardless what time of the calendar year the transfer
is made.
   C.   Proration Of Fee Authorized: Any licensee who operates for only a
portion of a year may have his license fee prorated from the date he commences
operation to the end of the calendar year, but in no event for less than six
(6) months. (Ord. 4-85, 12-10-1985, eff. 12-10-1985)
3-2B-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application Filed With Clerk: Before there shall be any lawful sale of
liquor by the drink, an application by the proposed licensee must be made for
such license and filed with the city clerk in the form and manner herein
provided.
   B.   Contents Of Application: Such application shall provide for the name of
the applicant, the location of the proposed business, and such other
information as may be prescribed and required by the city council.
   C.   State License Required: At the time said application is filed, the
applicant shall also present a copy of an application for a state license and
also the license issued by the state for the sale of liquor by the drink at
retail, and no license will be issued until a license has first been issued by
the state.
   D.   Council Approval: All applications shall be filed with the clerk and
referred to the council for approval.
   E.   Payment Of Fee; Issuance: The license fee shall be paid to the clerk at
the time of making application and, upon approval of said application by the
council, the clerk shall issue and deliver the license to the applicant. (1977
Code § 5-6-4)
3-2B-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Investigation:
      1.   Upon receipt of application for a license accompanied by the license
fee, the county sheriff, within ninety (90) days thereafter, shall cause to be
made a thorough investigation of all matters pertaining thereto and report his
findings to the city council.
      2.   In making the investigation required by this article, the county
sheriff shall have the power to investigate and examine the books and records
of the licensee and any person having a financial interest in any business to
be conducted on the licensed premises.
   B.   Council Action: The council shall then act upon said application
according to the facts presented and either approve or disapprove the
application. Upon approval by the council, the clerk shall then issue said
license; or, upon disapproval by the council, the clerk shall notify the
applicant and return the license fee, less the costs of investigation, to the
applicant. (1977 Code § 5-6-5; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-6: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for any premises in any neighborhood which is
predominantly residential or within three hundred feet (300') of any public
school, church, or any other place of worship, measured in a straight line to
the nearest entrance to the licensed premises, except with the approval of the
city council; provided, that this limitation shall not apply to any duly
licensed premises that at the time of licensing did not come within the
restricted area. (1977 Code § 5-6-6)
3-2B-7: SALE TO LICENSEE BY STATE LIQUOR DISPENSARY:
All liquor sold by any licensee shall be purchased from the Idaho liquor
dispensary through its regular retail stores and distributors at the posted
price thereof. The state liquor dispensary is hereby authorized and directed to
make such sales for cash to be paid at the time of purchase upon a special
permit issued to such licensee in such form as shall be prescribed by the
director of the department of law enforcement of the state. The posted price as
used herein shall mean the retail price of such liquor as fixed and determined
by the state liquor dispensary. (1977 Code § 5-6-7; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-8: SALE BY THE DRINK ONLY:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, keep for sale, dispense, give
away, or otherwise dispose of any liquor in the original containers or
otherwise than by retail sale by the drink. (1977 Code § 5-6-8)
3-2B-9: ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to adopt or use any name, sign or
advertisement outside of the licensed premises advertising the handling or sale
of liquor. (1977 Code § 5-6-20)
3-2B-10: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed
premises during the following hours:
   A.   Christmas from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the
following day.
   B.   On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. (Ord. 5-2013, 11-11-2013)
3-2B-11: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
No licensee or his or its employed agents, servants or bartenders shall sell,
deliver or give away, or cause or permit to be sold, delivered, or given away,
any liquor to:
   A.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   B.   Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated.
   C.   A habitual drunkard.
   D.   An interdicted person.
   E.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or other person, who
knowingly misrepresents his or her qualifications for the purpose of obtaining
liquor from such licensee shall be equally guilty with such licensee of a
misdemeanor. (1977 Code § 5-6-13; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-12: PEACE OFFICER ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All peace officers appointed by the state or county shall have free access at
all times to the licensed premises, and any information touching the manner and
method of the operation of said premises or the sale of said liquor shall be
submitted to the city council for appropriate action. (1977 Code § 5-6-14; amd.
1998 Code)
3-2B-13: REGULATIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
   A.   Loitering By Minors: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years
shall enter, remain in or loiter in or about any place licensed for the sale of
liquor by the drink at retail; nor shall any licensee or any person in charge
thereof, or on duty while employed by the licensee therein, permit or allow any
person under the age specified to remain in or loiter in or about such place.
(1977 Code § 5-6-15; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Exceptions: It shall not be unlawful nor shall subsection A of this
section be construed to restrict any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years from being: (1977 Code § 5-6-16; amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   Upon the premises of any restaurant, notwithstanding that such
premises may also be licensed for the sale of liquor by the drink or for the
sale of beer for consumption on the premises or that alcoholic beverages, or
beer, or both, are prepared, mixed or dispensed and served and consumed
therein.
      2.   In any building, a part or portions of which is used as a place
where liquor is sold by the drink, provided such place is separated or
partitioned from the remainder of said building and access to such place
through a doorway or doorways or other means of ingress can be controlled to
prevent persons under the age specified herein from entering therein.
      3.   In any baseball park, sports arena or fairgrounds; notwithstanding,
that such premises or any portion thereof may be licensed for the sale of beer
for consumption on the premises or that beer is dispensed and served and
consumed therein. (1977 Code § 5-6-16)
   C.   Posting Restrictions: Every licensee herein referred to shall keep a
sign conspicuously posted over or near each entrance to any place from which
persons under twenty one (21) years are herein restricted giving public notice
of such fact. The wording and size of such signs shall be in accordance with
such regulations as the county sheriff may prescribe. (1977 Code § 5-6-17; amd.
1998 Code)
3-2B-14: PREMISES OPERATED AS RESTAURANTS:
Every applicant for a state license for the sale of liquor by the drink or for
the sale of beer for consumption on the premises claiming that the premises for
which such license is sought constitute and are operated as a restaurant shall,
with each application for state license and with each application for renewal
of license, file with the county sheriff a statement under oath setting forth
that such premises constitute and are operated as such restaurant. Upon
issuance of a state license for the sale of liquor by the drink or for the sale
of beer for consumption on the premises, for premises constituting and operated
as a restaurant, for the licensee which has filed the sworn statement herein
required, the county sheriff shall endorse on the face of the license the fact
that it has been issued to a restaurant. Unless such sworn statement shall have
been filed with the county sheriff and his said endorsement shall appear on the
face of the license, the restriction contained in subsection 3-2B-13A of this
article shall apply, notwithstanding that such premises may in fact constitute
and be operated as a restaurant, and the posting of signs as provided for in
subsection 3-2B-13C of this Article shall be required. The filing of any false
statement sworn to as herein required shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of license. If the premises, licensed as a restaurant under this
Chapter, subsequently ceases to meet the qualifications of a restaurant, the
restrictions contained in subsection 3-2B-13A of this Article shall apply and
the posting of signs as provided for in subsection 3-2B-13C shall be required.
In such event, the licensee shall advise the County Sheriff, by mail, that his
premises no longer constitute a restaurant, so that the certificate of
endorsement may be recalled. (1977 Code § 5-6-18; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2B-15: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conformance With Regulations: Every licensee must conform to all
regulations and laws of the State of Idaho and the provisions of this Article.
   B.   View Of Premises: Liquor by the drink shall be sold only on premises
where there is a full and unobstructed view from the outside and nothing shall
be placed on or over the windows or doors to obstruct said view.
   C.   Lighting; Sanitary Inspection: All premises shall be adequately lighted
and subject to periodic sanitary inspection.
   D.   Gambling And Gambling Devices Prohibited: No gambling of any kind or
character shall be operated upon said premises and no gambling devices shall be
maintained thereon. (1977 Code § 5-6-19)
ARTICLE C. WINE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2C-1: License Required
3-2C-2: Application For License; Review
3-2C-3: Qualifications For License
3-2C-4: Fees
3-2C-5: Restrictions Concerning Minors
3-2C-6: Revocation Of License
3-2C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of wine without first obtaining
a proper license. (1977 Code § 5-7-1)
3-2C-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; REVIEW:
   A.   Contents: Application for a retail wine license shall be made under
oath to the City Clerk and the application shall show that the applicant
possesses all of the qualifications required by this Article.
   B.   Sheriff Review And Council Approval: Each application shall be
forwarded, after proper and adequate investigation by the County Sheriff, to
the City Council for approval or disapproval. (1977 Code § 5-7-2; amd. 1998
Code)
3-2C-3: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Nonissuance To Certain Persons: No retail license shall be issued to
any applicant who:
      1.   Is not a bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of
the United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the State for a
period of one year prior to the date of application; provided, that if the
applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens and at least
one thereof, or the actual manager therefor, shall have been such resident and
if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be qualified to do
business in the State, and the manager of such business place shall be such
citizen and shall have been such resident.
      2.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or
spouse of which has been convicted of a violation of any laws of the State or
of the United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic
beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years forfeited or
suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer charges of any
such violation.
      3.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer of which has been
convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed
any sentence of confinement therefor within five (5) years.
   B.   License Revocation For Noncompliance: A retail licensee must continue
throughout the license period to have all of the foregoing qualifications and
none of the foregoing disqualifications, and for failure therein upon proof
thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued,
and in writing sent by the United States registered mail notifying each of the
other issuers of a retailer's license to such licensee, stating sufficient
facts for identification of the licensee and the grounds and date of
revocation. (1977 Code § 5-7-3)
3-2C-4: FEES:
   A.   Bottled Wine: The fee for the sale of bottled wine shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for the sale of bottled wine, when it is not consumed on the
premises where sold.
   B.   License Transfer: The fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for
wine license transfers regardless what time of the calendar year the transfer
is made.
   C.   Proration Of Fee: If the license is purchased for less than one year,
the license fee shall be prorated to six (6) months only. (Ord. 6-85, 12-10-
1985, eff. 12-10-1985)
3-2C-5: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
   A.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may purchase, consume
or possess wine.
   B.   No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years. (1977 Code § 5-7-5; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2C-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any
license for just cause. When any license is revoked, the licensee shall have
the privilege of appearing before the City Council to appeal such revocation 1
. Any conduct or act on the part of the licensee which may be sufficient cause
for revocation of the license must be brought to the attention of the City
Council. (1977 Code § 5-7-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 3-2A-2C of this Chapter.
CHAPTER 3
BILLPOSTING AND HANDBILLS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Billposting Prohibited
3-3-2: Littering Public Thoroughfares Prohibited
3-3-3: Posting On Fences, Walls Or Poles
3-3-1: BILLPOSTING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the distribution or attaching
of any signs, bills, pictures or advertising matter on City property. (1977
Code §
5-2-1; amd. 1998 Code)
3-3-2: LITTERING PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public
thoroughfares any handbills, poster, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein
shall be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public thoroughfares
or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere or prevent
the posting of notices required by law to be posted. (1977 Code §
5-2-3)
3-3-3: POSTING ON FENCES, WALLS OR POLES:
   A.   Consent Of Property Owner: It shall be unlawful for any person to post,
paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice or other advertising matter to any
fence, wall or building or other property until first obtaining the consent of
the owner of such property.
   B.   Posting On Poles Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notices or advertising matter to any
telegraph, telephone, electric or other such poles. (1977 Code §
5-2-4)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: License Required; Exceptions
3-4-3: License Fees
3-4-4: Exhibition Of License Required
3-4-5: Receipts For Orders
3-4-6: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
3-4-7: Revocation Of License
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
A "solicitor", within the meaning of this Chapter, is defined to be any person
who goes from house to house, or from place to place, within the City taking
orders for, or offering to take orders for goods, wares, or merchandise, or any
article for immediate or future delivery, or for services to be performed
immediately or in the future, or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of
any article or thing whatsoever, immediately or for future delivery. (1977 Code
§
5-4-1)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a
solicitor within the meaning and application of this Chapter without first
securing a license so to do, from the City Clerk.
   B.   Exceptions: The exceptions from the provisions of this Chapter are
traveling salesmen doing business as representatives of established firms and
selling wholesale to an established business within the corporate limits, and
persons soliciting for the sale of newspapers, religious tracts, milk and
agricultural or farm products. The exception of newspapers does not include
magazines and periodical. Also excepted are persons who fulfill the
qualifications of a legal voter in general elections in the City. (1977 Code §
5-4-2)
3-4-3: LICENSE FEES:
"Solicitors" as defined in Section
3-4-1 of this Chapter shall be subject to the fees listed in Section
3-1-7 of this Title. (1977 Code §
5-4-5)
3-4-4: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Exhibit License Upon Request: Solicitors and canvassers are required to
exhibit their license at the request of any citizen.
   B.   Duty Of County Sheriff: It shall be the duty of the County Sheriff to
require any person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such
officer to be duly licensed, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's license
and to enforce the provisions of this Chapter against any person found to be
violating the same. (1977 Code § 5-4-7; amd. 1998 Code)
3-4-5: RECEIPTS FOR ORDERS:
All orders taken by a licensed solicitor shall be in writing in duplicate,
stating the terms thereof, and the amount paid in advance, and one copy shall
be given to the purchaser at the time of the taking of said order. (1977 Code §
5-4-4)
3-4-6: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of "soliciting", as
defined in Section
3-4-1 of this Chapter, or any person pretending to be a solicitor, to ring the
bell or knock at the door of any residence or dwelling bearing the sign "No
Solicitors", or solicit or pretend to solicit in any building wherein or
whereon the words "No Solicitors" or words of similar import are painted or
affixed so as to be exposed to public view. (1977 Code § 5-4-6)
3-4-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked
by the City Clerk for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or canvasser.
   C.   Any violation of this Chapter.
   D.   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
   E.   Conducting the business of soliciting, or of canvassing, in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the public trust. (1977
Code §
5-4-3)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definition; Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-2: Public Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-3: Abatement
4-1-1: DEFINITION; NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Definition: A "public nuisance" is any thing, act, occupation,
condition or use of property which shall:
      1.   Annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose, peace or
safety of the public;
      2.   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property;
      3.   Offend the public morals or decency;
      4.   Interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for
passage, any street, alley, highway or other public way; or,
      5.   Depreciate the property values of adjoining or nearby property.
   B.   Enumeration: The following are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other public nuisances
coming within the definitions of subsection A of this Section:
      1.   Unsafe Buildings: Insecure or unsafe buildings, walls, chimneys,
stacks or other structures, and partially burned structures.
      2.   Accumulations Of Debris: All nauseous, inflammable and unhealthful
matter, including accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, filth,
garbage, offal, ashes, shavings, weeds, grass, leaves, manure, papers, boards
and debris resulting from fires.
      3.   Unnecessary Noises: All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or
vibrations of any kind, including frequent or habitual howling, yelping,
barking or other noises which annoy or disturb a neighborhood.
      4.   Dangerous Excavations, Cesspools: Open or dangerous excavations,
unhealthful cesspools and septic tanks and stagnant water.
      5.   Pigsties; Nauseous Areas: Any pigsty, privy, barn, corral, sewer or
other unwholesome or nauseous house or place declared to be unhealthful.
      6.   Abandoned, Wrecked Vehicles 1 : Any obsolete, wrecked, dismantled or
in the process of being dismantled automobile, boat or trailer declared to be a
hazard or unsightly. This subsection need not apply when it is determined by
any duly authorized officer of the City that such automobile, boat or trailer
displays a current Idaho registration and is parked temporarily for repairs.
(1977 Code §
4-2-2)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 6, Chapter 2 of this Code.
4-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist, any public nuisance within the City. (1977 Code §
4-2-1)
4-1-3: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Inspection Of Premises: Any officer or employee of the City may inspect
the premises and make a written report of findings together with photographs
whenever practicable.
   B.   Summary Abatement: Any owner or occupant, or any person who erects,
contrives, causes, continues, maintains, or permits a public nuisance, shall,
not later than fifteen (15) days after being notified by written notice, abate,
remove or cause to be removed, the declared public nuisance.
      1.   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance
exists and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, notice may be served on the owner, occupant
or the person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or
remove such nuisance within twenty four (24) hours. Said notice shall state
that unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be
abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person
causing, permitting or maintaining the same.
   C.   Cost Of Abatement:
      1.   Abatement By City; Lien Against Property: In the event of the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the City
may perform or cause to be performed, the work required by this Chapter, at the
expense of the property owner, and the City shall have a lien therefor upon the
property chargeable therewith until paid.
      2.   Tax Assessed Against Property: If the City shall so direct, the cost
of such work shall be fixed as a tax against such property and the same shall
be included in the next assessment roll thereafter made, and be enforced and
collected in the same manner and at the same time as other taxes.
      3.   Foreclosure Of Lien; Other Remedies: The City Council may, however,
foreclose such lien by appropriate legal proceedings, or may collect the cost
of such work from the owner of the property or other person liable therefor,
through a civil action, or may pursue any other remedy authorized by law or the
provisions of this City Code. (1977 Code §
4-2-3)
CHAPTER 2
SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Responsible Authority
4-2-3: Compulsory Use Of System
4-2-4: Solid Waste Collection; License, Franchise, Or Contract
4-2-5: Containers
4-2-6: Solid Waste Accumulation Prohibited
4-2-7: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them unless the context otherwise indicates:
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Waste building materials resulting from
construction remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
CONTRACTOR: The person or business holding a license or contract with the City
and authorized to collect, handle, transport and dispose of refuse and wastes.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any compound, mixture, substance or article which is
designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as a "hazardous
substance" under 42 USC 9601 and implementing Federal rules or designated as a
"hazardous waste" by the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ)
pursuant to the Idaho Hazardous Waste Management Act (HWMA) at Idaho Code title
39, chapter 44 and implementing rules.
INFECTIOUS WASTE: Means waste, which may contain infectious agents.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Household waste.
NON-MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Construction and demolition waste, wood debris and
other inert wastes as defined in IDEQ rules.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Products or substances including, but not limited to,
paper, cardboard, metal, aerosol cans, plastics, grass clippings, garden waste,
vegetable matter or other substances capable of being re-processed or re-used.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage and trash or other matter, sludge and other discarded
solid waste materials, including materials, which are recyclable, or
compostable. Solid waste includes waste from residential, industrial, business,
institutional and agricultural operations. In addition, solid waste may include
de minimus quantities of hazardous materials and/or products by households.
(Ord. 2-2017, 11-13-2017)
4-2-2: RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY:
The City Council shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2-2017, 11-13-2017)
4-2-3: COMPULSORY USE OF SYSTEM:
Every owner and occupant of premises within the prescribed limits of the City
are required to use Cambridge's contracted solid waste service, unless they
elect to dispose of their own solid waste themselves. Business owners may use
the franchisee's services or they may also haul their own waste. (Ord. 2-2017,
11-13-2017)
4-2-4: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; LICENSE, FRANCHISE, OR CONTRACT:
   A.   License, Franchise, Or Contract Required: It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or
conveying any solid waste over the streets or alleys of the City, or to dump or
dispose of the same, unless and until such person is licensed therefor or has a
contract, or franchise therefor as an authorized representative of the City.
   B.   Council Authority: The City Council shall have sole authority to
license or contract for the performance of all services pertaining to solid
waste collection and disposal. All rules, regulations and conduct of operations
and all fees as provided for in this chapter shall be as determined and
prescribed by the City Council. (Ord. 2-2017, 11-13-2017)
4-2-5: CONTAINERS:
   A.   Duty Of Owner Or Occupant: It shall be the duty of every owner or
occupant of any place where solid waste is created or accumulated to at all
times keep or cause to be kept portable appurtenances consisting of metal or
other approved type of containers for the deposit therein of solid waste and,
except as otherwise provided, to deposit or cause to be deposited all solid
waste therein.
   B.   Duty Of Contractor: Contractor may provide carts to each residential
customer of the City that subscribes for solid waste collection service.
Contractor shall also be responsible for servicing such carts once a week.
   C.   Specifications: All containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition,
with the inside and outside thereof washed at such time as to keep the same
free and clean of all accumulated grease and decomposing material and so that
no odor nuisance shall exist. (Ord. 2-2017, 11-13-2017)
4-2-6: SOLID WASTE ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to suffer to accumulate in or
about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any street, alley or sidewalk
adjacent to such lot, yard, place or premises, owned or occupied by such
person, any solid waste. (Ord. 2-2017, 11-13-2017)
4-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2-2017, 11-13-2017)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition
4-3-2: Weeds Declared A Nuisance
4-3-3: Height Limitation
4-3-4: Owner Responsible To Cut Weeds
4-3-5: Failure To Comply
4-3-1: DEFINITION:
The word "weeds" shall include all vegetable growth that is troublesome,
useless or noxious. (1977 Code §
7-4-1)
4-3-2: WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr or other weeds
of a like kind found growing on any lot or tract of land in the City or
standing uncut or otherwise uncontrolled are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1977 Code §
7-4-2)
4-3-3: HEIGHT LIMITATION:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding ten inches (10") anywhere in the City. (1977 Code §
7-4-2)
4-3-4: OWNER RESPONSIBLE TO CUT WEEDS:
Each property owner shall be responsible for the cutting of grass and weeds
located on his property and on that property between his property line and the
edge of the publicly traveled street or alley. (1977 Code §
7-4-2)
4-3-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Notice To Owner: Whenever the growth of weeds advances to a condition
prohibited by this Chapter, the City, or its designated official, shall notify
such occupant or owner to remove same.
   B.   Abatement By City; Lien For Costs: In default of this being done, the
City shall remove the same and the cost thereof shall become a lien upon the
property. Said lien shall be collected as provided by statute. (1977 Code §
7-4-3)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Compliance With Chapter; Definitions
4-4-2: Special Permit For Fireworks Display
4-4-3: Dates For Sale And Use Of Fireworks
4-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; DEFINITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, either for sale
or for use by himself, any pyrotechnic device commonly known as fireworks,
except as hereinafter set forth. The following definitions shall apply: (1977
Code §
3-2-1; amd. 1998 Code)
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
"Fireworks" include items classified as common or special fireworks by the
United States bureau of explosives or contained in the regulations of the
United States department of transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or UN
0336 1.4G. The term "fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety flares,
toy guns, toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy guns or
toy cannons, party poppers, pop-its or other devices which contain twenty five
hundredths (0.25) of a grain or less of explosive substance.
NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS: Any fireworks such as ground spinners, fountains,
sparklers, smoke devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the ground and
not to travel outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle or emit sparks or
other burning material which land outside a twenty foot (20') diameter circle
or above a height of twenty feet (20'). "Nonaerial common fireworks" do not
include firecrackers, jumping jacks, or similar products. (1998 Code)
4-4-2: SPECIAL PERMIT FOR FIREWORKS DISPLAY:
   A.   Application For Permit: Any recognized civic or local organization may
make application to the city council for a special permit for a fireworks
display to be held in connection with a national holiday or any special local
event. Such application shall be made in writing to the city clerk who shall
present said application to the council for its action.
   B.   Investigation; Permit Issuance: The mayor and council shall make such
investigation as deemed necessary and may issue a permit subject to any special
provisions deemed necessary.
   C.   Permit For One Event: Such permit shall not be of a continuing nature
but shall be exclusive to the one time only for which it is issued. (1977 Code
§ 3-2-2)
4-4-3: DATES FOR SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS:
   A.   Sale at retail and the use of "nonaerial common fireworks" as defined
in section
4-4-1 of this chapter, shall be lawful beginning at one minute after twelve
o'clock (12:01) A.M. on June 23, and ending at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:
59) P.M. on July 5, and beginning at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M. on December 26, and ending at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on
January 1, of each year.
   B.   Sale at retail and the use of fireworks illegal for use in the state of
Idaho by Idaho state law is hereby prohibited except with a special permit per
section
4-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 5-2008, 3-10-2008)
CHAPTER 5
BURNING
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Open Burning
4-5-3: Penalty
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions pertain:
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste material from the construction, remodeling and
repair operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures.
COST OF SUPPRESSION: Costs incurred by the City of Cambridge, the Cambridge
Fire Protection District, or by any other agency which responds to such fire.
GARBAGE: All putrescible waste such as waste from the preparation and cooking
of foods, vegetables, fruits and meats, discarded noncombustible food
containers such as cans, bottles, etc., and also all discarded plastics,
styrofoam, etc., that produce toxic fumes, and also putrescible waste from
commercial and industrial processes, manufacturing, canneries, slaughterhouses,
packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar places.
RUBBISH: Abandoned appliances and furniture, concrete, bricks, plaster, earth,
lumber shavings, sawdust, crates, metal, rubber, junk, etc.
TOXIC FUMES: Emissions that contain dioxins, a group of highly toxic chemicals,
when burned.
TRASH: Paper, cardboard, tree branches, grass, leaves, and other nontoxic fumes
producing combustible waste generated on the premises. (Ord. 6-2016, 11-14-
2016)
4-5-2: OPEN BURNING:
The City of Cambridge designates the Fire Chief of the Cambridge Fire
Protection District to make all decisions as when to implement or remove burn
bans relating to the City.
   A.   Central Business District; Approved Container Required: It shall be
unlawful for any person to deliberately or negligently burn or cause to be
burned any trash, lumber, leaves, straw, papers or any other combustible
material outside of any building in any street, alley, vacant lot or vacant
portion of any lot located within the Central Business District Zone of the
City; unless the person building such fire shall have the substance to be
burned in some fireproof trash burner or container with a screen covering that
has been approved by the Fire Chief or his designee.
   B.   All Other Zones; Fire Chief Permission Required: It shall be unlawful
for any person to deliberately or negligently burn or cause to be burned any
trash, lumber, leaves, straw, papers or any other combustible material outside
of any building in any street, alley, vacant lot or vacant portion of any lot
located within all other zones of the City except the Central Business District
from the period of May 10th to October 20th of each year without first
obtaining permission from the Fire Chief or his designee stating when such
burning shall be done and under such proper safeguards as the Fire Chief or his
designee may direct. (Ord. 4-2018, 8-13-2018)
   C.   Nuisance, Hazard: Any burning so permitted by this section shall be
planned and controlled so that a public nuisance or traffic hazard is not
created.
   D.   Prohibited Burning: Open burning of the following materials is
prohibited: garbage, rubbish, construction debris, asphalt, plastic, rubber,
oils, dead animals, or any material that will generate toxic fumes as a product
of combustion. (Ord. 6-2016, 11-14-2016)
4-5-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. In addition to, or in lieu of, any criminal charges, the
City shall be allowed to recover all costs of suppression.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as repealing or amending in
any way any safety provisions of the Fire Prevention Code heretofore adopted by
the City. (Ord. 6-2016, 11-14-2016)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: State Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-1-2: Issuance Of Citations
5-1-3: Air Guns; Firearms
5-1-4: Climbing On City Buildings Or Structures
5-1-5: Loitering At Sewer Lagoon
5-1-6: Disorderly Conduct
5-1-7: Penalty
5-1-1: STATE CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   Code Adopted: Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section 50-901,
there is hereby adopted title 18 of said Idaho Code, being the criminal laws of
the state of Idaho, establishing principles of liability for conduct;
establishing general principles of justification for conduct; defining offenses
involving danger to persons; defining offenses against property; defining
offenses against the family; defining offenses against public administration;
defining offenses against public order and decency; establishing a uniform
system of penalties, including fines, forfeitures and imprisonment; and
establishing criteria for imposing sentences upon those convicted of an
offense, and said laws shall be and the same are hereby adopted as the criminal
code of the city.
   B.   Copies On File: Three (3) copies of said laws shall be on file in the
office of the city clerk for reference to and inspection by the general public.
(1977 Code §
6-1-1)
5-1-2: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
Upon a violation of any provision of this chapter or the laws hereinabove
adopted, the arresting officer shall execute the citation in the following
manner:
Violation of Cambridge City Code, Section
5-1-1 (being in particular section 18-        , of the Idaho Code).
(1977 Code §
6-1-2)
5-1-3: AIR GUNS; FIREARMS:
   A.   Definition: Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this section, the
term shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets
or other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by
the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and
including what are commonly known as air rifles and BB guns.
   B.   Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry
concealed upon his person any brass knuckles, revolver, pistol, dagger,
stiletto or other deadly weapon unless in possession of a valid and current
concealed carry permit recognized by the state of Idaho.
   C.   Discharge Of Firearms: It shall be unlawful to discharge:
      1.   Firearms: Any firearm within the limits of the city of Cambridge;
provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his or her
duty, or a person from discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of person or
persons or property, or a person from discharging a firearm on an approved
sport shooting range as defined in section 55-2604, Idaho Code.
      2.   Exceptions; Permits: The city council may at any time, upon receipt
of proper application, grant permits to sport shooting ranges, as that term is
defined and used in title 55, chapter 26 of the Idaho Code, and others for
shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall be
in writing attested by the city clerk conforming to such requirements as the
city council shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to
revocation at any time by action of the said council.
      3.   Other Weapons: Any bow or other weapon which will expel a projectile
through the action of release of a pressurized gas, compressed air, expanding
gas, explosive, or other force producing means or method including, but not
limited to, objects commonly referred to as air guns, air pistols, air rifles,
"BB" guns, pellet guns, blowguns, airsoft or similar guns, or paintball guns,
upon or within the public right of way, public parks and other public property
and ways, except at such locations as may be authorized for such purposes by
the city council. (Ord. 10-2014, 9-15-2014)
5-1-4: CLIMBING ON CITY BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
It shall be unlawful for unauthorized persons to climb on or around any city
building or structure, including, but not limited to, water towers, water
tanks, pumps, pump houses, city hall, city museum, or storage sheds. (1998
Code)
5-1-5: LOITERING AT SEWER LAGOON:
It shall be unlawful for unauthorized persons to loiter, trespass, swim, trap,
hunt, fish, boat, ice skate, or skip rocks in, on, or around the city sewer
lagoon. (1998 Code)
5-1-6: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully disturb the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood, family, or person by loud or unusual
noise, or by tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by threatening, traducing,
quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting, or firing any gun or pistol, or
using any vulgar, profane or indecent language in a loud and boisterous manner.
Any person cited for such conduct shall be subject to penalties as set forth in
section
5-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2020, 10-13-2020)
5-1-7: PENALTY:
A law enforcement officer shall provide a person(s) who is violating any
provision of this chapter with a written warning regarding the violation. Any
person(s) violating this chapter after receiving the written warning shall upon
conviction be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of $100.00. Any
person(s) violating this chapter shall upon a second conviction be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of $200.00. Any person(s) violating this
chapter upon a third and any subsequent conviction shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of $300.00 per conviction. (Ord. 6-2020, 10-
13-2020)
CHAPTER 2
CURFEW
SECTION:
5-2-1: Purpose
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Age And Hour Restrictions
5-2-4: Parental Or Adult Responsibility
5-2-5: Violation; Penalty
5-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to: a) promote the general welfare and protect
the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within
the city; b) promote the safety and well being of the city's youngest citizens,
persons of seventeen (17) years and younger, whose inexperience renders them
particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities,
particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older
perpetrators of crime; and c) foster and strengthen parental responsibility for
children. (Ord. 8-2016, 11-14-2016)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them below:
CURFEW HOURS: The hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. through five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. on Sunday through Thursday on school nights and the hours of one
minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. through five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on
Friday and Saturday or any night when school will not be in session the
following day.
EMERGENCY: Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting from
unforeseen circumstances, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or
property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters,
automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business within the city operated
for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to,
any place of amusement or entertainment.
MINOR: Any person who is seventeen (17) years of age or younger who has not
been legally emancipated.
OFFICER: A police or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the laws of the state of Idaho and/or the ordinances of the city of
Cambridge.
OPERATOR: Any person, and any firm, association, partnership (and the members
or partners) and/or any corporation (and the officers) conducting or managing
an establishment.
PARENT: A person who is:
   A.   A minor's biological or adoptive parent or stepparent and who has legal
custody (including either parent, if custody is shared under a court order or
agreement);
   B.   A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor
regularly resides;
   C.   A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or
   D.   A person eighteen (18) years of age or older standing in loco parentis
(as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in subsection A, B
or C of this definition, for the person to assume the care or physical custody
of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances).
PERSON: An individual, not any association, corporation, or any other legal
entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access, including, but not limited to: streets, highways, roads,
sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and
shops.
REMAIN: The following actions:
   A.   To linger or stay at or upon an establishment or public place; and/or
   B.   To fail to leave an establishment or public place when requested to do
so by an officer or by the owner, operator or other person in control of that
premises or public place. (Ord. 8-2016, 11-14-2016)
5-2-3: AGE AND HOUR RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or upon
any public place within the city, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or
parked in or upon such public place, or to remain in or upon the premises of
any establishment within the city, unless the minor:
      1.   Is accompanied by a parent; or
      2.   Is involved in an emergency; or
      3.   Is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning
home from such activity without detour or stop; or
      4.   Is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she resides
with a parent; or
      5.   Is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious or civic
organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another similar
organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or the
minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour or stop; or
      6.   Is on an errand at the direction of a parent; or
      7.   Is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or
terminating in, the city; or
      8.   Is exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly. (Ord. 8-2016, 11-14-2016)
5-2-4: PARENTAL OR ADULT RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   It is unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage such minor to violate section
5-2-3 of this chapter. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the actions, conduct or
whereabouts of a minor in that parent's custody.
   B.   It is unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any motor
vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of section
5-2-3 of this chapter.
   C.   It is unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any person
who is an employee of such establishment, to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection that
the operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department that a minor was present at the establishment after curfew hours and
refused to leave.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false
name, address or telephone number to any officer investigating a possible
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2016, 11-14-2016)
5-2-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any minor violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) subject to the
conditions set forth in Idaho Code section 20-549.
   B.   Any parent found guilty of the offense of failure to supervise a child
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   C.   Any nonparental adult violating the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute an infraction.
   D.   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. (Ord. 8-2016, 11-14-2016)
CHAPTER 3
DOGS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Authority Of Dog Control Officer
5-3-3: Running At Large
5-3-4: Nuisance
5-3-5: Regulation Of Vicious Dogs
5-3-6: Injuring, Damaging Or Destroying Public Or Private Property
5-3-7: Unlawful Release Of Dog
5-3-8: Dog Kennels
5-3-9: Violation; Penalties
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
DOG: Any dog breed recognized by the American Kennel Club, or any cross-breed
of a recognized breed.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER: Any individual authorized by the city to enforce the
provisions of this chapter including any state or local law enforcement officer
whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve seizure and
impoundment of any dog.
OWNER: Any one or more persons, firms, associations or corporations owning,
harboring, keeping or possessing a dog or dogs within the corporate limits of
the City. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018; amd. Ord. 5-2020, 3-9-2020)
5-3-2: AUTHORITY OF DOG CONTROL OFFICER:
The dog control officer, or other designated official, may take up or cause to
be taken up any of the dogs found to be violating any provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 5-2020, 3-9-2020)
5-3-3: RUNNING AT LARGE:
The City of Cambridge adopts title 25 chapter 28 section 25-2805 of the Idaho
State Code as the appropriate authority dealing with dogs running at large
except that the penalty for any violation of this section shall be as set forth
in
5-3-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018; amd. Ord. 5-2020, 3-9-2020)
5-3-4: NUISANCE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has
custody of any dog to fail to exercise proper care and control of said dog so
as to prevent it from becoming a nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely
barking, howling or attacking shall be deemed a nuisance.
   B.   This section shall not apply to veterinary hospitals.
   C.   Any person who is found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to penalties as set forth in
5-3-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018; amd. Ord. 5-2020, 3-9-2020)
5-3-5: REGULATION OF VICIOUS DOGS:
The City of Cambridge adopts title 25 chapter 28 section 25-2810 of the Idaho
State Code as the appropriate authority dealing with dangerous and at-risk
dogs. Any person in violation of this section shall upon conviction be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred ($300.00)
or up to six (6) months in the County Jail or both. Each 24-hour period that a
violation continues is considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018;
amd. Ord. 5-2020, 3-9-2020)
5-3-6: INJURING, DAMAGING OR DESTROYING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The City of Cambridge adopts title 25 chapter 28 section 25-2806 of the Idaho
State Code as the appropriate authority dealing with damage to public or
private property. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018)
5-3-7: UNLAWFUL RELEASE OF DOG:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner, to intentionally release
any dog restrained upon the owner’s property, without the owner’s permission.
Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to
penalties as set forth in
5-3-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018; amd. Ord. 5-2020, 3-9-2020)
5-3-8: DOG KENNELS:
   A.   Dog kennels are expressly forbidden within the City limits. A "dog
kennel" shall have the definition set forth in
10-1-3.
   B.   Allowable Number of Dogs Per Principal Dwelling Unit;
      1.   It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, or possess upon the premises
of any Principal Dwelling Unit located on less than 1 acre in size more than
four (4) dogs. Provided further that in the event the number of dogs upon the
premises of any one Principal Dwelling Unit exceeds the number of four (4) for
the reason that newborn puppies have been born to a dog living on the premises,
then and in that event, it shall be lawful to keep, maintain and possess upon
said premises, said puppies until they reach the age of one hundred eighty
(180) days.
      2.    It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, or possess upon the
premises of any Principal Dwelling Unit located on 1 acre or larger more than
six (6) dogs. Provided further that in the event the number of dogs upon the
premises of any one Principal Dwelling Unit exceeds the number of six (6) for
the reason that newborn puppies have been born to a dog living on the premises,
then and in that event, it shall be lawful to keep, maintain and possess upon
said premises, said puppies until they reach the age of one hundred eighty
(180) days.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain or possess upon the premises
of any approved Accessory Dwelling Unit more than one (1) dog. Provided further
that in the event the number of dogs upon the premises of any one Accessory
Dwelling Unit exceeds the number of one (1) for the reason that newborn puppies
have been born to a dog living on the premises, then and in that event, it
shall be lawful to keep, maintain and possess upon said premises, said puppies
until they reach the age of one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-
2018; amd. Ord. 3-2023, 7-10-2023)
5-3-9: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any violation of any section of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically set
forth herein, is punishable, as follows: the dog control officer shall provide
an owner who is violating any provision of this chapter with a written warning
regarding the violation. The owner shall have 72 hours from the time of receipt
of the written warning to cure the violation and become in compliance with this
chapter. Each 24-hour period that an owner remains in violation of this chapter
constitutes a separate violation and subjects the owner to penalties as
provided in this section. Any owner violating this chapter shall upon
conviction be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of $100.00. Any
owner violating this chapter shall upon a second conviction be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of $200.00. Any owner violating this chapter
upon a third and any subsequent conviction shall be guilty of an infraction and
subject to a fine of $300.00 per conviction. (Ord. 3-2018, 6-11-2018; amd. Ord.
5-2020, 3-9-2020)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Short Title
5-4-2: Purpose
5-4-3: Definitions
5-4-4: Rights Of Animal Control Officer
5-4-5: Herding Within Corporate Limits
5-4-6: Animals Running At Large
5-4-7: Prohibited Animals
5-4-8: Harboring Livestock
5-4-9: Harboring Poultry And Rabbits
5-4-10: Nuisance Control
5-4-11: Exemptions
5-4-12: City Immune From Liability
5-4-13: Penalty
5-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the “Animal Control Ordinance.” (Ord. 4-2020, 4-
13-2020)
5-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to preserve the quality of life and cultural
traditions that are part of the city’s heritage while also protecting the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Cambridge. These regulations
prohibit the harboring of certain types of animals within the corporate limits
of the city and set forth the limitations for harboring of other animals within
the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following mean:
                              Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird
ANIMAL:                       (including all poultry) or other member commonly
                              accepted as part of the animal kingdom.
                              Any individual authorized by the city to enforce
                              the provisions of this chapter including any
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:       state or local law enforcement officer whose
                              duties in whole or in part include assignments
                              that involve seizure and impoundment of any
                              animal.
                              A standard unit used in calculating the relative
                              grazing impact of different kinds and classes of
ANIMAL UNIT (AU):             livestock. As used in this chapter, it defines
                              the maximum number of livestock allowed to occupy
                              one (1) acre of pasture land within the city
                              limits.
                              Street sections designated for the herding of
ESTABLISHED LIVESTOCK ROUTES: livestock through the corporate limits of the
                              city, as designated by this Chapter.
                              Allowing any animal to remain, or to be lodged,
HARBORING:                    fed, or sheltered on the property one owns,
                              occupies or controls.
HERDERS:                      Persons engaged in the act of herding.
HERDING:                      The act of moving an individual animal or group
                              of animals from place to place.
                              Domesticated animals, traditionally kept for use
                              or profit, which are housed outdoors and commonly
                              associated with a farm or ranch or performing
                              work in an agricultural setting. Such animals
LIVESTOCK:                    include: members of the equine family (horses,
                              mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, swine
                              (pigs), goats, bees, llamas, alpacas, but
                              excluding poultry and rabbits, which are defined
                              separately.
                              A person having the right of property or custody
                              of an animal, or who harbors an animal or who
OWNER:                        knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
                              a premise occupied, owned or controlled by that
                              person.
                              An open field or grassland, within a city lot,
                              without buildings (other than those used for
PASTURE:                      harboring animals), yards, gardens or roads,
                              enclosed by a fence and used to confine
                              livestock.
                              An individual, corporation, partnership, limited
PERSON:                       liability company, or other organization commonly
                              recognized by law.
                              Domesticated birds kept by humans for their eggs,
POULTRY:                      meat or feathers. Poultry includes such animals
                              as: ducks, geese, turkeys, and chickens but
                              excludes roosters, which are defined separately.
                              Any of various burrowing animals of the family
RABBITS:                      Leporidae having long ears and short tails, which
                              are domesticated and raised for pets or food.
                              An animal shall be considered under restraint if
                              it is confined within the real property limits of
RESTRAINT:                    its owner, is secured by a leash, lead or chain,
                              or is confined within a vehicle in a manner that
                              prevents escape.
ROOSTERS:                     A male domestic chicken.
                              An animal shall be deemed to be running at large
RUNNING AT LARGE:             when found to be off the property of the owner
                              and not under restraint or control.
SECURE ENCLOSURE:             An enclosure that shall not allow the egress of
                              livestock in any manner without human assistance.
                              A nondomestic animal. Those animals commonly
                              considered to be naturally wild and not naturally
                              trained or domesticated, or which are commonly
WILD ANIMAL:                  considered to be inherently dangerous to the
                              health, safety, and welfare of people, which
                              shall include but not be limited to, any wild
                              animal as determined by the United States
                              Endangered Species List. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
 
5-4-4: RIGHTS OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The animal control officer, or other designated official, may take up or cause
to be taken up any of the animals named in this chapter found to be running at
large within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-5: HERDING WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS:
   A.   Notification Required: It shall be unlawful for any owner to herd
livestock within the corporate limits of the city unless the owner notifies the
city clerk or other city official, the county sheriff’s department, and all
property owners along the Established Livestock Route not less than twenty-four
(24) hours prior to herding livestock within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Herding on Established Livestock Routes:
      1.   Herders Required: It shall be the duty of the owner to provide
sufficient herders to confine the livestock to Established Livestock Routes in
order to protect the property adjacent to the livestock routes from damage by
the livestock.
      2.   Sheriff Escort: If upon notification by an owner, the county sheriff
determines that in order to protect the property adjacent to the livestock
route from damage by livestock to be herded, a county sheriff escort is
required, then the owner may not herd the livestock without such county sheriff
escort being present.
      3.   Owner to Pay Costs: The livestock owner shall pay all costs
associated with herding livestock through the city including, but not limited
to, county sheriff’s escort and damage to public and private property caused by
the livestock.
      4.   Established Livestock Routes: The following street sections are
designated as Established Livestock Routes for the herding of livestock through
the corporate limits of the city:
         a.   Hopper Avenue/State Highway 71 westbound between city limits and
5th Street.
         b.   5th Street between Hopper Avenue/State Highway 71 westbound and
Central Boulevard.
         c.   Central Boulevard between its north city limits and the Central
Boulevard/US Highway 95 northbound city limits.
         d.   Mill Road between city limits, then joins Superior Street to
Central Boulevard.
         e.   Cemetery Road between city limits, then joins Superior Street to
Central Boulevard.
         f.   Railroad Street between Salubria Road and Central Boulevard/US 95
northbound.
         g.   Salubria Road between city limits and Superior Street/US Highway
95 southbound city limits.
   Unless directed otherwise by city officials or police, the Established
Livestock Routes are to be the sole routes used to herd livestock through the
corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-6: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to be running at large
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-7: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any wild animals and any of the
following animals: swine, bull cows with a weight of 400 pounds or more, any
furbearing animal, hawk, eagle, beehives, bee colonies, roosters, mature male
buck goats, birds of the Ratite family, peafowl, guinea fowl, bison, buffalo,
and beefalo. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-8: HARBORING LIVESTOCK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor livestock within the corporate
limits of the city, except under the terms set forth in this section.
   A.   Minimum Lot Size Required: A minimum of one acre is required to harbor
livestock, of which, a minimum of one-half acre must be pasture. It shall be
the owner’s responsibility to prove to city officials that the lot and pasture
comply with the minimum lot size requirement.
   B.   Maximum Animal Unit Allowed: One (1) animal unit is allowed for one-
half acre of pasture in the corporate limits of the city. One (1) additional
animal unit is allowed for each additional half-acre of pasture. For example,
if one half of a one-acre lot is pasture, one animal unit is allowed. Maximum
density is two animal units per acre of pasture. The following animal unit
conversion chart shall be used to calculate the number of specific livestock
allowed on pasture in the corporate limits of the city:
Livestock Kind Livestock Class Animal Unit Factor
Livestock Kind Livestock Class            Animal Unit Factor
CATTLE         MATURE COW                 1.00
CATTLE         MATURE COW W/ NURSING CALF 1.32
CATTLE         WEANER CALF                0.5
CATTLE         YEARLING (9-18 MONTHS)     0.7
DONKEY/ BURRO  BURROS AND PONIES          0.6
GOATS          NANNY W/KID                0.3
GOATS          MATURE GOAT                0.2
HORSE          HORSE                      1.00
MULE           MULE                       1.00
SHEEP          EWE W/LAMB                 0.3
SHEEP          MATURE SHEEP               0.2
 
   Unless otherwise specifically given an animal unit factor in the above
chart, the offspring of animals that are being harbored within the maximum
density unit allowed will not be counted as an animal unit factor until such
offspring reach nine months of age.
   C.   Exceptions to Minimum Lot Size/Maximum Animal Unit Requirements:
      1.   Educational Purposes: Livestock less than one (1) year old may be
harbored temporarily in pasture within lots of less than one (1) acre in size
and only for educational purposes, such as 4H, FFA, or youth raising livestock
as a family project. The maximum animal unit density shall not be exceeded, and
no long-term breeding operation can be maintained on a city lot less than one
(1) acre in size. Such livestock can only be harbored under this exception
between March 1st and August 31st.
      2.   Clean-Up Purposes: Upon application and approval by City officials,
an owner may use a number of livestock exceeding the maximum density allotment
and/or on city lots less than one (1) acre in size on a temporary basis (not
exceeding 30 days) and only for the following purposes: to graze off
vegetation, to reduce fire hazard, and to enhance the overall appearance of
property.
   D.   Standards for the Harboring of Livestock: Livestock must be kept within
a secure enclosure, which enclosure must comply with setback requirements.
(Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-9: HARBORING POULTRY AND RABBITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor poultry or rabbits within the
corporate limits of the city, except under the terms set forth in this section.
   A.   Minimum Lot Size Required and Maximum Animal Numbers Allowed:
      1.   Chickens and Ducks: A maximum of 6 chickens and/or ducks per
Principal Dwelling Unit premises are allowed on a minimum of one-eighth (1/8)
acre. A maximum of 8 chickens and/or ducks per Principal Dwelling unit premises
are allowed on a minimum of one-quarter (1/4) acre. A maximum of 12 chickens
and/or ducks per Principal Dwelling Unit premises are allowed on a minimum of
one-half (1/2) acre or larger of pasture.
      2.   Geese and Turkeys: The minimum area required for geese and turkeys
is one (1) acre, of which, one-half (1/2) acre must be pasture. A maximum
number of 10 geese and/or turkeys shall be permitted for one-half (1/2) acre of
pasture. A maximum number of 20 geese and/or turkeys per Principal Dwelling
Unit premises are allowed on a minimum of one (1) acre or larger of pasture.
      3.   Rabbits: No more than twelve rabbits may be harbored per (1/8) one-
eighth acre.
      4.    Accessory Dwelling Units shall be considered as part of premises of
the Principal Dwelling Unit and shall not be considered as a separate premises
for harboring Poultry and Rabbits.
   B.   Standards for Harboring Poultry and Rabbits: Poultry and rabbits must
be kept in a secure enclosure. The secure enclosures must be at least 20 feet
from the neighboring property. The secure enclosures must be located to either
side or the back of the Principal Dwelling Unit, they cannot be located in
front of the Principal Dwelling Unit. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020; amd. Ord. 3-
2023, 7-10-2023)
5-4-10: NUISANCE CONTROL:
The harboring of animals within the corporate limits of the City shall not
create a “public nuisance” as that term is defined within
4-1-1 of this code. All provisions of Title 4, Chapter 1 shall apply with
regard to any “public nuisance” created by the harboring of animals. (Ord. 4-
2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-11: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Organizations Exempted: The City of Cambridge grants an exemption from
the requirements of this chapter to the following organizations: Washington
County Fair Board, Cambridge Rodeo Association, and Friends of the Weiser River
Trail.
   B.   Permitted Use: This exemption allows for the use of animals for
exhibition, education, competition, recreation and vegetation control within
the boundaries of the organization’s properties on a temporary basis. All
animals are under the exclusive control and responsibility of the Board of
Directors of the organization.
   C.   Time Period for Compliance For Pre-Existing Animals: This chapter is
effective as of the date set forth in section 5-4-14; however, citizens who
were harboring animals within the city limits prior to the effective date of
this chapter and who would be in immediate violation of this chapter as of its
effective date, have until December 31, 2021 to cease harboring any animals
necessary in order to become in full compliance with this chapter. Any such
citizens who fail to cease harboring such animals by said date, will be
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to penalties as set forth in
section
5-4-13. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-12: CITY IMMUNE FROM LIABILITY:
The city or the city’s designee shall be immune from all civil liability for
actions taken pursuant to this chapter or for any failure to take action to
enforce. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-2020)
5-4-13: PENALTY:
The animal control officer shall provide an owner who is violating any
provision of this chapter with a written warning regarding the violation. The
owner shall have 72 hours from the time of receipt of the written warning to
cure the violation and become in compliance with this chapter. Each 24-hour
period that an owner remains in violation of this chapter constitutes a
separate violation and subjects the owner to penalties as provided in this
section. Any owner violating this chapter after receiving the written warning
shall upon conviction be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of
$100.00. Any owner violating this chapter shall upon a second conviction be
guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of $200.00. Any owner violating
this chapter upon a third and any subsequent conviction shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of $300.00 per conviction. (Ord. 4-2020, 4-13-
2020)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Motor Vehicle Laws Adopted By Reference
6-1-2: Issuance Of Citations
6-1-3: Speed Limits
6-1-4: U-Turns Prohibited
6-1-5: Bicycles
6-1-6: Skateboards, Rollerblades, Sleds, Skiers
6-1-1: STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   Intent: It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to
aid and assist by whatever means possible, for the utmost consistency in
traffic regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having such
jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by the
cities of Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the
state.
   B.   Adoption Of Statute: There is hereby adopted, therefore, for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets and
public thoroughfares of the city, that certain code, identified as the latest
edition of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, more particularly Idaho Code title 49,
published by the department of law enforcement, and as the same may hereafter
be revised by the Idaho legislature, or amended by the city council, and the
same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as
though set forth at length herein.
   C.   Copies On File: Three (3) copies of the said Idaho motor vehicle laws,
together with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk,
shall be kept on file in the office for use and examination of and by the
public. (1977 Code §
8-1-1)
6-1-2: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
Upon a violation of any provision of this chapter or the laws hereinabove
adopted, the arresting officer shall execute the citation in the following
manner:
Violation of Cambridge City Code, Section
6-1-1 (being in particular section 49-        , of the Idaho Code).
(1977 Code §
8-1-2)
6-1-3: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Reasonable And Prudent Speed: No person shall drive a vehicle within
the corporate limits of the city of Cambridge at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person
shall drive at a safe and an appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection, pedestrian crossing or railroad grade crossing, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon
any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
   B.   Maximum Speed Limits Designated: No person shall travel at a speed
greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour on city streets, twenty (20) miles
per hour in posted school zones when children are present or ten (10) miles per
hour in any alley unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 4-2001, 11-8-2001)
6-1-4: U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any U-turn at any street
intersection or on any street or alley within the business district of the
city, nor shall any vehicle be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade,
where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction within five hundred feet (500'). (1977 Code §
8-1-4)
6-1-5: BICYCLES:
   A.   Riding On Roadways And Bicycle Paths:
      1.   Ride Near Right Side Of Road: Every person operating a bicycle upon
a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
      2.   Riding Two Abreast: Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not
ride two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles. (1964 Code § 8-15-14; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Riding On Sidewalks:
      1.   Prohibited In Business District: It shall be unlawful for any person
to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the business district.
      2.   Posting Of Signs: The city council is authorized to erect signs on
any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon and when
such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the
same. (1964 Code § 8-15-20; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-6: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES, SLEDS, SKIERS:
   A.   Riding On Roadway:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride skateboards,
rollerblades, roller skates, sleds, or inner tubes on any city street.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tow sleds, inner tubes, or
skiers with any motorized vehicle on any city street.
   B.   Riding On Sidewalks:
      1.   Prohibited In Business District: It shall be unlawful for any person
to ride skateboards, rollerblades, or roller skates upon a sidewalk within the
business district.
      2.   Posting Of Signs: The city council is authorized to erect signs on
any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of skateboards, rollerblades, or
roller skates thereon and when such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful
for any person to disobey the same. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Findings; Nuisance Declared
6-2-3: Exceptions
6-2-4: Chapter Not Exclusive
6-2-5: Enforcement; Vehicle Hearing Officer
6-2-6: Right Of Entry For Vehicle Removal
6-2-7: Administrative Costs
6-2-8: Abatement Hearing Procedure
6-2-9: Appeal
6-2-10: Removal Of Vehicle
6-2-11: Unpaid Costs Assessed Against Property
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes
"street".
PUBLIC PROPERTY: The term "public property" does not include "highway".
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks. (1977 Code §
8-2-1)
6-2-2: FINDINGS; NUISANCE DECLARED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho Code section 50-334, and correlated
other provisions, the City Council hereby makes the following findings and
declarations:
   A.   Findings: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public
property not including highways is hereby found to:
      1.   Create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property;
      2.   Promote blight and deterioration;
      3.   Invite plundering;
      4.   Create fire hazards;
      5.   Constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health
and safety of minors;
      6.   Create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to
the health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Declaration: Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property
not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared
to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with
provisions of this Chapter. (1977 Code §
8-2-1)
6-2-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Designation Of Exceptions: This Chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
      2.   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   B.   Maintenance Of Nuisance Not Authorized: Nothing in this Section shall
authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance. (1977 Code §
8-2-2)
6-2-4: CHAPTER NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition
to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter
enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (1977 Code §
8-2-3)
6-2-5: ENFORCEMENT; VEHICLE HEARING OFFICER:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be
administered and enforced by an individual appointed by the City Council who
shall be called the "vehicle hearing officer". In the enforcement of this
Chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public
property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part
thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (1977 Code §
8-2-4)
6-2-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR VEHICLE REMOVAL:
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person,
such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof, declared
to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (1977 Code §
8-2-5)
6-2-7: ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The Mayor and City Council shall from time to time determine and set by
resolution an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the
actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof, under this Chapter.
(1977 Code §
8-2-6; amd. 1998 Code)
6-2-8: ABATEMENT HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Hearing For Nuisance Determination And Costs: A public hearing shall be
held on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as
an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of
the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof
against the property on which it is located.
   B.   Hearing Notice: Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10)
days before the hearing by certified mail, and a five (5) day return requested,
to the owner of the land as shown on the last assessment roll of Washington
County, and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle
is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership. If any of the foregoing notices are returned undelivered by the
United States Post Office, the hearing shall be continued to a date not less
than ten (10) days from the date of such return. (1977 Code §
8-2-7)
   C.   Vehicle Hearing Officer:
      1.   Hold Hearings: All hearings under this Chapter shall be held before
the vehicle hearing officer, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems
pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of
the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on
the said private property or public property. The vehicle hearing officer shall
not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on
which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a
written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons
for such denial.
      2.   Impose Conditions: The vehicle hearing officer may impose such
conditions and take such action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances
to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. He may delay the time for removal of
the vehicle or part thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it.
(1977 Code §
8-2-8)
      3.   Findings; Order Removal: At the conclusion of the public hearing,
the vehicle hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property
and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed
of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost
of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the
vehicle or part thereof is located. A written order requiring removal shall
include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the
site, and given to the property owner and filed with the City Clerk. (1977 Code
§
8-2-8; amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   Landowner Not Liable: If it is determined at the hearing that the
vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he
has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the vehicle hearing officer
shall not assess costs of administration and removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such
costs from such landowner.
      5.   Written Presentation: If an interested party makes a written
presentation to the vehicle hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be
notified in writing of the decision. (1977 Code §
8-2-8)
6-2-9: APPEAL:
   A.   Appeal Decision Of Vehicle Hearing Officer: Any interested party may
appeal the decision of the vehicle hearing officer by filing a written notice
of appeal with the said vehicle hearing officer within five (5) days after his
decision.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time
and place of hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in
subsections 6-2-8A and B of this Chapter.
   C.   Hearing Before Council:
      1.   Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm,
amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
      2.   In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by
the technical rules of evidence. (1977 Code §
8-2-9)
6-2-10: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts
thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days from the date of mailing of
notice of the decision if such notice is required by subsection 6-2-8C of this
Chapter because of a written presentation, or five (5) days after such action
of the City Council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts
thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile
dismantler's yard. (1977 Code §
8-2-10; amd. 1998 Code)
6-2-11: UNPAID COSTS ASSESSED AGAINST PROPERTY:
If the administrative costs or the cost of removal which are charged against
the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to subsection 6-2-8C are not paid within
thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an
appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-334 and 50-1008, and shall be transmitted to
the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority
as other City taxes. (1977 Code §
8-2-11)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Sidewalk Construction In Public Rights-Of-Way
7-1-2: Snow And Ice Removal
7-1-3: Public Right-Of-Way Sidewalks Clear Of Obstructions
7-1-4: Mailboxes And Newspaper Delivery Boxes In City Rights-Of-Way
7-1-5: Penalty
7-1-6: Posting On Street Signs and Utility Poles
7-1-1: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Specifications: The material and method of constructing sidewalks shall
conform in all respects to the specifications adopted by the City Council.
These specifications shall be on file in the City Clerk's Office at all times.
   B.   Property Owner Responsibility: It shall be the duty of every property
owner, upon notification by the City Council, to construct or repair sidewalks
as such is prescribed in said notice.
   C.   Failure To Comply; City Construction; Costs A Lien: If such property
owner shall fail, after notification, to construct or repair any sidewalk, the
City Council may order same constructed or repaired. The costs of said work
shall be assessed against the property owner for which said sidewalk was
constructed or repaired and said cost shall become a lien upon the property.
   D.   Residential Zone Sidewalks: Residential Zone sidewalks are to be a
minimum of five feet (5') wide.
   E.   Commercial Zone Sidewalks: Commercial Zone sidewalks are to be a
minimum of six feet (6') wide.
   F.   Highway Frontage Sidewalks: Highways 95 and 71 frontage sidewalks shall
be six feet (6') wide in all zones with the exception of subsection G of this
section.
   G.   Central Business District Commercial Zone: Central Business District
Commercial Zone Highway 95 frontage shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12')
wide and shall extend from the front of the building to the back of the curb.
   H.   Sidewalks Abut Property Line: When sidewalks abut the property line a
five foot (5') wide utility easement behind the sidewalk is required for water
meters and fire hydrants. When right-of-way is sufficiently wide, five feet
(5') may be reserved behind the sidewalk for water meters and fire hydrants.
(Ord. 2-2018, 10-8-2018)
7-1-2: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
   A.   Removal Required: Every owner, tenant or occupant of any private or
public premises or building, and the owner or proprietor, lessee, or person
entitled to the possession of any vacant lot or block within the limits of the
City shall, during the winter season and during the time the snow shall remain
on the ground, clear the sidewalks abutting on such premises of snow and ice
and shall keep them conveniently free therefrom during the day.
   B.   Placement Of Snow Removed From Sidewalks:
      1.   Streets, Gutters And Other City Properties: Unless otherwise
provided, snow removed from sidewalks, parking areas or private properties
located inside or outside the City, shall not be thrown, shoveled or placed in
the streets, gutters, sidewalks, public parks or on other properties owned by
the City.
      2.   Large Heavy Machines: Large heavy machines such as but not limited
to backhoes, large tractors and automobiles with snow plows are prohibited from
clearing snow on public sidewalks. Machines with steel cleated tracks,
caterpillar tracks, wheel chains or studs are prohibited from being on public
sidewalks. Walk behind snow blowers with chains are permitted on public
sidewalks.
      3.   Property Of Another: Snow removed from any property, residential or
commercial, shall not be placed on the property of another property owner
without the permission of said property owner, nor shall snow be thrown,
shoveled, plowed or placed so as to block the view of drivers at street
intersections.
   C.   Failure To Comply; City Removal; Costs Assessed: Whenever any person
shall neglect or refuse to comply with this section, the Public Works
Superintendent shall cause all such snow and ice to be removed and shall report
the same, together with verified vouchers of the cost of such removal, to the
City Clerk, and said cost shall be assessed upon the abutting lot, block or
property to the sidewalk from which said snow and ice are removed, and the City
Clerk shall make a special assessment for the same and report the same to the
City Council with the report and vouchers from the Public Works Superintendent.
When approved and confirmed by the City Council, said assessment shall be a
lien on said lot or block and be collected as other special assessments are
collected, pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008 et seq. (Ord. 2-2018, 10-8-
2018)
7-1-3: PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY SIDEWALKS CLEAR OF OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   At all times a six foot (6') wide contiguous strip the complete length
of the sidewalk shall be kept free of any obstructions in order to allow
unimpeded pedestrian traffic. If the sidewalk is narrower than six feet (6'),
than the full width of the sidewalk shall be kept free of obstructions.
Obstructions include but are not limited to objects setting on the sidewalk or
vegetation trespassing into the sidewalk space.
   B.   Property owners in the Central Business District may adjust the
location of City benches within their business property frontage. Property
owners may display signs and merchandise next to their building on a temporary
basis. (Ord. 2-2018, 10-8-2018)
7-1-4: MAILBOXES AND NEWSPAPER DELIVERY BOXES IN CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   No mailbox or newspaper delivery box, (hereafter referred to as
mailbox) will be allowed to exist on the city's rights-of-way or interfere with
the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance, or operation
of the street system. The city does not allow new mailboxes to be installed
within city maintained public rights-of-way (ROW), because it is impractical
for property owners to keep mailbox clear of snow during the winter plow season
when city plow operations are occurring twenty-four-seven (24/7). Mailboxes
inevitably get damaged by snow plowing activities. These issues result in the
USPS being unable to deliver mail in a timely consistent manner. The following
exceptions apply:
      1.   If a property owner/mail customer can install the mailbox in an area
inside the owner's property (not in the city ROW) without obstructing any city
ROW, easements, or maintenance activities;
      2.   Does not require the delivery vehicle to access the mailbox via the
roadside of a city street; and
      3.   Gets approval from the USPS Cambridge Postmaster confirming that
they will deliver to this mailbox located on private property, then that is
acceptable and no city permitting is required. (Example: condominium HOA
installs a group mailbox within the complex's parking lot or private driveway).
      4.   Existing mailboxes located and accessed by USPS delivery vehicles on
city streets and ROWs are allowed, provided they do not create a snow plowing
or safety issue. If the location of an existing mailbox is deemed to be a
safety issue or creates an undue burden on the city's snow plowing activities,
that existing mailbox may be required to be removed from the city's ROW.
      5.   A new mailbox that is proposed to be co-located on an already
existing mailbox post that is recognized by the Public Works Department. No
city permitting is required for co-locate installation on an existing mailbox
post.
      6.   Requests for mailboxes to be located on private streets or public
streets that are outside the city limits need to be approved by the HOA or
other entity (i.e., Washington County) that has management control over the
street in addition to the USPS Cambridge Postmaster. No city permitting is
required for mailbox installations on private roads.
   B.   A mailbox installation that does not conform to the provisions of this
section is an unauthorized encroachment under Idaho Code, §49-221(2); §50-313;
or §50-314.
   C.   The location and construction of mailboxes shall conform to the rules
and regulations of the U.S. Postal Service, as well as the Manual for the
Location, Support and Mounting of Mailboxes adopted by the city. A mailbox
installation conforming with the Local Highway Technical Assistance Council
Manual for the Location, Support and Mounting of Mailboxes, dated December
2020, (hereafter referred to as Mailbox Manual) will be considered acceptable.
Mailbox location, height, support, mounting and turnout construction shall be
in accordance with the Mailbox Manual. Any exceptions to the Mailbox Manual may
be granted, if in the judgment of the city, the installation does not interfere
with the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance, or the
operation of the street system. Requests for any exception to the Mailbox
Manual shall be made in writing. The request shall contain sufficient details
to evaluate the requested exception.
      1.   Location: It will be the responsibility of the postal patron to
inform the city of any new or existing mailbox installation where turnout
construction is inadequate to permit all-weather access to the mailbox. An all-
weather turnout is sufficiently stable to support passenger cars stopping
regularly during all weather conditions. The sub-base (ballast), base and
surface treatment is a requirement of all new or reconstructed turnouts, and
shall be the same as the adjacent roadway section. No mailbox will be permitted
where access is obtained from the lanes of an arterial or where access is
otherwise prohibited by law or regulation. Where a mailbox is installed in the
vicinity of an existing guardrail, it should, whenever practical, be placed
behind the guardrail. Exceptions to the lateral placement criteria may exist on
residential streets and certain designated rural roads where the city deems it
is in the public's interest to permit lesser clearances or to require greater
clearances.
      2.   Mailboxes: Mailboxes shall be of light metal or plastic
construction, conforming to the requirements of the U.S. Postal Service.
Newspaper delivery boxes shall be of light sheet metal or plastic construction
of minimum dimensions suitable for holding a newspaper.
      3.   Supports: Mailbox supports shall not be set in concrete, unless the
support design has been shown to be safe by crash tests when so installed. A
metal post shall not be fitted with an anchor plate, but it may have an anti-
twist device (stabilizer fin) that extends no more than ten (10) inches below
the ground surface.
      4.   Mounting: The post-to-box attachment details should be of sufficient
strength to prevent the box from separating from the post if the installation
is struck by a vehicle. The product must result in a satisfactory attachment of
the mailbox to the post, and all components must fit together properly.
   D.   Removal Of Non-Conforming Or Unsafe Mailboxes: Any mailbox found to
violate the intent of this regulation shall be removed by the postal patron
upon notification by the city. At the discretion of the city, based on an
assessment of hazard to the public, the patron will be granted not less than
twenty-four (24) hours or more than fifteen (15) days, to remove an
unacceptable mailbox. After the specified removal period has expired, the
unacceptable mailbox will be removed by the city at the postal patron's
expense.
(Ord. 3-2024, 5-28-2024)
7-1-5: PENALTY:
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1  of this Code.
(Ord. 2-2018, 10-8-2018; amd. Ord. 3-2024, 5-28-2024)
7-1-6: POSTING ON STREET SIGNS AND UTILITY POLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills, posters, advertisements,
campaign literature or other notices on any utility pole, telephone pole or
street sign. All such notices shall be removed by the City. Any person
violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1  of this Code. (Ord. 11-2025, 10-14-2025)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Legislative Intent
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Permit Required
7-2-4: Application For Permit
7-2-5: Time Limits
7-2-6: Insurance Required
7-2-7: Permit Fee
7-2-8: Permit Compliance; Notice Of Excavation
7-2-9: Damage To Underground Facilities
7-2-10: Permit Issuance; Duties Of City
7-2-11: Excavations Exempt From Notice Requirement
7-2-12: Manner Of Excavating
7-2-13: Area Limit; Temporary Sidewalks
7-2-14: Restoration Of Surface
7-2-15: Barricades
7-2-16: Inspections
7-2-17: Waiver Permitted
7-2-18: Violation; Civil Penalty; Additional Remedies
7-2-19: Penalty
7-2-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to protect underground facilities
located underneath property owned or under the control of the city from damages
caused by haphazard excavation.
   B.   It is further the intent to protect the city from liability due to
careless actions by excavators.
   C.   It is further the intent to provide notice to the city of any
substantive excavation within the city limits. (1998 Code)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS DAY: Any day other than Saturday, Sunday, or legal, local, state or
federal holiday.
EMERGENCY: Any condition constituting a clear and present danger to life or
property, or a customer service outage.
EXCAVATION: Any operation in which earth, rock, or other material in the ground
is moved or otherwise displaced by any means including, but not limited to,
trenching, drilling, boring, tunneling, or explosives.
EXCAVATOR: Any person who engages directly in excavation.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Any item buried or placed belowground for use in
connection with the storage or conveyance of potable water, stormwater,
irrigation water, sewage, electronic, telephonic or telegraphic communications,
cable television, electric energy, petroleum products, gas, gaseous vapors,
hazardous liquids, or other substances and including, but not limited to,
pipes, sewers, conduits, cables, valves, lines, wires, manholes, attachments,
and those parts of poles or anchors belowground.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY OWNER: Any person, firm, utility, private association,
public association, or government agency who owns or operates an underground
facility. (1998 Code)
7-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate or tunnel in or under any
street, alley, public utility easement located on private property,
prescriptive or otherwise, or other public place in the city without first
having obtained a permit as is herein required. (Ord. 3-2011, 7-11-2011)
7-2-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Contents Of Application: Applications for permits to excavate or tunnel
in or under any street, alley, public utility easement located on private
property, prescriptive or otherwise, or other public place in the city shall be
made to the city clerk or the public works superintendent and shall contain the
location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose
thereof, the person doing the actual excavation work and the name of the person
for whom or for which work is being done.
   B.   Agreement To Comply: Such application shall also contain an agreement
signed by the person doing the work to be bound by and comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter relative to securing permits
shall not apply to officers or employees of the city engaged in doing work for
the city nor to persons doing work for the city under contract. (Ord. 3-2011,
7-11-2011)
7-2-5: TIME LIMITS:
Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated
will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the
surface of the ground or until the refill is made ready for the pavement to be
put on by the city, if the city is to restore such surface pavement. It shall
be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation unless the permission
for an extension of time is granted by the city. (1998 Code)
7-2-6: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No permit to excavate or tunnel in or under any street, alley, public utility
easement located on private property, prescriptive or otherwise, or other
public place in the city shall be issued unless and until the applicant has
filed with the city clerk proof of insurance in the sum of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, liability or
damage that may result or accrue for or because of the making, existence or
manner of guarding or constructing any such tunnel or excavation or failure to
properly restore the street or alley. (Ord. 3-2011, 7-11-2011)
7-2-7: PERMIT FEE:
No permit to open, excavate or tunnel in or under any street, alley, public
utility easement located on private property, prescriptive or otherwise, or
other public place in the city shall be issued unless and until the applicant
has paid to the city clerk a permit fee established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 3-2011, 7-11-2011)
7-2-8: PERMIT COMPLIANCE; NOTICE OF EXCAVATION:
   A.   Excavator Requirements: Before commencing excavation, the excavator
shall:
      1.   Comply with other applicable laws or permit requirements of any
public agency issuing permits;
      2.   Provide notice of the scheduled commencement of excavation to the
city, Idaho Dig Line, and other underground facility owners not less than two
(2) business days nor more than ten (10) business days before the scheduled
date for commencement of excavation, unless otherwise agreed by the parties;
      3.   Receive a permit from the city for excavation of any street, alley,
public utility easement located on private property, prescriptive or otherwise,
or other public place in the city unless under the provision of section
7-2-11 of this chapter, as set forth below.
   B.   Emergency Excavations: Emergency excavations are exempt from the time
requirements for notification provided in this section.
   C.   Unidentified Underground Facilities; Notice To City: If the excavator,
while performing the excavation, discovers underground facilities (whether
active or abandoned) which are not identified, the excavator shall cease
excavating in the vicinity of the facility and immediately notify the city.
(Ord. 3-2011, 7-11-2011)
7-2-9: DAMAGE TO UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
   A.   Notify City And Safety Agencies Of Damage: An excavator who, in the
course of excavation, contacts or damages an underground facility shall notify
the city and the underground facility owner owning or operating such facility.
If the damage causes an emergency condition, the excavator causing the damage
shall also alert the appropriate local public safety agencies and take all
appropriate steps to ensure the public safety. No damaged underground facility
may be buried until it is repaired or relocated and inspected by the city.
   B.   Provisions For Repair; Cost: The excavator shall assume all costs
incurred by the city for the repair of any underground facility damaged in the
course of excavation. The city shall arrange for repairs or relocation as soon
as is practical or may permit the excavator to do necessary repairs or
relocation upon request. (Ord. 3-2011, 7-11-2011)
7-2-10: PERMIT ISSUANCE; DUTIES OF CITY:
   A.   Permit Issuance; Notice To Excavator: The city will issue permits
authorizing excavation operations and shall notify persons seeking such permits
of the existence of this chapter. It is the sole responsibility of persons
seeking excavation permits to notify all underground facility owners.
   B.   Permit Invalid Without Notice: A permit shall not be valid for
excavation until or unless the notice provisions of this section have been
complied with and documentation provided, as approved by the city. (1998 Code)
7-2-11: EXCAVATIONS EXEMPT FROM NOTICE REQUIREMENT:
The following excavations shall not require notice of the excavation pursuant
to Idaho Code section 55-2203(1)(b):
   A.   An excavation of less than fifteen inches (15") in vertical depth
outside the boundaries of an underground facility easement of public record on
private property and if the excavation is being performed by the person or an
employee of the person who owns or occupies the property on which the
excavation is being performed.
   B.   The tilling of soil to a depth of less than fifteen inches (15") for
agricultural practices, unless such excavation is on public property.
   C.   Excavation of less than fifteen inches (15") upon public property or
roads, alleys, rights of way, and parks owned by or upon which the city has an
easement.
   D.   The extraction of minerals within recorded mining claims or excavation
within material sites legally located and of record, unless such excavation
occurs within the boundaries of an underground facility easement. (1998 Code)
7-2-12: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
   A.   Bracing: It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or tunnel in any
way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in
excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any
portion which extends underneath the opening at the surface. (1998 Code)
   B.   Existing Pipes, Cables, Conduits, Trees: No injury shall be done to any
pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels, and
notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or
conduits and to the public works superintendent before such pipes, cables or
conduits shall be disturbed. Proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the
roots of any tree or shrub wherever possible. (Ord. 4-2011, 9-12-2011)
7-2-13: AREA LIMIT; TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to render more than one-half (1/2) the width of any street
unavailable for travel in connection with any excavation or tunnel. If any
sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed
or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. (1998
Code)
7-2-14: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
   A.   Opening Where No Pavement Exists: Any person making any excavation or
tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city
shall restore the surface thereof to its original condition if there is no
pavement there. Refills shall be of suitable materials placed under the
supervision of the public works superintendent and properly tamped down and any
bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground. (Ord. 4-2011,
9-12-2011)
   B.   Opening Where Pavement Exists: If the excavation or opening has
necessitated an opening in a pavement, the refill shall be properly made so
that the surface pavement can be relayed by the city in the same manner,
thickness and character as the surrounding pavement. Notice shall be given to
the city when such opening is prepared for pavement, and the pavement may be
laid by the city either by contract or by city employees, provided the city
incurs no expense in so doing. In either event, the surface relayed may extend
for one foot (1') in every direction beyond the original opening. (1998 Code)
7-2-15: BARRICADES:
   A.   Barricades Required: Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a
street, sidewalk or other public place or making any excavation in any such
place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or
vehicle by reason of the work.
   B.   Lights: Such barricades shall be protected by suitable and sufficient
lights. These lights shall be kept burning from twilight in the evening through
the night. Flares, lanterns, bombs or other devices using a flame shall not be
permitted as suitable lights.
   C.   Pavement Defects; Open Excavation: Defects in pavement shall be
barricaded to prevent injury and any person properly maintaining an opening or
excavation in such place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same
remains open by proper barricades and lights described in subsection B of this
section.
   D.   Interference With Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to disturb or
interfere with a barricade or light lawfully placed to protect or mark new
pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1998 Code)
7-2-16: INSPECTIONS:
The public works superintendent shall, from time to time, inspect all
excavations or tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other
public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Notice shall be given to the city at least ten (10) hours before the
work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (Ord. 4-2011, 9-12-
2011)
7-2-17: WAIVER PERMITTED:
The notification and marking provisions of this chapter may be waived for one
or more designated persons. (1998 Code)
7-2-18: VIOLATION; CIVIL PENALTY; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
   A.   Civil Penalty Imposed: Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter, and which violation results in damage to underground facilities, is
subject to a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation. All penalties recovered in such actions shall be deposited
in the state general account.
   B.   Liability For Treble Costs: Any excavator who wilfully or maliciously
damages a field marked underground facility owned by the city shall be liable
for treble the costs incurred in repairing or relocating the facility.
   C.   Additional Remedies: Unless expressly provided herein, nothing in this
chapter eliminates, alters or otherwise impairs common law, statutory or other
preexisting rights and duties of persons affected by the provisions of this
chapter; nor does anything in this chapter, unless expressly so provided,
eliminate, alter or otherwise impair other remedies, state or federal,
including those at common law, or an underground facility owner whose facility
is damaged; nor do the provisions of this chapter affect any civil remedies for
personal injury or property damage except as expressly provided for herein.
(1998 Code)
7-2-19: PENALTY:
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Trimming Trees Required
7-3-2: Maintenance Of Hedges And Shrubs
7-3-3: Injury To Trees Or Shrubs
7-3-4: Trees Outside Property Line
7-3-5: Landscaping in Public Rights-Of-Way
7-3-1: TRIMMING TREES REQUIRED:
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on property
owned or occupied by him, overhanging any public thoroughfare, to at least
twelve feet (12') above said thoroughfare, so that the branches thereon will
not interfere with pedestrians or public travel. (1977 Code §
7-3-1; amd. 1998 Code)
7-3-2: MAINTENANCE OF HEDGES AND SHRUBS:
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubs
adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/or shrubs shall
extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the City. (1977 Code §
7-3-2)
7-3-3: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBS:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or
without lawful authority so to do, wilfully to injure, deface, disfigure or
destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or
plant located either on private ground or on any public place or thoroughfare.
(1977 Code §
7-3-3)
7-3-4: TREES OUTSIDE PROPERTY LINE:
The City Council is hereby provided full and complete control over all trees
which are outside of the property lines of privately-owned real property. (1977
Code §
7-3-4)
7-3-5: LANDSCAPING IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Any person or business who plants trees, shrubs, flowers, grass or plants or
otherwise landscapes in a public right-of-way shall do so at their own risk and
the City assumes no liability for any damage to said landscaping by City
vehicles or employees, including but not limited to maintenance equipment and
crews, snow plowing equipment and public safety vehicles. (Ord. 10-2025, 10-14-
2025)
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Purpose
7-4-2: Definitions
7-4-3: City Property
7-4-4: Recreational Activities
7-4-5: Behavior
7-4-6: Merchandising, Advertising And Signs
7-4-7: City Owned, Leased Or Maintained Natural Area, Park, Playground Or Play
Field Operating Policy
7-4-8: Enforcement
7-4-9: Penalties
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
It shall be the purpose of this chapter to protect and ensure equitable usage
of all city owned, leased or maintained natural areas, parks, playgrounds or
play fields throughout the city for the enjoyment of the public. All of said
control is for purposes of providing reasonable safety of city owned public
land, provide reasonable security for all members of the public utilizing the
city's land, and provide reasonable care of existing and future improvements
and development of city owned public lands. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
prescribed in this section:
APPLICANT: The person, or group of people, who is or are the organizer(s) and
with whom the responsibility for conduct of the special event lays.
CITY: The city of Cambridge, Idaho.
CITY ATTORNEY: The duly appointed city attorney of the city of Cambridge,
Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The duly elected city council of the city of Cambridge, Idaho.
ENGAGING IN OR CONDUCTING BUSINESS: The selling, soliciting, advertising or
offering for sale of any service or item of personal property or real property
or any interest in such property.
NATURAL AREA: Any undeveloped or minimally developed property or section of
property owned by the city of Cambridge.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
any other business entity.
PUBLIC EVENT: Any special event held on public property in which the general
public is invited, with or without charge, and which creates significant public
impact through: a) the attraction of large crowds; b) the necessity for street
closures or use of other public property; c) the required use of city equipment
and/or services.
PUBLIC HOLIDAY: Any state or national holiday or any locally declared day of
celebration, including, but not limited to, Hells Canyon Days and New Year's
Eve, during which a special event may be held.
PUBLIC PARK: Any public property designated and developed for the use of the
public as a park.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, public right of way,
park, parking lot or other place owned in fee or leased by the city, or in, on
or over which an easement exists in the name of or held by the city, or which
exists for the benefit and use of the public.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: A portion of property reserved for public use, and
accepted for such by the city council, to provide circulation and travel to
abutting properties, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
provisions for public utilities, cut and fill slopes, and open public space.
SPECIAL EVENT: The temporary use of public property, including streets, parking
lots, and parks, for the purpose of conducting certain public events such as,
but not limited to, art shows, music concerts, fundraising events, amusement
attractions, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, craft fairs, sporting events,
contests, dances, tournaments, walk-a-thons, marathons, races, exhibitions or
related activities. In addition, a "special event" is any public event, which
could reasonably be interpreted to cause significant public impact via
disturbance, crowd, traffic/parking or disruption of the normal routine of the
community or affected neighborhood.
SPONSOR: The applicant becomes the "sponsor" when the special event has been
approved by the city, and the fee, security, insurance and indemnity
requirements have been fulfilled. The sponsor becomes the sole proprietor of
the special event and inherits the responsibilities connected with all
licenses, fee assessments, copyrights, insurance and liabilities connected with
the special event.
STREET CLOSURE: The deliberate blockage of all or a portion of, a public
street, a right of way or a city owned parking facility to prohibit the flow of
traffic or access of vehicles. Any nonconstruction street closure, regardless
of duration, requires advance permission from the city council.
VENUE: The location or locations upon which a special event is held, as well as
the ingress and egress route.
WEEKLY EVENT: Any event that takes place once per week for two (2) or more
consecutive weeks. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
7-4-3: CITY PROPERTY:
No person in any city owned, leased or maintained natural area, park,
playground or play field shall:
   A.   Buildings And Other Property:
      1.   Disfiguration And Removal: Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public
utilities or parts or appurtenances, signs, notices or placards whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or
other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal, or have in their possession any of the
foregoing things or objects or any part thereof.
      2.   Restrooms And Washrooms: Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms
and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.
      3.   Erection Of Structures: Construct or erect any permanent building or
structure of whatever kind, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, except with special written permission from the
Cambridge city council.
   B.   Trees, Shrubbery And Lawns; Injury And Removal:
      1.   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure
the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any
person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A
person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way
injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
      2.   Plant or cause to be planted any tree or plant of any kind except
with prior written permission from the Cambridge city council.
   C.   Parking:
      1.   Park a vehicle in other than established parking area.
      2.   Drive any vehicle on any area except established roads or parking
areas. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
7-4-4: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES:
No person in any city owned, leased or maintained natural area, park,
playground or play field shall:
   A.   Picnic, Natural Area And Park Area Use:
      1.   Availability: Violate the regulation that use of the individual
tables and benches follows generally the rules of "first come, first served".
      2.   Nonexclusive: Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the
buildings or structures for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of
other persons nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
      3.   Moving Tables: Move tables from under the picnic shelter.
      4.   Duty Of Picnicker Or Camper: Leave a picnic area before all trash in
the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed
in disposable receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park or natural
area by the picnicker or camper to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
      5.   Camping: Camp in anything except tents in city parks, or stay longer
than overnight until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following morning. Camping is
not allowed at natural areas unless prior permission is obtained from the city
council or the lessee. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
7-4-5: BEHAVIOR:
No person in any city owned, leased or maintained natural area, park,
playground or play field shall:
   A.   Consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in the city parks.
   B.   Throw, carry or have in his possession any glass beverage container in
any city park.
   C.   Be under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or drugs to
the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or property or annoy
or disturb persons in his vicinity.
   D.   Permit or suffer a dog or other domestic animal to enter or remain in a
park except on a leash or carried by the person owning or having the care,
custody and control of such dog or domestic animal. All owners or persons
having the care, custody and control of such dogs or domestic animals will
clean up and remove any fecal matter that is deposited by their dog or domestic
animal and cause the same to be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
   E.   Endanger the safety or health of any person by any conduct or act.
   F.   Prevent any person from using any part or any of its facilities or
interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and the rules and
regulations applicable to such use.
   G.   Violate any rules and regulations for the use of any city owned, leased
or maintained natural area, park, playground or play field or any of its
facilities.
   H.   Solicit or accost other persons for the purpose of begging or
soliciting alms.
   I.   Use a radio, loudspeaker, CD player, tape player, or any other
amplification device in any city park which can be heard at a distance of more
than fifty feet (50') from the source of the amplified sound, without first
having obtained written permission issued by the city.
   J.   Make, use, or have any open fires in or on any city owned, leased or
maintained natural area, park, playground or play field except in designated
areas.
   K.   Except when permitted as a part of a public display authorized by this
chapter, it is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession or to
use fireworks of any kind on any city owned, leased or maintained natural area,
park, playground or play field, or any arterial or collector roadways.
   L.   No group or event shall be allowed to charge fees of any sort to the
public for events held within public parks without first obtaining approval of
the city council. Said approval may be conditioned upon receipt of proof of
adequate insurance coverage, a release of liability of the city for the event
or gathering and the procurement of any required licenses. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-
2010)
7-4-6: MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS:
No person in any city owned, leased or maintained natural area, park,
playground or play field shall:
   A.   Vending And Peddling: Expose or offer for sale any article or thing.
Nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here
made as to any concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation
of the city council.
   B.   Advertising: Distribute, leave or throw any advertising material, such
as dodgers, handbills, circulars, or like matter or give away or otherwise
distribute for advertising purposes any goods or wares. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-
2010)
7-4-7: CITY OWNED, LEASED OR MAINTAINED NATURAL AREA, PARK, PLAYGROUND OR PLAY
FIELD OPERATING POLICY:
   A.   Hours: Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, city owned,
leased or maintained natural area, park, playground or play field shall be open
to the public every day of the year twenty four (24) hours a day. The mayor
shall have the authority to change the hours of any park by proclamation and
publication of the proclamation in the "Upper Country News Reporter", the
official newspaper of the city.
   B.   Closed Areas: Any section or part of any city owned, leased or
maintained natural area, park, playground or play field may be declared closed
to the public by the Cambridge city council at any time and for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regularly and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise) and either entirely or merely for certain uses, as the city council
shall find reasonably necessary.
   C.   Approval Process: For any organized event other than personal use, the
sponsor must submit a written request for use of any city owned, leased or
maintained natural area, park, playground or play field at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date requested for the activity or event. The request must
include:
      1.   A detailed schedule of events,
      2.   Accurate information regarding the historical audience attendance,
which has previously been attracted to the event,
      3.   An executed hold harmless agreement in a form approved by the city
attorney's office.
      4.   If the activity or event is anticipated to attract more than five
hundred (500) people or last more than three (3) hours, the sponsor must also
provide proof of liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured
in an amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage or
bodily or personal injury, death or loss as a result of any one occurrence or
accident regardless of the number of persons injured or the number of
claimants. The insurance policy cannot be canceled or modified by the sponsor
or insurance company without at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice
to the city.
   D.   Concessions: The event sponsor is allowed to sell items related to the
event or concessions. The related concession can operate only during the hours
of the special event. The city accepts no responsibility for security of
display booths or materials, and the sponsor and special event concessionaires
must agree in writing to hold the city, its agents and employees harmless as
part of their permit application. Concessions along city rights of way during
events shall not impede or restrict the free flow of foot traffic or the
ingress or egress to adjacent buildings.
   E.   Additional Rules: The sponsor must comply and enforce compliance with
all applicable guidelines, rules or regulations and is responsible to reimburse
the city for any and all damage to city property resulting from the activity or
event. The sponsor shall be liable for any loss, damage or injuries sustained
by any person or persons to whom the permit shall have been issued. The city
council or a duly authorized representative shall have the authority to revoke
permission upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
7-4-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Provisions Enforced: Officials, police officers and duly authorized
representatives of the city of Cambridge shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Ejectment: A police officer or a duly authorized representative of the
city of Cambridge shall have the authority to eject from the park any person
acting in violation of this chapter.
   C.   Seizure Of Property: A police officer shall have the authority to seize
and confiscate any property, thing or device on city property or used in
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
7-4-9: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2-2010, 12-13-2010)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: General Parking Provisions
7-5-2: Stopping, Standing Or Parking In Specified Places
7-5-3: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
7-5-4: Violation; Penalties
7-5-1: GENERAL PARKING PROVISIONS:
Except in those areas within the city where angle parking is permitted, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way highway shall be stopped or parked
with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the
right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right hand
shoulder. (Ord. 9-2025, 10-14-2025)
7-5-2: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, in
compliance with law, the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         a.   On the traffic side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a highway.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks.
         i.   On any place where traffic control devices prohibit stopping.
      2.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at any intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of
a highway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a highway opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five feet (75') of the entrance (when properly signposted).
         f.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit standing.
      3.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as to be unlawful. (Ord. 9-
2025, 10-14-2025)
7-5-3: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
The city council may, by resolution, determine and designate by proper signs
which parking spaces shall be limited to parking for persons with disabilities
only within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in
a space reserved for persons with disabilities, except for a vehicle that is
momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a person with a disability
to enter or leave the vehicle, unless the vehicle is displaying special license
plates for persons with disabilities, a special card for persons with
disabilities or a special temporary card as prescribed in Idaho Code section
48-410. (Ord. 9-2025, 10-14-2025)
7-5-4: VIOLATION: PENALTIES:
Any violation of any section of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically set
forth herein, is punishable, as follows: the Public Works Superintendent shall
provide the owner of a vehicle that is violating any provision of this chapter
with a written warning regarding the violation. The owner shall have 24 hours
from the time of receipt of the written warning to cure the violation and
become compliant with this chapter. Each 24-hour period that an owner remains
in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate violation and subjects the
owner to penalties as provided in this section. Any owner violating this
chapter shall upon conviction be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine
of $100.00. (Ord. 9-2025, 10-14-2025)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Waterworks System; Mandatory Connection
8-1-2: Authority Of City Council
8-1-3: Rates, Charges, And Fees
8-1-4: Application For Water Service; Grant Of Consensual Lien
8-1-5: Request For Water Service; Termination Of Water Service; Fees
8-1-6: Water Service Connection; Plumbing Requirements; Permit And Fee
8-1-7: Payment Of Costs; Delinquencies
8-1-8: Water Revenue Fund
8-1-9: Protest Of Billing
8-1-10: Water Service Line Requirements
8-1-11: Free Access For Inspection
8-1-12: Water Meters
8-1-13: Nonliability Of City
8-1-14: Injury To Or Tampering With Water System
8-1-15: Nonessential Water Usage
8-1-16: Fire Protection Fittings
8-1-17: Resale Of Water
8-1-18: Water Availability Restricted Outside City Limits
8-1-19: Violations; Penalty
8-1-1: WATERWORKS SYSTEM; MANDATORY CONNECTION:
   A.   Construction Of System: For the purpose of promoting health, safety and
the general welfare of the city, a "water system" as described in Idaho Code
section 50-1029 shall be constructed, extended, maintained, repaired, replaced,
operated and removed within the corporate limits of the city by which to
provide an adequate public waterworks, public water system and water supply for
domestic, commercial, industrial, fire protection and other municipal purposes
and uses.
   B.   Connection To System Required: Every residence or place of business
within the corporate limits of the city shall be separately and independently
connected by a separate water service line to a public water line or main where
such water line or main adjoins the lot, tract or parcel of land on which such
building or structure stands.
   C.   New Building Construction; Plans To Show Water Connection: No permit
shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure in the city
on any lot, tract or parcel of land where there is a public water line or main
adjoining such lot, tract or parcel of land, unless the plans and
specifications show connections to said water system in compliance with this
code and with any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this code.
   D.   Compliance With City Requirements: All such connections to the city
public water system shall be properly designed and constructed in conformity
with ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city.
   E.   Right To Revoke: Permission given to connect to the public water system
shall be upon the express condition that the city may for good cause revoke the
same and the person making such connection, or his successor in interest, shall
have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such permission being
revoked. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-2: AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
In all cases wherein by this chapter any discretion is vested in any city
official or city employee, such discretion shall be subject to the control of
the city council. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-3: RATES, CHARGES, AND FEES:
   A.   Water User Fees: From time to time, the city shall adopt resolutions,
which resolutions shall set rates to be charged for water service and usage
delivered to residential and commercial users and for bulk water sales.
   B.   Water Connection Fees: From time to time, the city shall adopt
resolutions, which resolutions shall set fees and charges for each and every
connection to city water mains and lines, for application for service, for
temporary termination of service, any involuntary termination of service and
any other fees deemed necessary. In addition to the connection fee, the
property owner shall be responsible for the total expenses incurred from the
installation for labor, services, and materials provided in putting in each
water main tap, service line, water meter vault and water meter including the
current cost of materials and the actual cost of all asphalt repair after the
installation of the water service.
   C.   Connection Charges Separate From Service Rates: The charges for
connecting to the public water system shall be made, imposed and collected as a
separate charge and are hereby declared to be separate and in addition to the
fees and charges imposed and collected pursuant to the provisions of subsection
A of this section and are in addition to and separate from any other charge or
fee imposed by any other ordinance. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-4: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE; GRANT OF CONSENSUAL LIEN:
   A.   Water and sewer services are hereby declared to be appurtenant to the
land to which the water and sewer services are provided. When any person
applies for either water or sewer services, or for both services, as part of
their application they shall sign an agreement which states in part that in the
event of nonpayment of their bill, they grant to the city of Cambridge, a
consensual lien against the property to secure the payment of the water and/or
sewer service bill in full.
   B.   In the event of the nonpayment of a water or sewer bill, the city may
discontinue service to the property and may refuse to reestablish water or
sewer services to the property until the bill is paid in full. The city may
refuse to reestablish water or sewer service even though the property has been
sold or transferred to a new owner.
   C.   In the event a property owner has not signed an agreement to allow the
city to file a consensual lien if water or sewer services are not paid for, the
city shall have the right to obtain a judgment against the water user and
against the benefited property and record the judgment as a judgment lien
against the property.
   D.   In the event of nonpayment, the city shall proceed to collect any
unpaid water or sewer bills both against the individual, individuals or
entities accruing the bill and in the alternative may sue to foreclose against
the property against which the lien has been filed or recorded.
   E.   The consensual lien will be in substantial compliance with the lien
form created by the city clerk and which is approved by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-5: REQUEST FOR WATER SERVICE; TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE; FEES:
   A.   Water Turned On At Applicant's Request, New Water Service: Application
to have new water service installed and turned on shall be made in writing to
the city clerk, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and
accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of
the city water system by the applicant. A connection fee, as set by resolution
by the city council, shall be paid for new water service.
   B.   Water Turned On At Applicant's Request, Existing Water Service: A
request to have existing water service turned on shall be made to the city
clerk. A change in property ownership shall require application for service
from the city clerk. A fee as set by resolution by the city council shall be
paid for turning on the water.
   C.   Water Turned Off At Applicant's Request: A request to have water
service temporarily terminated shall be made to the city clerk prior to
termination of water service. A fee as set by resolution by the city council
shall be paid for temporarily terminating water service.
   D.   Water Turned Off For Access Denial: If access is denied per section
8-1-11 of this chapter, water service will be discontinued.
   E.   Water Turned Off For Failure To Pay; Discontinuance Of Service: In the
event the account shall be in arrears for city services, it shall be the
responsibility of the city clerk to notify the property owner and the legally
authorized agent of the arrearage and that unless all arrearages are paid
within five (5) days from the date of the notice, that the service shall be
discontinued unless other arrangements have been agreed upon in advance. In the
event such arrearages are not paid after five (5) days from the date of said
notice, the city clerk shall, without further notice, cause the service to the
premises to be discontinued unless other arrangements have been agreed upon in
advance. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-6: WATER SERVICE CONNECTION; PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS; PERMIT AND FEE:
   A.   No connections with a water main shall be made without a permit being
issued and twenty four (24) hours' notice having been given to the city clerk.
Applications for such connections must be made to the city clerk, and the fees
provided by sections
8-1-3 and
8-1-5 of this chapter shall be paid for each connection at the time of
application.
   B.   No water shall be turned on for service to property or premises in
which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the city, the
statutes of the state, and until after the plumbing has been inspected and
passed by a certified plumbing inspector. Provided, however, that water may be
turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   No water from the city public water system shall be turned on for
service into any property or premises by any person except by the duly
authorized personnel of the city. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-7: PAYMENT OF COSTS; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Owner Responsibility: All water accounts under this chapter shall be
opened and maintained by the owner of record or the contract purchaser,
hereinafter referred to as property owner, of the property to be served. Such
property owner shall agree, as a condition of opening any water service
account, to be liable for any service or other charges imposed because of such
water services, whether such charges are the consequence of use of water or
provision of service by the owner or by tenants who have agreed to pay utility
charges. The record owner of real property is ultimately responsible for all
utility charges which are the obligation of the property served.
   B.   Unpaid Water Bills: Unpaid water bills and water associated services
shall be the ultimate obligation of the owner of the property served. Any
property receiving service from the city water system may be disconnected if
said services are not paid for as required herein. An owner may allow a tenant
to pay utility charges while the tenant is in possession of rented premises,
but such action shall not relieve the owner of the ultimate responsibility for
the charges accruing to the account.
   C.   Written Authorization Required: A property owner may authorize a tenant
to be his legally authorized agent with a written letter to such effect on
record at city hall. In the event legally authorized agent fails to pay
charges, property owner shall be ultimately responsible.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Service; Fee To Reestablish: In the event of a
discontinuance of service, the party seeking to reestablish such service shall
pay a charge as set by resolution by the city council plus all past arrears.
   E.   Prorating: The city does not prorate. In the event of rental
properties, the property owner shall be responsible for any prorating of all
charges incurred by tenants.
   F.   Due Date: All charges shall be due and payable by the fifteenth of each
month. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
   G.   Monthly Billing; Late Payment Penalty: All bills for water shall be
paid monthly to the city clerk on or before the fifteenth day of the month for
the previous month's consumption. If not paid on or before the fifteenth of the
month, a ten percent (10%) penalty shall be applied exclusively to the overdue
consumption, not on unpaid penalty, and attached to the bill. (Ord. 4-2016, 6-
13-2016)
8-1-8: WATER REVENUE FUND:
   A.   Fund Created; Expenditures: There is hereby created an enterprise fund
to be known and designated as the water revenue fund. All charges and fees and
all connection fees received and collected pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be deposited to the credit of the water revenue fund and such
monies are hereby set aside and perpetually appropriated for, and shall be
expended only for, the payment of:
      1.   Costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, replacement and repair
of the city public water system; and
      2.   Constructing, improving and extending the city public water system
as the term "water system" is described by Idaho Code section 50-1029(b) or any
successor code section; and
      3.   The principal and interest on revenue funds duly issued and sold in
accordance with ordinances of the city and statutes of the state.
   B.   Duties Of Clerk: The city clerk shall bill and receive all charges and
fees and all connection fees in the time and manner required by the city
council or by an ordinance. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-9: PROTEST OF BILLING:
In case of a dispute as to the amount of a bill, or the credits to be allowed
on payment of a bill when due, the user shall give notice at the office of the
city clerk at the time of payment, which must be before the delinquent date,
that the bill is in dispute. The city council will forthwith investigate such
complaint, and if such complaint shall disclose that user's objections are well
founded, the city will refund the amount of the payment in dispute or credit it
upon the next monthly bill of the water user. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-10: WATER SERVICE LINE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Installation: All water service lines from the water main tap to one
foot (1') past the water meter vault on the premises served shall be installed
by the city at the expense of the property owner, the developer or the
applicant for the service. Such installations shall be under the direct
supervision and inspection of the public works superintendent. Thereafter, the
service line from the water main tap to one foot (1') past the water meter
vault shall be under the exclusive control and jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Repairs: All repairs to service lines from the water main tap to one
foot (1') past the water meter vault shall be made by the city. The city will
be responsible for costs of repairs if the repairs are necessitated because of
normal aging and deterioration. Costs of repairs required because of all other
causes shall be paid by the property owner or any person committing any act
which makes such repair necessary.
   C.   Excavations; Permit: Excavations for installing water service lines or
repairing the same shall be made in compliance with section
7-2-3 of this code.
   D.   Standard Specifications: Water service lines must be installed in
accordance with the Idaho standards for public works construction (ISPWC)
standards, as adopted by the city. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-11: FREE ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Right Of Entry For Inspection: The public works superintendent or any
person designated by the city shall be given free and unobstructed access at
all times to all improvements or areas supplied with water from the city public
water system. Access shall be given to the public works superintendent or his
designee to examine the condition of the apparatus, the amount of water used,
any connections or alterations to the system, and the manner of its using. Any
water user violating this chapter, the rules and regulations relating to water
usage, water supply or to the city public water system shall forfeit all
payments or deposits made. Access may be denied, which will result in immediate
termination of water and sewer services per subsection 8-1-5D of this chapter.
(Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-12: WATER METERS:
   A.   Required: All premises using the city public water system shall be
equipped with a functioning water meter furnished and approved by the city. All
new water meters for new connections shall be paid for by the property owner,
the applicant for water services, or the developer or by the consumer. Water
meters shall be installed in an unobstructed location that can be easily
accessed by a meter reader.
   B.   Reading: The city shall read or cause to be read every water meter used
in or outside of the city as frequently as the city may determine is necessary
so that the bills may be sent out at a time designated by the city. At any time
when it may be difficult or inconvenient to read the meters, the city may elect
to not read the water meters and may estimate usage based on past consumption
or may charge a flat rate as set by resolution of the city council. If at a
later reading the estimate is shown to be high, the user will be given credit
for any overage paid.
   C.   Downsizing And Upsizing: Water users shall have the option to reduce
the size of water meters larger than five-eighths by three-fourths inch (5/8 x
3/4") size servicing their lot or parcel of land by written notification to the
city of Cambridge. Upon receipt of such written notification, the monthly
charges for the water service will be based upon the requested reduced size
beginning the following month. The city of Cambridge may change the water meter
to the requested reduced size at its convenience and expense. Requests to
increase the size of a water meter will only be considered when a payment equal
to the cost of a complete new installation of the larger meter and service line
size has been made to the city, regardless of the size of the existing water
meter and service line, and even if the existing water meter and service line
is the size requested. Nonresidential users must continue to meet Idaho state
plumbing code requirements. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-13: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not be held liable for damages to any water user by reason of
stoppage or interruption of the water supply caused by scarcity of water,
accident to waterworks or water main, alterations, repairs, termination of
water service, or from any other causes. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-14: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Damaging System: It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, adjust,
molest, meddle, or otherwise interfere with any portion of the city public
water system or its appurtenances, located on either public or private
property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally,
from handling or otherwise tampering with said water system, the violator shall
pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or
any damages that may result from the tampering with said water system.
   B.   Replacement Cost: The city's cost of repairing or replacing any meter,
shutoff valve or other related part of the water system having been damaged by
any person other than a city officer or employee shall be the obligation of the
property owner. Owners are responsible for the acts of their tenants,
contractors or permissive users. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-15: NONESSENTIAL WATER USAGE:
Any or all nonessential water usage, as determined by the city of Cambridge or
its staff, shall be curtailed or discontinued during or at any time when the
city determines that a water shortage exists or any water related emergency
exists. Fountains and sprinklers for lawns or gardens shall not be operated
during or at any time when the fire department is attempting to extinguish any
fire within the city limits. At any time the city council determines that good
cause exists, the council may impose upon persons using city water for
irrigation purposes a rotation system of irrigation. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-16: FIRE PROTECTION FITTINGS:
Pipes for fire protection purposes shall be fitted with such fixtures only as
are needed for fire protection, and such fixtures shall be sealed by the public
works superintendent. Whenever practicable, the hose shall be kept attached to
the fixtures, or suspended conveniently for use in case of fire and shall be
under the control of said superintendent at all times. All fire hydrants shall
be under the control of, and shall be kept in repair by the public works
superintendent; provided, that the fire department and street department shall
have free access to said hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any other person to
operate any fire hydrant or to attempt to draw water from, or to obstruct the
approach to. Wrenches for fire hydrants shall be furnished by the public works
superintendent to the fire department and the street department, and it shall
be unlawful for any person having charge of said wrenches to permit the same to
be taken from their accustomed place of deposit, or to be used for any purpose
other than that authorized by the superintendent. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-1-17: RESALE OF WATER:
No water received through the city public water system shall be resold or
distributed in any manner by the recipient thereof until the water user has
submitted an application to the city council, has appeared before the city
council, and the request has been approved by the city council. An application
to resell or distribute water may be denied for any reason. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-
2014)
8-1-18: WATER AVAILABILITY RESTRICTED OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
No water from the city public water system shall be made available to any
property outside of the corporate city limits. This section is subject to any
presently existing hookups. No new hookups shall be allowed. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-
12-2014)
8-1-19: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Violations; Tampering With System: It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      1.   Violate any provision of this chapter;
      2.   Tamper with, alter or injure any part of the city waterworks or city
public water system, any water meter, or any shutoff box;
      3.   Turn the water supply to an individual property off or on at the
water meter vault;
      4.   Install, remove or disconnect a water meter, service line, or water
main tap without city approval.
   B.   Penalty: Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, any such person shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition to the foregoing, the city, any property owner
or any resident citizen aggrieved may proceed, by way of injunction, to enforce
the discontinuance of such violation or any situation or condition which may
have been brought about or exist by reason of such violation of this chapter
and may, in addition to such injunctive relief, be awarded both compensatory
and punitive damages for such violation. (Ord. 2-2014, 5-12-2014)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Sanitary Sewer System; Mandatory Connection
8-2-2: Rates, Charges, And Fees
8-2-3: Application For Sewer Service; Grant Of Consensual Lien
8-2-4: Request For Sewer Service; Termination Of Sewer Service; Fees
8-2-5: Sewer Service Connection; Plumbing Requirements; Permit And Fee
8-2-6: Payment Of Costs; Delinquencies
8-2-7: Sewer Revenue Fund
8-2-8: Protest Of Billing
8-2-9: Sewer Service Line Requirements
8-2-10: Free Access For Inspection
8-2-11: Grease Traps Required
8-2-12: Nonliability Of City
8-2-13: Injury To Or Tampering With Sewer System
8-2-14: Prohibited Discharges
8-2-15: Violations; Penalty
8-2-1: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; MANDATORY CONNECTION:
   A.   Construction Of System: For the purpose of promoting health, safety and
the general welfare of the city, a "sewerage system" as described in Idaho Code
section 50-1029 shall be constructed, extended, maintained, repaired, replaced,
operated and removed within the corporate limits of the city by which to
provide an adequate public sewerage system for domestic, commercial,
industrial, fire protection and other municipal purposes and uses.
   B.   Connection To System Required: Every parcel of land or premises within
the boundaries of the city which has been or which is improved for human
occupancy or used by any person, or used as a commercial business, shall be
connected to the city public sanitary sewerage system; provided that the
sewerage system is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line.
Any owner or person in charge of any parcel of land to be improved for human
occupancy or business that is not connected to the city public sanitary system,
shall make or cause to be made such connection within sixty (60) days after
receiving official notice from the city to so connect; provided, that the
sewerage system is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line.
   C.   New Building Construction; Plans To Show Sewer Connection: No permit
shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure in the city
on any lot, tract or parcel of land where there is a public sewer line or main
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of property line, tract or parcel of land,
unless the plans and specifications show connections to said sewerage system in
compliance with this code and with any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to
this code.
   D.   Compliance With City Requirements: All such connections to the city
public sanitary sewer mains shall be properly designed and constructed in
conformity with ordinances, regulations, standards and resolutions adopted by
the city.
   E.   Right To Revoke: Permission given to connect to the public sewerage
system shall be upon the express condition that the city may for good cause
revoke the same and the person making such connection, or his successor in
interest, shall have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such
permission being revoked. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-2: RATES, CHARGES, AND FEES:
   A.   Sewer User Fees: From time to time the city may adopt resolutions,
which resolutions shall set the rates to be charged for sewer service to
residential and commercial users.
   B.   Sewer Connection Fee: From time to time, the city may adopt
resolutions, which resolutions shall set fees and charges for each and every
connection to city sewer mains and lines, for application for service, for
temporary termination of service, and any other fees deemed necessary. In
addition to the connection fee, the property owner shall be responsible for the
total expenses incurred from the installation for labor, services, and
materials provided in putting in each sewer main tap and service line,
including the current cost of materials and the actual cost of all asphalt
repairs after the installation of the sewer service.
   C.   Connection Charges Separate From Service Rates: The charges for
connecting to the public sewerage system shall be made, imposed and collected
as a separate charge and are hereby declared to be separate and in addition to
the fees and charges imposed and collected pursuant to the provisions of this
section and are in addition to and separate from any other charge or fee
imposed by any other ordinance. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-3: APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE; GRANT OF CONSENSUAL LIEN:
   A.   Water and sewer services are hereby declared to be appurtenant to the
land to which the water and sewer services are provided. When any person
applies for either water or sewer services, or for both services, as part of
their application they shall sign an agreement which states in part that in the
event of nonpayment of their bill, they grant to the city of Cambridge, a
consensual lien against the property to secure the payment of the water and/or
sewer service bill in full.
   B.   In the event of the nonpayment of a water or sewer bill, the city may
discontinue service to the property and may refuse to reestablish water or
sewer services to the property until the bill is paid in full. The city may
refuse to reestablish water or sewer service even though the property has been
sold or transferred to a new owner.
   C.   In the event a property owner has not signed an agreement to allow the
city to file a consensual lien if water or sewer services are not paid for, the
city shall have the right to obtain a judgment against the water user and
against the benefited property and record the judgment as a judgment lien
against the property.
   D.   In the event of nonpayment the city shall proceed to collect any unpaid
water or sewer bills both against the individual, individuals or entities
accruing the bill and in the alternative may sue to foreclose against the
property against which the lien has been filed or recorded.
   E.   The consensual lien will be in substantial compliance with the lien
form created by the city clerk and which is approved by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-4: REQUEST FOR SEWER SERVICE; TERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE; FEES:
   A.   Sewer Service On At Applicant's Request, New Sewer Service: Application
to have sewer service shall be made in writing to the city clerk, and shall
contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the
provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of the city sewerage
system by the applicant. A connection fee as set by resolution by the city
council shall be paid for sewer service.
   B.   Sewer Service On At Applicant's Request, Existing Sewer Service: A
request to have existing sewer service reinstated shall be made to the city
clerk. A change in property ownership shall require application for service
from the city clerk. A fee as set by resolution by the city council shall be
paid for reinstatement.
   C.   Sewer Service Off At Applicant's Request: A request to have sewer
service temporarily terminated shall be made to the city clerk. A fee as set by
resolution by the city council shall be paid for temporarily terminating sewer
service.
   D.   Sewer Service Off For Access Denial: If access is denied per section
8-2-10 of this chapter, sewer service will be discontinued.
   E.   Sewer Service Off For Failure To Pay; Discontinuance Of Service: In the
event the account shall be in arrears for city services, it shall be the
responsibility of the city clerk to notify the property owner and the legally
authorized agent of the arrearage and that unless all arrearages are paid
within five (5) days from the date of the notice, that the service shall be
discontinued unless other arrangements have been agreed upon in advance. In the
event such arrearages are not paid after five (5) days from the date of said
notice, the city clerk shall, without further notice, cause the service to the
premises to be discontinued unless other arrangements have been agreed upon in
advance. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-5: SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION; PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS; PERMIT AND FEE:
   A.   No connections to a sewer main shall be made without a permit being
issued and twenty four (24) hours' notice having been given to the city clerk.
Applications for such connections must be made to the city clerk and the fees
provided by sections
8-2-2 and
8-2-4 of this chapter shall be paid for each connection at the time of
application.
   B.   No water shall be turned on for service to property or premises in
which the sewerage system plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the
city, the statutes of the state, and any regulations adopted by the city until
after the plumbing has been inspected and passed by a certified plumbing
inspector. Provided, however, that water may be temporarily turned on for
construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-6: PAYMENT OF COSTS; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Owner Responsibility: All sewer accounts under this chapter shall be
opened and maintained by the owner of record or contract purchaser hereinafter
referred to as property owner, of the property to be served. Such property
owner shall agree, as a condition of opening any sewer service account, to be
liable for any service or other charges imposed because of such sewer services,
whether such charges are the consequence of use of sewerage system or provision
of service by the owner or by tenants who have agreed to pay utility charges.
The record owner of real property is ultimately responsible for all utility
charges which are the obligation of the property served.
   B.   Unpaid Sewer Bills: Unpaid sewer bills and sewer associated services
shall be the ultimate obligation of the owner of the property served. Any
property receiving service from the city sewerage system may be disconnected
from the water system and the sewerage system if said services are not paid for
as required herein. An owner may allow a tenant to pay utility charges while
the tenant is in possession of rented premises, but such action shall not
relieve the owner of the ultimate responsibility for the charges accruing to
the account.
   C.   Written Authorization Required: A property owner may authorize a tenant
to be his legally authorized agent by providing a written letter to such effect
to the city clerk. In the event legally authorized agent fails to pay charges,
the property owner shall be ultimately responsible.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Service; Fee To Reestablish: In the event of a
discontinuance of service, the party seeking to reestablish such service shall
pay all arrearages together with a charge as set by resolution by the city
council.
   E.   Prorating: The city does not prorate. In the event of rental
properties, the property owner shall be responsible for any prorating of all
charges incurred by tenants.
   F.   Due Date: All charges shall be due and payable by the fifteenth of each
month. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
   G.   Monthly Billing; Late Payment Penalty: All bills for sewer service
shall be paid monthly to the city clerk on or before the fifteenth day of the
month for the previous month's consumption. If not paid on or before the
fifteenth of the month, a ten percent (10%) penalty shall be applied
exclusively to the overdue consumption, not on the unpaid penalty, and attached
to the bill. (Ord. 4-2016, 6-13-2016)
8-2-7: SEWER REVENUE FUND:
   A.   Fund Created; Expenditures: There is hereby created an enterprise fund
to be known and designated as the sewer revenue fund. All charges and fees and
all connection fees received and collected pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be deposited to the credit of the sewer revenue fund and such
monies are hereby set aside and perpetually appropriated for, and shall be
expended only for, the payment of:
      1.   Costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, replacement and repair
of the city public sewerage system; and
      2.   Constructing, improving and extending the city public sewerage
system as the term "sewerage system" is described by Idaho Code section 50-
1029; and
      3.   The principal and interest on revenue funds duly issued and sold in
accordance with ordinances of the city and statutes of the state.
   B.   Duties Of Clerk: The city clerk shall bill and receive all charges and
fees and all connection fees in the time and manner required by the city
council or by an ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-8: PROTEST OF BILLING:
In case of a dispute as to the amount of a bill, or the credits to be allowed
upon payment of a bill or in refusing to pay the bill when due, the user shall
give notice at the office of the city clerk at the time of payment, which must
be before the delinquent date, that the bill is in dispute. The city council
will forthwith investigate such complaint, and if such complaint shall disclose
that user's objections are well founded, the city will refund the amount of the
payment in dispute or credit it upon the next monthly bill of the water and
sewer user. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-9: SEWER SERVICE LINE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Installation: When a permit for an individual sewer service line (side
sewer) has been granted, the sewer tap at the sanitary sewer main and the sewer
service line from the sanitary sewer main to a point ten feet (10') beyond the
street or alley right of way line or sewer easement line shall be installed by
the city at the expense of the person desiring sewer service. Thereafter, the
sewer service line within the public right of way or easement shall be
maintained at the expense of the property owner but shall be under the
exclusive control and jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Maintenance And Repair: All sewer users shall keep their individual
sewer service lines in good repair and shall be responsible for all costs
associated with maintaining the service line for all portions of the service
line including the sewer tap to the sanitary sewer main.
   C.   Excavations; Permit: Excavations for installing sewer service lines or
repairing the same shall be made in compliance with section
7-2-3 of this code.
   D.   Standard Specifications: Sewer service lines must be installed in
accordance with the Idaho standards for public works construction (ISPWC)
standards as adopted by the city. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-10: FREE ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Right Of Entry For Inspection: The public works superintendent or any
person designated by the city shall have the right to enter upon any premises
connected with the public sanitary sewerage system at all reasonable hours to
determine that there is compliance with provisions of this chapter. If conflict
with any provision of this chapter or any ordinance, resolution or regulation
is observed, the owner of said premises or its agent shall be directed to
alter, repair, or reconstruct said sewer facilities and conform to the
requirements of this chapter within fifteen (15) days. Any sewer user violating
the rules and regulations relating to sewer usage or to the city public
sewerage system shall forfeit all payments or deposits made. Access may be
denied, which will result in immediate termination of water and sewer services
per subsection 8-2-4D of this chapter. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-11: GREASE TRAPS REQUIRED:
In all cases where a building is used as a hotel, boarding house, restaurant,
service station, garage, wash down area, or as a use where there is debris,
dirt, mud, chemicals, or any substances other than domestic waste introduced
into the sewer system, the owner, developer, lessee or occupant shall provide a
properly constructed grease trap through which all wastes of a greasy nature
shall be drained. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-12: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not be held liable for damages to any water and/or sewer user by
reason of stoppage or interruption of his water supply caused by scarcity of
water, accident to waterworks or water main, alterations, repairs, termination
of water service, or from any other causes. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-13: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Damaging System: It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, adjust,
molest, meddle or otherwise interfere with any portion of the city sanitary
sewage collection or treatment system or its appurtenances, located on either
public or private property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or
unintentionally, from handling or otherwise tampering with or plugging said
sewerage system, the violator shall pay for all costs incurred in connection
with the repairs of said system and/or for any damages that may result from the
tampering with or plugging of said sewerage system.
   B.   Obstructing Sewer Flow: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit
in any sewer opening, any substance which may tend to obstruct the flow of the
sewer. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-14: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or
other nonpollutant water to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
8-2-15: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition to the foregoing, the city, any property owner
or any resident citizen aggrieved may proceed, by way of injunction, to enforce
the discontinuance of such violation or any situation or condition which may
have been brought about or exist by reason of such violation of this chapter
and may, in addition to such injunctive relief, be awarded both compensatory
and punitive damages for such violation.
   B.   Remedial Action: The proper local authorities of the city, in addition
to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
correct or abate any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3-2014, 5-12-2014)
CHAPTER 3
CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Purpose
8-3-3: Responsibility
8-3-4: Consumer's Responsibility
8-3-5: Plumbing Official Responsibility
8-3-6: Certified Backflow Assembly Technicians, Surveyors Or Repair Persons
Responsibilities
8-3-7: Policy
8-3-8: Violations
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: Accepted by the department of health, bureau of
drinking water/sanitation, as meeting an applicable specification or as
suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on, or available to, the premises
other than the purveyor's public water supply will be considered as an
auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well,
spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids".
These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not
have authority for sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
under pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water system
from any source(s) other than the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s)
other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the uniform plumbing code chapter 6 and IDAPA 58.01.08.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping, or fixtures
which may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other material of
questionable quality, to come in contact with potable water inside a
distribution system. This would include any temporary connections, such as
swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or change over devices or sliding multiport tubes or
other plumbing arrangements.
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water
system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention
assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's
water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot
be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection
(isolation).
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a
nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
WATER PURVEYOR: The person designated to be in charge of the water department
of the city of Cambridge who is invested with the authority and responsibility
for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-2007)
8-3-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   To protect the safe drinking water supply of the city of Cambridge from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring compliance with
state and local plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and other applicable
industry standards for water system(s) or private water system(s). Compliance
with these minimum safety codes will be considered reasonable vigilance for
prevention of contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public
drinking water systems; and
   B.   To promote reasonable elimination or control of cross connections in
the plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system(s) of the consumer, as
required by state and local plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and other
applicable industry standards to assure water system safety; and
   C.   To provide for the administration of a continuing program of backflow
prevention which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination
or pollution of all drinking water systems. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-2007)
8-3-3: RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The city of Cambridge shall be responsible for the protection of the
drinking water distribution system from foreseeable conditions leading to the
possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the
backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
   B.   Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system(s) shall be conducted or cause to be conducted by
individuals deemed qualified by and representing the city of Cambridge. Survey
records shall indicate compliance with the aforementioned health and safety
standards. All such records will be maintained by the city of Cambridge.
   C.   The city of Cambridge shall notify in writing, all consumers of the
need for the periodic system survey to ensure compliance with existing
applicable minimum health and safety standards.
   D.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for containment
control required at the service entrance shall be determined from the results
of the system survey. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-2007)
8-3-4: CONSUMER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   To comply with this chapter as a term and condition of supply and
consumer's acceptance of service is admittance of his/her awareness.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install,
test and maintain any backflow prevention device/assembly required to comply
with this chapter. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-2007)
8-3-5: PLUMBING OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The plumbing official's responsibility to enforce the applicable
sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service (downstream or
consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the developed length of
the consumer's water system.
   B.   The plumbing official will review all plans to ensure that unprotected
cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water system. If a
cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the installation
of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device/assembly, in accordance
with the state plumbing code.
   C.   Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so via approved air
gap or approved mechanical backflow prevention assembly, properly installed and
in accordance with the state plumbing code. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-2007)
8-3-6: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TECHNICIANS, SURVEYORS OR REPAIR PERSONS
RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair,
or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the certified backflow technicians,
surveyors or repair persons will have the following responsibilities:
      1.   Ensuring acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
      2.   Make sure of such testing and/or repair to the consumer and water
purveyor.
      3.   The report shall include the list of materials or replacement parts
used.
      4.   Ensuring replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally
supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
      5.   Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of
the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
      6.   A certified technician shall perform all tests of the mechanical
devices/assemblies and be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all
tests and reports.
      7.   Ensuring their license is current, the testing equipment being used
is acceptable to the state, and is in proper operating condition.
      8.   Be equipped with, and be competent to use, all necessary tools,
gauges, and other equipment necessary to properly test, and maintain backflow
prevention assemblies.
      9.   The certified technician conducting the test must tag each double
check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and
high hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date tested and by whom.
   B.   In the case of a consumer requiring a commercially available
technician, any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report
the results of that test to the consumer and water purveyor. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-
2007)
8-3-7: POLICY:
   A.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the public water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by state laws, regulations, codes, and this chapter. Service of water
to a consumer found to be in violation of this chapter shall be discontinued by
the water purveyor after due process of written notification of violation and
an appropriate time suspense for voluntary compliance, if:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for control
of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested, and maintained, or
      2.   It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or
bypassed, or
      3.   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or
      4.   The periodic system survey has not been conducted.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
   B.   The customer's system(s) shall be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the water purveyor to determine whether
cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation
of this chapter exist and to audit the results of the required survey.
   C.   Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service connection's water
usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, an approved backflow
prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of the identified
consumer's water system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside
the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line
leading off the service line.
   D.   The type of protective assembly required under subsection C of this
section, shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists at the point of
cross connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and state
requirements or resulting from the required survey.
   E.   Pressure vacuum breakers cannot be used as backflow protection unless
the entire water service on the consumer's property, including irrigation
systems, is installed so that winterization is never required. In addition,
assurances must be made, and accepted by the public water purveyor, that
compressed air will never be introduced into the water system. Atmospheric
vacuum breakers are never allowed.
   F.   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies, except
atmospheric vacuum breakers, which do not meet the requirements of this section
but were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of
installation and maintenance requirements under this section, shall be excluded
from the requirements of these rules so long as the water purveyor is assured
that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Atmospheric
vacuum breakers will be replaced with an approved backflow assembly within one
year from the date this chapter is in full force and effect. Whenever the
existing assembly is moved from the present location or, requires more than
minimum maintenance or, when the water purveyor finds that the operation or
maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be
replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the local and
state requirements.
   G.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified survey/
inspections, and operational tests made at least once per year at the
consumer's expense. In those instances where the public water purveyor deems
the hazard to be great, he may require certified surveys/inspections and test
at a more frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the public water purveyor
to see that these tests are made according to standards set forth by the state
and local regulations.
   H.   No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a
safety hazard. Example: installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes,
boilers, pits, or above ceiling level. (Ord. 5-2007, 7-9-2007)
8-3-8: VIOLATIONS:
If violations of this chapter exist, or if there has not been any corrective
action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the written notification
of deficiencies noted within the survey, then the public water purveyors shall
deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical
break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in
conformance with the state and local statutes relating to plumbing, safe
drinking water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 5-
2007, 7-9-2007)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
9-1-2: Building Permits Required
9-1-3: Fees And Regulations Imposed
9-1-4: Snow Loading And Shedding For Roof Systems
9-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Codes Adopted: The following nationally recognized codes are hereby
adopted for the city:
      1.   Building Code: The international building code, including appendix
chapters E and I, and the following requirements concerning rebar reinforcement
shall be added to section 1805.4.2 to said international building code:
         a.   Minimum rebar reinforcement requirements for residential and
light commercial construction shall be as follows:
 
                Horizontally, will have two #4 rebars.
Footings:       Vertically, will have one #4 rebar per each 48 inches and will
                extend into stemwall.
Stemwall:       Horizontally, will have one #4 rebar per each vertical 18
                inches.
Basement Walls: #4 rebar each 18 inches both vertically and horizontally.
 
      2.   Mechanical Code: The international mechanical code.
      3.   Life Safety Code: The life safety code published by the National
Fire Protection Association.
      4.   Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code: The uniform code for
abatement of dangerous buildings published by the International Conference Of
Building Officials.
      5.   Residential Code: The international residential code, as published
by the International Code Council, parts I–VI, IX–X.
      6.   Fire Code: The international fire code.
      7.   Energy Conservation Code: The international energy conservation
code, as published by the International Code Council.
      8.   Electrical Code: The national electrical code.
      9.   Standards For Public Works Construction: Idaho standards for public
works construction (ISPWC), together with any addenda affixed thereto.
      10.   Plumbing Code: The uniform plumbing code.
      11.   Historic Building Code: The uniform building code for conservation
published by the International Conference Of Building Officials. (Ord. 4-2003,
4-14-2003)
      12.   Sign Code: See section
9-5-6 of this title. (Ord. 5-2012, 8-13-2012)
   B.   Latest Versions Adopted: For all codes listed above, the adoption is
for the latest version of each code, as that code may be amended, changed or
superseded. (Ord. 5-96, 8-12-1996)
   C.   Copies On File: One copy of the codes shall be retained by the city,
and the city clerk shall make the copies available during regular business
hours to any person upon request.
   D.   Conflicts Repealed: Any ordinances or resolutions which are in conflict
with this section are hereby repealed, but only insofar as the conflict exists.
(Ord. 4-2003, 4-14-2003)
9-1-2: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   The city requires building permits for any and all structures
regardless of size or square footage, including all new construction,
remodeling, and fences over six feet (6') in height.
   B.   Excepted from the provisions of subsection A of this section are the
following:
      1.   Any maintenance or repair that does not require structural
modification, including, but not limited to, roofing, siding, window and door
replacement when preexisting openings are used (retrofit).
      2.   One-story temporary, detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet (18.58 m2). Temporary structures shall not
have a foundation. (See
Chapter 6 of this Title).
      3.   All temporary structures must meet all zoning and setback
requirements as set forth in
Chapter 6 of this title.
C.   The city shall approve all zone changes, conditional use permits, and
variances before a building permit is issued. (Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-2015; amd.
Ord. 2-2026, 1-12-2026)
9-1-3: FEES AND REGULATIONS IMPOSED:
   A.   Building Permit Fees: Building permit fees shall be established by
resolution of the city council. The council shall establish a building permit
fee schedule, which schedule shall reflect the fees which are to be charged and
collected by the city clerk before the issuance of a building permit. The fee
schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and in the
office of the building inspector/official and shall be made available to the
public upon request. (Ord. 3-96, 4-8-1996; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Application Of Fees: These fees shall apply to building permits issued
within the city limits. (Ord. 5-2004, 1-10-2005)
   C.   Calculation Of Fees: All building permit fees shall be calculated on
the total job cost, or total bid price, whichever is greater. House
construction or remodeling valuation shall be based on a minimum per square
foot rate established by resolution of the city council as part of the building
permit fee schedule.
   D.   Mobile Homes And Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Mobile homes and manufactured homes placed on a permanent foundation
shall be assessed a flat building permit fee established by resolution of the
city council as part of the building permit fee schedule.
      2.   Mobile homes and manufactured homes not placed on a permanent
foundation shall be assessed a flat building permit fee established by
resolution of the city council as part of the building permit fee schedule.
      3.   Accessory buildings or structures or structural attachments to
mobile homes or manufactured homes shall require separate building permits and
separate fees as set out in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 3-96, 4-8-1996;
amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   Exemptions:
         a.   Recreational vehicles shall be exempt from a building permit fee
when parked in a designated recreational vehicle park or designated mobile home
park.
         b.   Recreational vehicles shall be exempt from a building permit fee
when parked and occupied on private property for a period of no more than two
(2) weeks.
      2.   Temporary Use Or Emergency Permit: When parked and occupied on
private property for more than two (2) weeks, the owner shall obtain a
temporary use permit or emergency permit.
   F.   Failure To Obtain Permit And Pay Fee; Penalty:
      1.   Failure to obtain a building permit or to pay the required fee
before commencing work shall result in the assessment of double the fee set out
in subsection A of this section. In addition, the city shall be entitled to
receive all court costs and attorney fees for enforcement of this section.
Proceedings under this section shall not preclude enforcement of any criminal
penalties provided herein.
      2.   Failure to obtain a building permit or to pay the required fee
before commencing work is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the
misdemeanor statutes of the state. (Ord. 3-96, 4-8-1996)
9-1-4: SNOW LOADING AND SHEDDING FOR ROOF SYSTEMS:
   A.   Adoption Of Standards: All roofs and roofing systems, when first built
or when remodeled, shall be constructed to carry a minimum snow load of seventy
four (74) pounds per square foot based upon the University of Idaho, Ground
Snow Loads for Idaho, 2015 Edition. Builders shall be allowed to use the
following coefficients:
      1.   Reduction For Slope: Snow loads in excess of twenty (20) pounds per
square foot (0.96 kN/m2) may be reduced for each degree of pitch over twenty
degrees (20°) by Rs as determined by the following formula:
 
       Rs = S  - 1
            40  2
For S: Rs = S  0.024
            40
 
 
Where:
 R s = Snow load reduction in pounds per square foot (kN/m2).
 S   = Total snow load in pounds per square foot (kN/m2).
 
      2.   Values For Occupancy Importance Factor: The following multiplication
factors shall be used to increase or decrease the minimum snow loading
requirements for building roof systems depending on occupancy:
         a.   Essential facilities shall have a multiplication factor of 1.15.
         b.   Any building where the primary occupancy is for assembly use for
more than three hundred (300) persons in one room shall have a multiplication
factor of 1.15.
         c.   Agricultural buildings and production greenhouses shall have a
multiplication factor of 0.9.
         d.   All others, including, but not limited to, residential and
commercial shall have a multiplication factor of 1.0.
   B.   Drifting Requirements: All snow loading for roof system calculations
shall include the requirements for drifting as set out in the building code.
      1.   Snow Shedding Roof Setback:
         a.   If the roof of any structure slopes toward the side property
line, then the roof shall be designed to hold and/or shed snow to prevent snow
accumulation on the adjoining property. Roofs shall be designed to prevent snow
or ice from shedding directly onto a pedestrian walkway, access or adjacent
property. Decks and balconies shall be designed to handle snow and drift loads
including snow shedding from roof overhangs above.
         b.   Snow Deposited upon the Property of Another without Permission:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to cause snow to be
dumped, deposited, placed, or pushed onto property owned by another without
first obtaining written permission from the property owner.
         c.   Owner Responsibility: It shall be the duty of the owner, or the
representative of the owner or owners, of each parcel or real property within
the city to clear off snow, and maintain free from snow, sufficient space on
such real property as is necessary to meet the off-street parking requirements,
pedestrian and bike paths, for such parcel and structures thereon.
      2.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of Cambridge City Code. (1998 Code; amd. Ord. 8-2025, 10-14-2025)
CHAPTER 2
HISTORIC PRESERVATION CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Purpose
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-3: Historic Preservation Commission
9-2-4: Special Restrictions
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public of the City through the identification,
evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, areas,
structures, and objects which reflect significant elements of the City's, the
State's, and the nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural
heritage. (Ord. 16-86, 1-12-1987)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The City of Cambridge, Idaho.
COMMISSION: The Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Cambridge,
Idaho.
DESIGNATED HISTORIC PROPERTY: In order for any historic property to be
designated in the ordinance, it must, in addition, meet the criteria
established for inclusion of the property in the National Register of Historic
Places.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The identification, evaluation, recordation,
documentation, curation, acquisition, management, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, stabilization, maintenance, interpretation, conservation, and
education of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this State,
its communities or the Nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, district, area or site that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this
community, the State, or the nation.
(Ord. 16-86, 1-12-1987; amd. Ord. 2-2025, 2-10-2025)
9-2-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   Appointment; Qualifications; Terms; Compensation:
      1.   Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created a Historic
Preservation Commission which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
      2.   Qualifications: All members of the Commission shall have a
demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historic
preservation. The Council shall endeavor to appoint at least one (1) member
with professional training or experience in the disciplines of architecture,
history, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law,
or other historic preservation related disciplines.
      3.   Terms: Initial appointments to the Commission shall be made as
follows: one one-year term, two (2) two-year terms, and two (2) three-year
terms. All subsequent appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms.
Commission members may be reappointed to serve additional terms.
      4.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
      5.   Reimbursement For Expenses: The members of the Commission may be
reimbursed by the City for expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
   B.   Organization; Officers; Rules; Meetings:
      1.   Rules And Bylaws: The Commission shall have the power to make
whatever rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in
this Chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws adopted by the Commission shall be
available for public inspection.
      2.   Chairman And Vice Chairman: The Commission shall elect officers from
among the Commission members. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the
Commission. The vice chairman shall, in the absence of the chairman, perform
the duties of the chairman.
      3.   Meetings; Records: All meetings of the Commission shall be open to
the public, and follow the requirements of the Idaho open meetings law 1 . The
Commission shall keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its
resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
      4.   Recommend Technical Experts: The Commission may recommend to the
City Council, within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the
contracting with parties for the services of technical experts or other persons
as it deems necessary to carry on the functions of the Commission.
   C.   Powers, Duties And Responsibilities: The Commission shall be advisory
to the City Council and shall be authorized to:
      1.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
      2.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest, or
donation.
      3.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
City.
      4.   Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
      5.   Contract, with the approval of the City Council, with the State or
Federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
      6.   Cooperate with the Federal, State, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
      7.   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
County, the City, the State, or the Federal government and the agencies of
these entities.
      8.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purposes of historic preservation in the City.
      9.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic preservation and historic properties in the City.
      10.   Commission members, employees or agents of the Commission may enter
private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of its official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
      11.   Review nominations of properties to the National Register of
Historic Places for properties within the City's jurisdiction.
(Ord. 16-86, 1-12-1987; amd. Ord. 2-2025, 2-10-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 67-2341 et seq.
9-2-4: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Under the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-4612, the City may provide by
ordinances, special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement
and preservation of historic properties.
(Ord. 16-86, 1-12-1987)
CHAPTER 3
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Residential Units On Individual Lots Outside Parks
9-3-3: Permits Required
9-3-4: Penalty
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Any awning, storage cabinet, utility building, ramada,
carport, fence, windbreak, porch or factory-built addition.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: Shall have the same definition as provided in
10-1-3 .
AWNING: Any permanent or demountable stationary structure other than a window
awning used in conjunction with a mobile home for the purpose of providing
shelter from the sun and rain, and having a roof with supports and not more
than one wall or storage cabinet substituting for a wall.
CARPORT: A stationary structure consisting of a roof with its supports used for
sheltering a motor vehicle.
COMMERCIAL COACH: Manufactured structure, designed to be used for commercial
and other nonresidential purposes, that bears the label of the Department of
Labor and Industrial Services, Building Bureau. The label shall designate the
unit's plan approval number, occupancy group classification and type of
construction as specified in the Uniform Building Code.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure which is mass produced in a factory; is
designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use
when connected to required utilities; is built on a chassis; and is designed
for long- term residential use by a family, containing kitchen, bath and
sleeping facilities. For purposes of these regulations, mobile/manufactured
homes shall be divided into the following classes:
   A.   Class A: A structure built since June 1, 1976, certified as meeting the
Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development; or, the HUD Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards as amended June 29, 1982, and meeting the definition of a
manufactured home as established by this section. Class A mobile homes are
manufactured homes on permanent foundations.
   B.   Class B: Mobile/manufactured homes certified as meeting Department of
Housing and Urban Development Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards as
promulgated in 1976, but not necessarily meeting acceptable similarity
appearance standards. Class B mobile homes may or may not be placed on
permanent foundations.
   C.   Class C: Mobile homes constructed prior to 1976 which are found upon
inspection to be in good condition and suitable for residential occupancy.
   D.   Class D: Mobile homes found on inspection to be in poor condition and
unsafe and/or unfit for residential occupancy due to conditions or defects
which are deemed to endanger the life, health, property or safety of the
occupants or of the public. Applicable conditions and/or defects are identified
in chapter 3, section 302, of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings.
PERMANENT LIVING QUARTERS: The use of a mobile/manufactured home on one
specific site for living quarters shall constitute a use for permanent living
quarters.
RV PARK: Any lot of land upon which two (2) or more spaces are located,
established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles, tents, tent
trailers, and related equipment of the general public as temporary and/or
transient living quarters; an "RV park" shall also include any campground or
sites offering cabins with limited facilities.
RAMADA: A stationary structure having a roof extending over a mobile home which
may also extend over a patio or parking space for motor vehicles, and used
principally for protection from sun and rain.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A vehicular type unit designed as a temporary
dwelling for recreational, camping or travel use which is either self-
propelled, self-contained or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, including
all recreation vehicles, camping trailers, truck campers and motor homes of
eight and one-half feet by forty feet (81/2' x 40') or less in size. The
utilization of recreational vehicles for long term residential use is
prohibited. "Long term use" is defined as over six (6) months per calendar
year. Recreational vehicles in RV parks are exempt and can be occupied year-
round.(Ord. 3-2019, 6-10-2019; amd. Ord. 2-2023, 8-14-2023)
9-3-2: RESIDENTIAL UNITS ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS OUTSIDE PARKS:
   A.   Conditions; Requirements: Mobile/manufactured homes for permanent
living quarters on property other than in mobile home parks shall be permitted
in the City when all of the following conditions have been met:
      1.   Size Of Site: The site shall meet the minimum lot size and street
frontage requirements of a permanent structure as set out in titles 10 and 11
of this Code. (Security mobile/manufactured homes or mobile homes not used for
residential use are subject to regulations governing their particular use.)
      2.   Width Of Home: The minimum allowable width for a mobile/manufactured
home on an individual parcel of land shall be twelve feet (12').
      3.   Setback And Parking Requirements: A mobile/manufactured home placed
on a parcel of land shall meet the setback and parking requirements of a
permanent structure.
      4.   Sanitary And Electrical Conditions Of Home: The mobile/manufactured
home shall be either Class A or Class B, containing flush-type toilet and other
sanitary facilities. Sanitary connections shall conform to the regulation of
the agencies having jurisdiction over them. Outside electric connections shall
also conform to the regulations of the agencies having jurisdiction over them.
All connections shall be inspected by the appropriate inspectors and required
permits obtained.
      5.   Continuance Of Nonconforming Use: Class C mobile homes already in
place on the effective date hereof which do not meet the Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) in 1976, shall be allowed to continue as nonconforming
mobile homes; however, when replaced, it shall be by a "Class A" or "Class B"
manufactured home as defined herein or other approved housing.
      6.   Building Permit Required; Foundation: Prior to any construction or
the establishment of a mobile/manufactured home on a lot or parcel of land, the
owner or his agent shall obtain a building permit from the City, and the
mobile/manufactured home shall be sited on an adequate foundation.
   B.   Additional Building Improvements On Lot: Following establishment of
said mobile/manufactured home, all further building improvements on the lot or
parcel of land may be permitted by obtaining an additional building permit from
the City, provided such permit would be required from the owner of a
conventional and fixed residence in the same zone.
   C.   Recreational Vehicle Use Restricted: Nothing within these regulations
shall be construed to allow a recreational vehicle as a permanent dwelling
except in a designated RV park.
   D.   Class A Mobile/Manufactured Homes: Class A mobile/manufactured homes
are subject to the regulations for single-family residences.
   E.   No person shall maintain two (2) or more occupied Principal Dwelling
Unit mobile/manufactured homes on a single legal building site other than as
follows:
      1.   When the mobile/manufactured homes are located in a mobile home
park.
      2.   When the second, smaller mobile/manufactured home meets the all the
requirements and standards to be an Accessory Dwelling Unit.
         a.   The ADU mobile home must be placed on a permanent foundation
unless a conditional use permit has been issued for a temporary ADU.
         b.   Only one (1) ADU mobile/manufactured home may be allowed on a
single legal building site already containing a Principal Dwelling Unit mobile/
manufactured home.
   F.   Abatement Of Homes Determined To Be Menace: Occupied mobile/
manufactured homes or mobile/manufactured homes that have been abandoned or
unoccupied for a period of six (6) months may be abated if they constitute a
menace to the public health, safety and welfare pursuant to provisions of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. (Ord. 3-2019, 6-10-2019;
amd. Ord. 2-2023, 8-14-2023)
9-3-3: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Building Permits: Prior to occupancy of any mobile/manufactured home
upon real property in the City, the property owner shall obtain a building
permit.
   B.   Temporary Use Permits:
      1.   Issuance: Temporary use permits for one recreational vehicle not to
exceed one hundred eighty (180) days in any calendar year shall be issued by
the City Clerk, which will permit the use of one recreational vehicle upon a
parcel of land of single ownership upon payment of the temporary use permit fee
as set by resolution. The permit shall only be issued in the property owner's
name. The recreational vehicle must be licensed. Any such temporary use permit
shall not, other than permitting a smaller area requirement, vary or alter the
provisions of this chapter. No public hearing shall be required for the
issuance of such temporary use permit. The intent of this subsection is to
allow friends, relatives and bona fide visitors to place and use their
recreational vehicles for a limited period of time under circumstances which
would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. Recreational vehicles are
primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
travel use, and shall not be used for living quarters longer than two (2)
weeks, except with a temporary use permit. The storage of a resident's
recreational vehicles on his/her own property is permitted. No occupied
recreational vehicle may be placed on a vacant lot without water, wastewater,
and electrical services in an "on" status. No permit shall be required of
friends, relatives or bona fide visitors staying two (2) weeks or less.
      2.   Emergency Permits: When a true emergency condition exists (example:
fire, flood, building a home with an active building permit, or medical
emergency, etc.), a mobile/manufactured home or recreational vehicle may be
used for temporary living quarters for a period of time not to exceed one
hundred eighty (180) days, upon application and issuance of an emergency permit
pursuant to this section. Adequate documentation, in the discretion of the
party issuing said permit, of the emergency condition must be submitted with
application for an emergency permit; said permit may be issued by the Mayor
when an extended emergency exists, and the Mayor may, in his/her discretion,
require adequate documentation to verify the reason for the extended emergency.
(Ord. 3-2019, 6-10-2019)
9-3-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of any section of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically set
forth herein, shall be an infraction punishable by a penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) to the owner of the property. For purposes of this chapter,
in the case of a continuing violation, each day of violation shall constitute a
separate infraction. (Ord. 3-2019, 6-10-2019)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT COST RECOVERY
SECTION:
9-4-1: Cost Recovery
9-4-2: Certificate Of Completion
9-4-3: Affidavit Of Payment
9-4-4: Ineligibility For Permit
9-4-5: Affidavit Required
9-4-6: Address Changes And Forfeiture
9-4-1: COST RECOVERY:
Any person who is required to develop a water system, a sewer system, streets,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks or other public utilities, hereinafter referred to as
public improvement(s), as a condition of receiving a building permit, zone
change, annexation, subdivision approval or approval of some other development
request, shall for a period of twenty (20) years after the completion of the
public improvement(s), be allowed to recover a pro rata share of the cost of
the public improvement(s) from any landowner, builder, contractor or developer
who obtains or seeks to obtain, a building permit or who builds a structure
upon lands which will be served by the public improvement(s). (Ord. 2-2003, 1-
13-2003)
9-4-2: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
Upon completion of the public improvement(s), the developer shall present the
city clerk, the city engineer or their designee, with a certificate of
completion. The certificate shall set forth a description of the public
improvement(s), addresses of abutting properties, the cost of the public
improvement(s), the cost per lot or the cost per frontage foot or the cost per
acre of the public improvement(s) together with the names of the owners of
adjoining properties who have participated in the cost of constructing the
public improvement(s). In the event the city clerk, the city engineer or their
designee has not received the certificate of completion within one hundred
twenty (120) days after completion of the public improvement(s), the developer
shall forfeit the ability to recover development costs allowable under this
chapter. (Ord. 2-2003, 1-13-2003)
9-4-3: AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT:
Any person or applicant who attempts to obtain either a water connection, a
sewer connection, an occupancy permit or a building permit on a property which
will be served by the public improvement(s) which has been built, developed or
constructed by a prior developer, shall present an affidavit that they have
paid their pro rata share of the cost of the public improvement(s) which is
attributable to the property or parcel upon which they are seeking their
permit. The city engineer shall review the affidavit and such other information
as he may require and determine the accuracy of the allocation of costs
attributable to each property receiving service from the public improvement(s).
(Ord. 2-2003, 1-13-2003)
9-4-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR PERMIT:
An applicant for a building permit or for a water or sewer connection which
will be served by any public improvement(s) that will service their property,
shall not be allowed a permit unless that person shall present an affidavit
from the original developer that they have paid their share of the cost of the
public improvement(s) which is attributable to the property upon which they are
seeking a hookup or a building permit or another permit. An applicant shall not
be required to submit an affidavit if more than twenty (20) years has passed
since the public improvement(s) was built or developed or if the name of the
applicant is included in the original certificate of completion. (Ord. 2-2003,
1-13-2003)
9-4-5: AFFIDAVIT REQUIRED:
If no affidavit of payment is filed with the application, the building official
shall not issue a water or sewer hookup permit or a building permit or
occupancy permit until the applicant has received a receipt of payment of the
pro rata cost from either the original developer, his assigns or from the city
clerk. The city clerk shall inform the applicant of the last known address of
the original developer and the applicant shall endeavor to obtain the required
affidavit of payment from the developer. In the event, after ten (10) days of
receipt of the last known address of the original developer, the applicant is
unable to contact the developer and cannot obtain the required affidavit of
payment, the applicant can obtain the necessary permits after the applicant
first pays to the city the pro rata cost for the property being developed.
After receipt of the money, the clerk shall send notice of receipt of the funds
to the last known address of the original developer. (Ord. 2-2003, 1-13-2003)
9-4-6: ADDRESS CHANGES AND FORFEITURE:
Original developers shall keep the city clerk informed of their current address
and of any changes of address. It shall be the sole responsibility of
developers to keep the city clerk informed of an address where applicants can
contact them, or where any funds collected can be forwarded. In the event the
city is unable to forward funds or in the event a developer does not claim any
funds for a period of one year after those funds are paid to the city, any
funds collected from an applicant shall be forfeited and shall become a part of
the city's capital improvement fund. (Ord. 2-2003, 1-13-2003)
CHAPTER 5
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Title
9-5-2: Purpose
9-5-3: Interpretation
9-5-4: Signs Permitted
9-5-5: Definitions
9-5-6: Building Codes Adopted
9-5-7: General Regulations
9-5-8: Inspection And Enforcement
9-5-9: On Premises Signs
9-5-10: Off Premises Signs
9-5-11: Limitation Of Provisions
9-5-12: Penalty Established
9-5-1: TITLE:
The regulations contained in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as
SIGN REGULATIONS of this code. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the sign regulations set forth in this chapter shall be to
minimize potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians; to encourage
dissemination of information that is informative and correct; to encourage
signs which, by their design, are integrated with and harmonious to the
buildings and sites which they occupy; to encourage sign legibility through the
elimination of excessive and confusing sign displays; to reduce driver
inattention; to safeguard and enhance property values; to preserve and improve
the appearance of the city; to protect public and private investment and to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-
2014)
9-5-3: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign
regulations contained herein are declared to be the minimum standard allowable.
The types of signs allowed by this chapter shall be plenary and sign types not
specifically allowed as set forth within this chapter shall be prohibited
without specific authorization of the Cambridge city council. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-
14-2014)
9-5-4: SIGNS PERMITTED:
Subject to the hereinafter contained conditions, signs for the advertising of
services, premises, products or names are permitted within the city limits.
(Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-5: DEFINITIONS:
AWNING SIGNS: Any sign which is a structure made of cloth, metal or other
material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be
raised or retracted to a position against the building.
BANNER/PENNANT SIGNS: Signs intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to
paper, plastic or fabric of any kind excluding flags, emblems and insignia or
political, professional, religious, education or corporate organizations
providing that such flags, emblems and insignia are displayed for noncommercial
purposes.
BILLBOARD SIGNS: Billboard means a permanent structure sign which meets any one
or more of the following criteria: a) it is used for the display of off
premises commercial messages; b) it is used for general advertising for hire;
c) it functions economically and operationally independent from the principal
use of the land on which it is located, in contrast to functioning as an
accessory or auxiliary to a principal use which is not a sign. The term
"billboard" applies to all physical parts of the sign, including display face,
structure, support poles, attached ladders, attached catwalks, and appurtenant
lighting systems, and visual display systems.
CANOPY SIGNS: A canopy sign is any sign which is a structure, other than an
awning made of cloth, metal, or other material with frames, affixed to the
building and carried by a frame which is supported by the ground.
CHURCH, QUASI-PUBLIC ORGANIZATIONS, APARTMENT HOUSE AND BED AND BREAKFASTS
IDENTIFICATION SIGNS: An on premises sign which identifies the name of the
organization and announces activities or vacancies thereof.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: An image on a sign which proposes or promotes a commercial
transaction, or concerns the economic interests of the advertiser and/or
audience.
COMMUNITY EVENT SIGNS: Any signs advertising a public entertainment or event of
a public interest, provided the placing of the signs shall be approved and
locations designated by the public works superintendent. These signs shall
remain in place for no more than twenty one (21) days before and seven (7) days
after the event.
FASCIA/FLAT SIGNS: Any signs erected parallel to and attached to the outside
wall of a building.
FREESTANDING SIGNS: A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces, or a
monument type sign, and not attached to any building.
GENERAL ADVERTISING: The business of advertising other business, establishments
or causes, typically for a fee or other consideration, also known as general
advertising for hire.
HOME BUSINESS SIGNS: Any sign for a home business allowed by city of Cambridge
zoning ordinance in a residential district.
IDENTIFICATION SIGNS: Any signs which are nonilluminated, internally
illuminated or indirectly illuminated identification signs.
INFORMATIVE SIGNS: Any signs commonly associated with, and limited to
information and directions related to the permitted use of the structure on
which the sign is located. (This category shall be interpreted to include signs
as "No Smoking", "Restroom", "No Solicitors", "Self-Service", "Vacancy",
"Caution" and similar information signs.)
MARQUEE SIGNS: Any signs built on a permanent rooflike structure or canopy of
rigid materials supported by and extended from the facade of a building.
Marquee signs will allow reader boards, changeable copy areas and electronic
message centers.
MONUMENT SIGNS: Any freestanding sign supported upon the ground by a solid base
or poles. Monument signs are intended to be low to the ground requiring no
clearance.
NAMEPLATE SIGNS: Signs identifying the property's occupants.
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE: One that visually displays speech or images not
pertaining to commercial matters. Noncommercial messages commonly concern
religion, politics, social commentary and other matters of public debate.
Contrast: See definition of Commercial Message.
OFF PREMISES SIGNS: Any sign displaying a commercial message that pertains to a
business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not
principally located, or primarily manufactured, or sold on the premises on
which the sign is located. The on premises/off premises distinction applies
only to commercial messages.
ON PREMISES SIGNS: A commercial message advertising an establishment, business,
person, activity, good, product or service located on the premises where the
sign is installed and maintained. In the context of construction signs, all
establishment involved in the construction are considered on premises during
the time of construction.
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS: Signs or posters that announce the candidates seeking
public office and/or political issues and data pertinent thereto.
PORTABLE SIGNS/A-FRAME SIGNS: Any signs which are temporary and movable. A-
frame signs are constructed with two (2) sides attached at the top so as to
allow the sign to stand in an upright position. Portable signs are signs not
permanently affixed to the ground, building or other structure, which may be
moved from place to place. Portable/A-frame signs are temporary signs.
Portable/A-frame signs can be of the commercial or noncommercial message
category.
PUBLIC SIGNS: Any signs required or specifically authorized for a public
purpose by any law, statute or ordinance. May be of any type, number, area,
height location or illumination authorized by law. Such signs are considered to
include safety signs, danger signs and traffic signs.
SUSPENDED SIGNS: Any signs which are anchored to a building and are free to
hang from the structure to which it is attached.
TEMPORARY SIGNS: A temporary sign is a nonpermanent sign erected, affixed, or
maintained on the premises.
TRAFFIC DIRECTIONAL SIGNS: Any signs guiding or directing vehicular or
pedestrian traffic onto, off of, or within a premises and do not contain any
advertising or trade name identification and are not illuminated, or internally
illuminated.
WALL SIGNS: A wall sign is any sign that is either painted on a wall or its
facing, or is painted in such a way that gives the appearance of being painted
on a wall or facing by not having a frame or separation from the wall or
facing. Wall signs differ from paintings in that their intent is to advertise
or give a message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in view of the
observer thereof for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interest
of any person, entity, product or service. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-6: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
All signs allowed by this chapter must be constructed in accordance with the
nationally recognized codes adopted by section
9-1-1 of this title, as well as the current version of the uniform sign code,
together with appendices thereto. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-7: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   New Billboards Prohibited: No new large, general advertising signs of
the billboard category are allowed.
   B.   Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in good condition. Exposed
parts of signs shall be painted or treated chemically in such a manner as to
preserve the condition, aesthetics and life of such signs; moving parts shall
be maintained in operable condition and signs designated to be lighted shall be
maintained with a full complement of the lighting facilities required by the
design of each such sign.
   C.   Removal Of Signs: All occupants, tenants, owners and agents of owners
of real property within the municipality shall, upon discontinuing the business
advertised, be required to remove all signs not complying with the requirements
of this chapter.
   D.   Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs, not of a temporary nature,
legally existing at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be exempt from
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Signs still must be maintained.
   E.   Moving Or Changing Nonconforming Signs: No sign erected before the
adoption of this chapter shall be moved to a new location on the lot or
building or be enlarged, modified or replaced unless it is made to conform to
the regulations of this chapter.
   F.   Nameplate Signs: Nameplate signs shall be allowed in all zoning
districts.
   G.   Interference With Utility Equipment: Signs shall not interfere with any
public or private utility company equipment. Clearance from overhead utility
lines shall conform to utility provider standards.
   H.   Distance From Public Ways: No sign other than official traffic signs or
similar signs shall be erected within four feet (4') of the lines of any
street, or within any public way, unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances or regulations of the city of Cambridge.
   I.   Information On Sign: No sign shall provide incorrect information about
the occupancy or use of a street, alley way or other public right of way. Any
sign which purports to give information about a street alley or other public
right of way that is incorrect or which provides a reader with incorrect
information about the use of a public right of way or which misrepresents a
person's interest in a street, alley or other public right of way shall be
unlawful. In the event the mayor or city council determines that a sign
provides incorrect information or misinformation about a city street, alley or
other public right of way, which misinformation may constitute a hazard to
public safety, in the interest of public safety, the mayor or city council may
immediately instruct the public works superintendent to remove the sign.
   J.   Other Acceptable Signage: Other acceptable signing methods include
projecting double faced boards, affixed high on the facade of a building and
structurally supported by wires.
   K.   Suspended Sign Boards: Suspended sign boards, attached under covered
porches or canopies are permitted, but sign shall not extend beyond the porch
or canopy to which it is attached. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-8: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The public works superintendent or other duly authorized representative is
authorized, empowered and directed:
   A.   To inspect and ascertain that the construction or maintenance of any
sign conforms to the ordinances and regulations of the city of Cambridge.
   B.   To issue a notice of violation to any person having charge, care,
control or benefit of any sign found to be unsafe or dangerous, or which sign
is in violation of the ordinances of the city of Cambridge.
   C.   To give actual notice to the owner, agent of the owner, tenant or
occupant of real property to comply with regulations of this chapter; provided,
however, if actual notice is not possible, the city of Cambridge shall give
written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to owner,
agent of owner, tenant or occupant at his last known address. Upon the failure,
neglect or refusal of any such owner, agent of owner, tenant or occupant to
comply with the regulations of this chapter, the designated official is
authorized and empowered to abate any violation by paying for and employing
labor for the removal of the sign. The amount of the reasonable value of
services rendered in removing the sign, plus accrued interest computed thereon
at the legal rate from the date of completion of said work, if not paid within
thirty (30) days after actual notice is given to the owner, agent of owner,
tenant or occupant of the real property that the sign has been removed, shall
be declared delinquent and be certified to the tax collector of the county by
the clerk, and shall be placed by the county tax collector upon the tax roll
and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other
city taxes.
   D.   To remove any sign that represents a hazard to the public safety. (Ord.
6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-9: ON PREMISES SIGNS:
   A.   Commercial Zones: Subject to the conditions stated herein, all sign
types, except billboards, shall be allowed in commercial zones.
   B.   Residential Zones: The following signs and no others shall be permitted
in residential zoning districts and all applicable provisions of this chapter
shall apply:
Apartment house identification.
Bed and breakfast signs.
Church signs.
Community event signs.
Flags.
Home business signs.
Informative signs.
Nameplate signs.
Political campaign signs.
Public signs.
Quasi-public organization signs.
Real estate signs.
Traffic directional signs.
Window signs.
   C.   Advertising Signs: On premises advertising signs shall not extend over
a property line nor interfere with any street, alley or other public right of
way.
   D.   Vision Obstruction: On premises signs shall not obstruct the vision of
vehicle drivers or pedestrian traffic at any street intersection.
   E.   Sign Limitations: Temporary, portable, A-frame, banner or pennant signs
shall not flash, blink, spin, rotate, block traffic visibility, constitute a
vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard or cause a public nuisance of any kind.
Said signs shall not be attached to telephone poles, fences or trees or be
placed within any public right of way. Temporary signs may be attached to
permanent signs only during a grand opening period. Temporary signs may not
cover permanent signs unless the business has changed hands or changed names.
Temporary, banner or pennant signs shall be firmly attached to a building or to
the ground. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-10: OFF PREMISES SIGNS:
Off premises signs shall not be allowed. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-11: LIMITATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not be construed to permit signs where otherwise prohibited
by city ordinance, state or federal codes; nor shall this chapter to be
construed to permit a sign to be installed which would be a nuisance as defined
in Idaho Code or by Cambridge city ordinances. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
9-5-12: PENALTY ESTABLISHED:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and incarceration in the county jail
for a period of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and
imprisonment may be imposed. (Ord. 6-2014, 4-14-2014)
CHAPTER 6
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND CONTAINERS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Placement Of Temporary Shed Or Storage Structures And/Or Containers
Within The City, Permits Required
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: Additional Permit Conditions
9-6-4: Bulk Solid Waste Containers
9-6-5: Additional Conditions
9-6-6: Penalties For Violations
9-6-1: PLACEMENT OF TEMPORARY SHED OR STORAGE STRUCTURES AND/OR CONTAINERS
WITHIN THE CITY, PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or for
any property owner to permit or continue the placement of a temporary storage
structure or container within the city of Cambridge without a permit issued by
the Cambridge Public Works Superintendent or other designated official.
   B.   Permit Conditions: Issuance of a permit to place a portable storage
structure or container shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Permit Fee: A Permit fee shall be established by resolution of the
city council.
         a.   One (1) permit may be issued for temporary placement of not more
than two (2) temporary storage structures or containers, in Zones R Residential
and C2 Commercial, for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180)
days in any one calendar year.
         b.   Temporary sheds or storage structures or containers shall not be
placed in the public right of way.
         c.   Permittees must comply with the setbacks and other conditions
specified in this chapter specific to the type of structure or container they
wish to place. (Ord. 2-2026, 1-12-2026)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
   BULK SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: A container intended for construction, waste
materials or other refuse, excluding garbage, for the purpose of removing said
materials from a site.
   CARGO CONTAINER: A container intended for multimodal transportation via
seagoing vessel, train, and trailer. These containers are self-contained
without axles or wheels.
   CONSTRUCTION TRAILER/CONTAINER /PORTABLE STRUCTURE: A trailer, portable
temporary container, or portable structure with or without axles and wheels,
intended to support construction activity at a site with an active building
permit.
   PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER: A self-storage container that is delivered to
and retrieved from a site for use as storage. Portable storage on demand, or
POPs, are portable storage containers for purposes of this chapter. These
containers are not on a chassis and do not have axles or wheels.
   SEMITRAILERS: A mobile trailer not to exceed fifty-three feet (53') in
length with a chassis, axles and wheels that is towed by a truck or tractor.
   SHED OR STORAGE STRUCTURE, PERMANENT: The shed or structure cannot be moved
at will. The square footage and width are not factors to be considered. This
type of structure does require a building permit and appropriate foundation.
   SHED OR STORAGE STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: The shed or structure must be able to
be moved at will. The maximum square footage will be two hundred (200) square
feet. This type of structure does not require a building permit, but must meet
all zoning and setback requirements.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, erected, or placed, that is accessory to
the permitted use of the property, that does not have a permanent foundation or
footing which includes storage sheds, cargo containers, portable storage
containers, truck semitrailers, construction trailers, and bulk solid waste
containers, which require location on the ground, or attached to something
having a location on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as
fences eight feet (8') or less in height, poles, lines, or cables. (Ord. 2-
2026, 1-12-2026)
9-6-3: ADDITIONAL PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   Temporary shed or storage structures are structures intended to provide
temporary storage of goods and materials. Such temporary structure shall not
interfere with the normal operation of the permanent use on the property and
shall not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area.
There shall also be no risk of injury to persons because of such storage.
   B.   The following additional conditions apply to all temporary storage
structures or containers:
      1.   Cargo containers are not allowed in C1 Central Business District and
shall not exceed industry standards for width and height and shall not exceed
forty feet (40') in length. Such containers shall be located to the rear or
side of the principal building and set back a minimum of two feet (2') from the
side and rear property lines.
      2.   Portable storage containers are not allowed in Cl Central Business
District and shall not exceed industry standards for width, height, and length,
not to exceed eight feet (81) wide by ten feet (10'1 high by forty feet (40')
in length. Such containers shall be set back a minimum of two feet (2') from
the side and rear property lines and fifteen feet (15') from front property
line.
      3.   Semitruck trailers are not allowed in Cl Central Business District
and shall not exceed fifty-three feet (53') in length.
      4.   A Construction trailer/container/portable structure shall not be
located on any property for more than six (6) months in any twelve (12) month
period, measured continuously from the day the container is first placed. The
Public Works Superintendent (or any other person as designated by the Mayor)
may grant extensions of up to six (6) months, but only if it is determined
that:
         a.   The storage container is located on a site with an active
building permit.
         b.   The storage container is a necessary part of the construction
process.
      5.   Not be allowed in the public right-of-way.
      6.   Construction is moving forward in a timely manner and in accordance
with generally accepted industry standards.
      7.   The storage containers shall be removed prior to the granting of a
certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2-2026, 1-12-2026)
9-6-4: BULK SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS:
Bulk Solid Waste Containers: Bulk solid waste containers meeting the same size
limitations as portable storage containers may be used within the city. Such
containers shall be set back a minimum of two feet (2') from the side and rear
property lines and fifteen feet (15') from front property lines. Such container
used in conjunction with a building permit shall be moved prior to the building
permit expiration or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2-2026,
1-12-2026)
9-6-5: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   No temporary storage structure shall be located so as to interfere with
traffic.
   B.   No temporary storage structures shall be stacked upon each other.
   C.   A building permit is required prior to placement of cargo containers,
portable storage containers, or semitrailers, or permanent shed or storage
structures, that exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. The application
shall show the proposed cargo container is accessory to the permitted use of
the property and meets the placement criteria for the zone.
   D.   Emergency Permit: If any person who has been issued a permit under this
Chapter finds it likely that it will be necessary to exceed the prescribed time
limits of the permit because of the occurrence of an event or condition beyond
such person’s reasonable control, such as, and not necessarily limited to,
extreme weather events, strikes, civil disorder, or other force majeure events,
and if such event or condition is not attributable to such person’s own
negligence, then the person may apply to the City for an “Emergency Permit”
under this section. Any such Emergency Permit shall be issued in the sole and
absolute discretion of the Public Works Superintendent (or any other person
designated by the Mayor) The Emergency Permit shall be valid for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days; however, a person shall be authorized to apply for
additional Emergency Permits if the case so requires. (Ord. 2-2026, 1-12-2026)
9-6-6: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
The owner of any property upon which a portable storage structure or container
has been placed and any individual placing such structure on the property
within the city without a permit or in excess of the one hundred eighty (180)
day permit, who is found to be in violation of the conditions set forth herein
shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, may be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2-2026, 1-12-2026)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Purpose
10-1-2: Application Of Provisions
10-1-3: Definitions
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to protect and promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the community. It is intended, therefore, to provide for:
   A.   Coordination with the Cambridge, Idaho, comprehensive plan for the
orderly development of the city of Cambridge and its area of impact.
   B.   To protect property rights and enhance property values.
   C.   To ensure that the economy of Cambridge and its area of impact is
protected and enhanced.
   D.   To ensure that the important environmental features of the impact zone
and localities are protected and enhanced.
   E.   To encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry, and mining
lands for production of food, fiber and minerals.
   F.   To avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land.
   G.   To ensure that the development of land is commensurate with the
physical characteristics of the land.
   H.   To protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and
disasters.
   I.   To protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
   J.   To avoid undue water and air pollution. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
10-1-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This title shall apply to the city and its impact area as designated by a map
and description referred to in section
10-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Words not herein defined shall be construed to have the meanings commonly given
to them in ordinary usage, unless the context clearly indicates another
meaning. Certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows, for the purpose
of this title:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the main building, or to the main use of the
land, and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use, and
not including those buildings defined herein as farm or garden buildings.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): An additional dwelling smaller and subordinate
to the Principal Dwelling Unit including, but not necessarily limited to, a
detached cottage, a unit attached to a garage, or a portion of a Principal
Dwelling Unit, and must meet all zone setback requirements and ADU standards in
10-4-2 -B-4.
ACCESSORY USE: A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and
devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises.
ACRE: Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ADMINISTRATOR: An official having knowledge in the principles of zoning and
building, who is appointed by the city council of the city of Cambridge, Idaho,
to administer this title.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: A structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products.
This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of
employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged; nor
shall it be a place used by the public.
AGRICULTURAL LAND OR PURPOSE: An agricultural purpose of agricultural land is
defined as land with an area five (5) acres or more.
AIRPORT: Any runway, land area or other facility designed or used either
publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking off of aircraft,
including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas, hangars
and other necessary buildings.
ALLEY: A minor street providing secondary access to the back or side of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
AREA, MINIMUM LOT: The total area within the property lines of the lot,
excluding adjacent streets, except as otherwise provided.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A building providing overnight accommodations and breakfast
food service with six (6) or fewer guestrooms and designed to accommodate
twelve (12) or fewer guests.
BOARDING AND ROOMING HOUSES: A building or portion thereof, which is used to
accommodate, for compensation, three (3) or more boarders or roomers, not
including members of the occupant's immediate family who might be occupying
such building. The word "compensation" shall include payment in money, services
or other things of value.
BUILDING: Any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind and not including
advertising signboards or fences.
BUILDING CODES: See the building code and fire code, as adopted by reference in
section
9-1-1 of this code.
BUILDING HEIGHTS: The vertical distance from the "grade" to the highest point
on the roof surface.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is situated.
CAFO (CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION): An area where any one of the numbers
of animals listed in subsections A through I of this definition are confined
for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month period or
calendar year,
   A.   Three hundred (300) slaughter/feeder cattle and/or dairy heifers;
   B.   Two hundred (200) mature dairy cattle (whether milked or dry cows);
   C.   Seven hundred fifty (750) swine, each weighing over fifty five (55)
pounds;
   D.   One hundred fifty (150) horses;
   E.   Three thousand (3,000) sheep or lambs;
   F.   Sixteen thousand five hundred (16,500) turkeys;
   G.   Thirty thousand (30,000) laying hens or broilers (if the facility has
continuous overflow watering);
   H.   Nine thousand (9,000) laying hens or broilers (if the facility has a
liquid manure handling system); or
   I.   Three hundred (300) animal units with the number of animal units at a
facility defined as the sum of the following: number of slaughter and feeder
cattle and dairy heifers multiplied by 1.0, plus - number of mature dairy
cattle multiplied by 1.4, plus - number of swine weighing over fifty five (55)
pounds multiplied by 0.4, plus - number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus -
number of horses multiplied by 2.0;
and where less than fifty percent (50%) of the feed is produced by the owner on
his immediate property, or crops or other vegetation are not sustained in the
normal growing season over a portion of the lot.
CHILD OR ADULT CARE FACILITY: A building where children or adults regularly
receive care, maintenance and supervision usually unaccompanied by a parent,
guardian, or custodian, and regardless of whether the facility does or does not
provide educational instruction. This use excludes:
   A.   The care of the operator's children or legal wards,
   B.   Children or adults related by blood or marriage,
   C.   Occasional personal guests,
   D.   Any home, place, or facility providing overnight custodial services for
lodging and/or boarding for the occupants therein.
The occupant load of a building, as determined by the building code and fire
code requirements, will include all persons using the facility.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing board of the city, hereinafter referred to as the
council.
COMMERCIAL FEED YARDS AND FEEDLOTS: Custom feeding, or a nonfarming operation
for the feeding and fattening of poultry, or livestock, where fowl or animals
are kept in the restricted area, except for family use.
COMMERCIAL PACKING SHED FOR FARM CROPS: Packing sheds for fruit, vegetables,
hops or other farm crops will be considered commercial for the terms of this
title when less than fifty percent (50%) of the farm crops graded or packed are
produced by the owner.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES: As part of a zoning
ordinance, each governing board may provide by ordinance adopted, amended, or
repealed in accordance with the notice and hearing procedures provided under
Idaho Code section 67-6509 for processing of applications for conditional use
permits. A conditional use permit may be granted to an applicant if the
proposed use is otherwise prohibited by the terms of the ordinance, but may be
allowed with conditions under specific provisions of the ordinance and when it
is not in conflict with the plan. A conditional use permit is not transferable
from one parcel of land to another 1 .
CONVALESCENT HOME, NURSING HOME: A building housing any facility, however
named, whether operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide
skilled nursing care and related medical services for two (2) or more
individuals suffering from illness, injury, deformity, or requiring care
because of old age.
DRIP LINE: The edge of eaves which water drains off of. All setbacks shall be
measured starting at the drip line.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is used as the private
residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, but not including
hotels, motels, tourist courts, resort cabins, clubs, hospitals or similar
uses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building occupied by two (2) or more families
living independently of each other, but not including motels or hotels.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building designed exclusively for and occupied
by one family.
DWELLING UNIT EXAMPLE (SUCH AS AN APARTMENT): One or more rooms in a dwelling
designed for or occupied by one family.
FARM, RANCH, AND GARDEN OR AGRICULTURE BUILDING: Those buildings and structures
used to shelter or enclose livestock, poultry, feed, farm crops, flowers, field
equipment, dairy operations or similar uses.
GRADE AND OFFICIAL GRADE: Grade (ground level) is the average of the finished
ground level at the center of all walls of a building. If walls are within
twenty five feet (25') of the sidewalk or curb, said ground level shall be
measured at the sidewalk or curb. Official grade refers to the grade or
elevation established by a civil engineer for the street, curb, sewer or
structure considered.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A type of housing for persons convicted of nonviolent crimes and
who are in the later stages of serving a sentence and are being transitioned
back into free society.
HANDICAPPED HOME: Homes for mentally and/or physically handicapped resident
patients and no more than two (2) resident staff, where all state and local
licensing and standards of operation requirements have been met. Resident
patients may include those currently undergoing rehabilitation for drug and/or
alcohol addiction.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted principally within a dwelling and carried on
by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling purpose and does not change the character thereof.
HOSPITAL: Any building, or portion thereof, used for the accommodation and
medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons and including sanatoriums, but
not including rest homes.
HOTELS AND MOTELS: Any building or portion thereof containing six (6) or more
guestrooms used, designed to be used, let, or hired out for occupancy by
persons on more or less a temporary basis.
JUNKYARD: A lot or structure, or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage
and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material, or for the
collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery, or vehicles, for
the sale of parts thereof; a junkyard includes auto wrecking yards.
KENNEL: Any lot or parcel on which five (5) or more dogs at least six (6)
months of age are harbored for commercial purposes.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building or group of
buildings, and any accessory buildings identified with each, together with such
open areas as are required under this title, and having its principal frontage
on a public right of way.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A readjustment of property lines as shown on a recorded
plat or established via a survey which does not reduce the area, frontage,
width or depth of each building lot/parcel below the minimum prescribed by
applicable zoning standards.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner
lot only one street line shall be considered as a front line, and the shorter
street frontage shall be considered the front line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The line opposite the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot having its side street line substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of the first lot line of the first lot to
its rear.
LOT WIDTH: The distance parallel to the front lot line measured between side
lot lines through that part of the building or structure where the lot is
narrowest.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB: An association of persons, whether incorporated or
unincorporated, for some common purpose, but not including groups organized
primarily to render a service carried on as business.
MOBILE HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections which is eight
(8) body feet or more in width and is thirty two feet (32') or more in length,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating and electrical systems contained
therein.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Two (2) or more mobile homes upon a single ownership of land
constitute a mobile home park.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure or portion thereof built prior
to the effective date hereof, or any amendment thereto, and conflicting with
the provisions of this title applicable to the zone in which it is situated.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of a structure or premises conflicting with
provisions of this title.
OCCUPIED: Shall also include: arranged, designed, built, altered, converted,
rented, or leased, or intended to be occupied.
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION: An area substantially open to the sky which may be
on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural
environmental features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and other
sites of recreational, historic, or archaeological value which the city deems
desirable. Through streets, structures for habitation and the like shall not be
included.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat of record on
file in the office of the county recorder, or any unplatted contiguous parcel
of land held in one ownership as of May 8, 1995 (zoning ordinance 3-1995).
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS: Any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted, wooden,
glass, plaster, stone or other sign of any kind placed for outdoor advertising
purposes.
PARCEL: A legally defined piece of real estate for tax purposes with or without
structures.
PERSON: Shall also include association, firm, copartnership, or corporation.
PREMISES: Structures and land that make up a parcel of property.
PRINCIPAL DWELLING UNIT: A Principal Dwelling Unit shall be the principal,
single-family dwelling on a lot or parcel.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Any office for professions such as physicians, dentists,
lawyers, architects, engineers, artists, musicians, designers, teachers,
accountants, and others, who through training are qualified to perform services
of a professional nature.
PUBLIC WATER AND PUBLIC SEWER FACILITIES: Those facilities of a municipality or
sanitation district approved by the Southwest district health department and by
the state department of health for general public use.
REGULATIONS SEMANTICS: A. Shall: A mandatory condition. Where certain
requirements in the regulation are described with the "shall" stipulation, it
is mandatory that these requirements be met.
   B.   Should: An advisory condition. Where the word "should" is used, it is
considered to be advisable usage, recommended but not mandatory.
   C.   Tense And Number: The present tense includes the future tense, the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the
singular.
SETBACK: The distance from the nearest point of a building or other structure,
measured to the front lot line.
SHED OR STRUCTURE, PERMANENT: The shed or structure cannot be moved at will.
The square footage and width are not factors to be considered. This type of
structure does require a building permit and appropriate foundation.
SHED OR STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: The shed or structure must be able to be moved at
will. The maximum square footage will be two hundred (200) square feet. This
type of structure does not require a building permit, but must meet all zoning
and setback requirements.
SIGNS FOR IDENTIFICATION: Such signs shall refer only to the principal use of
the lot upon which such signs are located.
SIMPLE LOT DIVISION: One division of any original lot or parcel of land (after
May 8, 1995, zoning ordinance 3-1995) into not more than two (2) lots or
parcels may be done, provided that each building lot or parcel resulting from
such a split meets applicable zoning standards in order to be considered by the
city as "buildable" property. Any subsequent divisions will require filing for
subdivision plat approval.
STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also
includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard,
lane, place and other such terms.
Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of
property otherwise abutting a street.
Arterial: A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy
traffic.
Collector: A street designated for the purpose of clearing traffic from minor
streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
Cul-De-Sac: A street connected to another street at one end only and provided
with a turnaround space at its terminus.
Frontage: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street to
provide access to abutting properties.
Loop: A minor street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.
Minor: A street which has the primary purpose of providing space access to
abutting properties.
Partial: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required
street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.
Private: A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance which
provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the
ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not
including fences or walls used as fences eight feet (8') or less in height,
poles, lines, or cables.
SUBDIVISION: See definition of "subdivision" in title 11, chapter 2 of this
code.
TRAILER AND MOBILE HOME COURTS: An area for the temporary placing of movable
vehicles designed and used for human occupancy and housekeeping.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or intended
or for which either is, or may be, occupied or maintained.
USED CAR LOTS AND MACHINERY LOTS: A retail sales area for the sale of
automobiles and machinery which are in such condition as to meet all
requirements of the state and county for license and operation.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot
coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setback, parking
space, height of building, or other ordinance provisions affecting the size or
shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots or the size of
the lots. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but
may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of
characteristics of the site and the variance is not in conflict with the public
interest. Prior to granting a variance, notice and an opportunity to be heard
shall be provided to property owners adjoining the parcel under consideration 2
.
YARD: An open space other than a court, or a lot unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
front lot line and the nearest line or point of the building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear
lot line and the nearest line or point of the building.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
side lot line and the nearest line or point of the building or accessory
buildings attached thereto. (Ord. 2-2015, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-
2015; Ord. 2-2023, 8-14-2023; Ord. 3-2023, 7-10-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-6512.
2 1. IC § 67-6516.
CHAPTER 2
ZONING MAP; ZONE BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
10-2-1: Adoption Of Zoning Map And Legal Description
10-2-2: Zoning Designations
10-2-1: ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
This title shall consist of this text and the official zoning map, which shall
be designated as the "Cambridge impact zone zoning map" and is hereby adopted
by the city council as part of this title. If there is a discrepancy between
the written description of the zones and the zoning map, the written
description shall determine the boundary of the zone. The written description
is attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A, on file in the
office of the city clerk, and incorporated herein. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff.
5-8-1995)
10-2-2: ZONING DESIGNATIONS:
The boundaries of each zone are shown on the official zoning map and designated
on said map by use of the following colors:
(Zone A1)  Agricultural                          Green
(Zone A2)  Agricultural transitional             Light green/yellow
(Zone R)   Residential                           Yellow
(Zone C1)  Central business district commercial  Dark pink
(Zone C2)  Commercial                            Red
(Zone D)   Industrial                            Purple
(Zone O)   Open space and recreation             Dark green
(Zone N)   Mixed land use                        Orange
 
(Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Facilities And Uses Near Residential Areas
10-3-2: Permitted Uses
10-3-3: Building Height
10-3-4: Open Space And Site Requirements
10-3-5: Flashing Lights
10-3-6: Exclusions
10-3-7: Division Of Lots
10-3-1: FACILITIES AND USES NEAR RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
In addition to the restrictions imposed upon the uses in the various classes of
zones, no facility or use can be permitted near residential areas unless it can
be demonstrated that:
   A.   The proposed use will not result in smoke, dirt, glare, smog, air
pollution, excessive noise, financial damages, offensive odors or water
pollution beyond the limits as defined by the environmental protection agency
(EPA) or the state department of health and welfare.
   B.   The user can and will comply with such screening and setback
requirements that may be required by the city council. (Ord. 4-2015, 2-9-2015)
10-3-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, added
to or enlarged nor shall any land, building or premises be used, designated or
intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is included
among the uses herein listed as permitted in the zone in which such building,
land or premises is located; except as otherwise provided in this title. (Ord.
3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-3-3: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed
in height the limit herein designated for the zone in which such building is
located. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-3-4: OPEN SPACE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be
altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building
be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard,
building site area and building location regulations herein designated for the
zone in which such building or open space is located.
   B.   No lawn, yard or other space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with provisions of this title shall be considered as
providing a lawn, yard or other open space for any other building. (Ord. 3-95,
5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-3-5: FLASHING LIGHTS:
Under no circumstances shall flashing lights of high intensity be allowed
within one hundred feet (100') of the road. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-
1995)
10-3-6: EXCLUSIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to concrete ditches, pipelines,
fences, wells, or other similar improvements where the land is used exclusively
for agricultural purposes. Further, the provisions of this title shall not
apply to farm and ranch buildings which are not located within fifteen feet
(15') of any property line or boundary (other than when said property line or
boundary is a public road or street right of way) or within forty feet (40') of
any public road or street right of way. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-3-7: DIVISION OF LOTS:
An original lot, tract, or parcel may not be divided into two (2) or more parts
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development unless it is either a
simple lot division or is an approved subdivision and complies with the
provisions of the subdivision regulations in title 11 of this code. (Ord. 4-
2015, 2-9-2015)
CHAPTER 4
ZONE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: A Agricultural Zones
10-4-2: R Residential Zone
10-4-3: C Commercial Zones
10-4-4: D Industrial Zone
10-4-5: O Open Space And Recreation Zone
10-4-6: N Mixed Land Use Zone
10-4-7: Minimum Yard Area (Rep. by Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
10-4-8: Maximum Height Of Buildings
10-4-9: Setback Building Lines
10-4-10: Street Right Of Way Widths
10-4-11: Parking Facilities
10-4-1: A AGRICULTURAL ZONES:
   A.   Purpose: An "agricultural purpose of agricultural land" is defined as
land with an area of five (5) acres or more. (Ord. 3-95, 5-18-1995, eff. 5-18-
1995)
   B.   A1 Agricultural Zone:
      1.   Definition: The A1 zone shall include all tracts of land which are
being used for agricultural purposes and are not devoted to uses included
within classifications A2, R, C1, C2, D and shall be designated as A1 zones.
(Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000; amd. Ord. 2-2009, 1-12-2009; Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
      2.   Lot Area Restrictions:
         a.   In zone A1, no dwelling, the construction of which was begun
after May 8, 1995, shall be sold, transferred or built with less than five (5)
acres of lot area. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
         b.   In zone A1, no dwelling shall be erected or building altered to
serve as a family residence on less than five (5) acres of lot area. (Ord. 3-
95, 5-18-1995, eff. 5-18-1995)
      3.   Permitted Uses: The following uses and no others shall be deemed
class A1 uses and shall be permitted in all A1 zones:
Airports, by special permit of the city council.
CAFOs by special permit of the city council. The following restrictions will
apply to CAFOs:
         a.   Any new CAFO or major expansions (50 percent or more) of an
existing CAFO shall be by conditional use permit.
         b.   No CAFO may be constructed within one thousand feet (1,000') of
the adjoining property lines.
Cemeteries, by conditional use permit.
Cultivation, storage and sale of crops, vegetables, fruits, plants, flowers,
and nursery stock produced on the premises.
Fairgrounds, by conditional use permit.
Farm and ranch houses, buildings and other structures.
Gravel pits and quarries, by conditional use permit.
Livestock and poultry raising, feeding and sale, but not including commercial
feedlots, kennels, and veterinary or animal hospitals.
Radio and television transmitting stations, by conditional use permit.
Riding stables, by conditional use permit. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995;
amd. Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000; Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008; Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
   C.   A2 Agricultural Transitional Zone:
      1.   Definition: The A2 zone shall be an area that is presently used for
agricultural purposes but due to its size and environmental conditions, it
would be better suited for development. For example: Nonirrigable plateau in an
existing farm or a rock outcropping that makes it uneconomical to farm. This
land use will be evaluated on a case by case basis by the city council. (Ord.
5-99, 1-10-2000; amd. Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      2.   Permitted Uses: The following uses and no others shall be deemed
class A2 uses and shall be permitted in all A2 zones: (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
All uses as permitted in A1 agricultural zone, and such other uses or
development as determined on a case by case basis by the city council. (Ord. 5-
99, 1-10-2000; amd. Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-4-2: R RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
   A.   Definition: The R zone shall include any small tract of land of less
than five (5) acres which shall be used for residential purposes, and shall be
designated as an R zone. The following shall be an R zone:
      1.   R Residential Zone: R residential shall be lots within city limits,
with a minimum lot size of fifty four feet by one hundred forty feet (54' x
140'), where public water or public water and sanitary sewer systems are
available. The minimum area of a corner lot shall be not less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet and the minimum area of an inside lot shall be not
less than seven thousand five hundred sixty (7,560) square feet.
   B.   Lot And Building Requirements:
      1.   Lot Size: No Principal Dwelling Unit shall be erected or building
altered to accommodate one family as a residence on a lot having less than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet of lot area and width of at least one
hundred fifty feet (150') per side, except where municipal water and/or public
water and sewer systems are available, then the minimum lot size may be reduced
subject to any city regulations thereon.
      2.   Building Standards: All structures placed on lots or parcels of any
size must meet standards, rules and regulations set up by the state board of
health or the district health department. All lots within the city limits which
are connected to municipal water and/or public water and sewer systems will be
exempt from this provision.
      3.   Number of Principal Dwelling Units on a single lot or parcel: No
person shall maintain two (2) or more separate occupied one-family Principal
Dwelling Units on a single parcel.
      4.   Accessory Dwelling Units: The installation of an Accessory Dwelling
Unit in new or existing single-family dwellings (hereinafter Principal Dwelling
Units) may be allowed in single-family residential zones, subject to the
specific standards listed below.
         a.   A maximum of one (1) Accessory Dwelling Unit is permitted, per
lot or parcel.
         b.   The ADU structure must comply with all residential building,
health, safety, and fire codes.
         c.   The ADU structure must meet all zone requirements concerning
setbacks and height.
         d.   The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not exceed 75% of the size of
the Principal Dwelling Unit or 800 square feet in floor area, whichever is
less.
         e.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall contain no more than two (2)
bedrooms.
         f.   The exterior appearance of an addition or detached Accessory
Dwelling Unit shall be architecturally compatible with the Primary Dwelling
Unit. Compatibility may include, but is not necessarily limited to, exterior
building colors, and roof form and pitch that meets snow load compatibility.
         g.   Separate entrances shall be oriented towards the side or rear
yards.
         h.    A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided
for each Accessory Dwelling Unit.
         i.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall have separate water, sewer, and
power connections from the Principal Dwelling Unit.
         j.   A temporary ADU may be installed with a conditional use permit.
   C.   R Zone Permitted Uses: The following uses and no others shall be deemed
class R uses:
   Accessory Dwelling Units.
   Bed and breakfasts by conditional use permit.
   Boarding and rooming houses by conditional use permit.
   Child and/or adult care facilities.
   Churches and church schools.
   Colleges and private schools.
   Dormitories, sorority and fraternity houses.
   Halfway houses by conditional use permit.
   Handicapped homes.
   Hospitals, rest homes, convalescent homes and nursing homes.
   Mobile home parks by conditional use permit.
   Multi-family dwellings of three (3) or more units by conditional use permit.
   One-family dwellings and duplexes.
   Preschool age nurseries.
   Public parks, playgrounds and other recreational areas owned and operated by
governmental or other nonprofit institutions.
   Public schools.
   Other uses related to or incidental to the primary uses set forth in this
subsection, including, but not limited to, garages, incinerators,
identification signs, home occupations and private swimming pools. (Ord. 2-
2015, 2-9-2015; amd. Ord. 3-2015, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2-2023, 8-14-2023)
10-4-3: C COMMERCIAL ZONES:
   A.   C1 Central Business District Commercial Zone:
      1.   Definition: The C1 zone shall include tracts devoted to small
clusters of retail and personal service shops near residential zones, but not
including tracts devoted to manufacturing or wholesaling and shall be
designated as C1 zones.
      2.   Permitted Uses: The following uses and no others shall be deemed
class C1 uses and shall be permitted in all C1 zones:
Manufacturing:
   Assembly of any article from previously manufactured parts, provided some
retail sales occur on site
   Food or food products or confections manufacture, provided some retail sales
occur on site
   Offices
Residential:
   Bed and breakfast
   Hotel or motel
   1 or more apartment units provided they are located above or behind principal
use, when the first floor is devoted to an unrelated principal commercial use
Retail sales and service:
   Auditorium
   Automotive service station for the retail sale of fuel, motor oil, automotive
accessories
   Bakeries, retail
   Bar, cocktail lounge
   Barbershops, hair salons, nail technicians, massage, spas
   Catering service
   Dry cleaners and laundromats
   Entertainment facility
   General retail sales of any product
   Household and building repair services, including plumbing and electrical
service and small appliance and computer/electronics repair
   Liquor store
Medical facilities:
   Chiropractic related
   Dental related
   Dermatology related
   Emergency related facilities
   Hearing related
   Hospital
   Other medical related clinics and offices
   Pharmacy related
   Physical therapy related
   Vision related
   Mortuary, funeral home, crematorium
Motel
Parking lot or parking garage for public use
Pet grooming
Photocopy, blueprint and mailing service
Private club, fraternal organization or lodge, social club, union hall
Recreation center, gymnasium, health or tanning spa, or other business offering
exercise and/or body conditioning services
Restaurant
Restaurant, fast food with drive-through
Taxidermy
Upholstery and furniture repair
Veterinarian service, including pet hospital
 
   B.   C2 Commercial Zone:
      1.   Definition: The C2 zone shall include tracts devoted to various
business and office uses and shall be designated as C2 zones.
      2.   Permitted Uses: The following uses and no others shall be deemed C2
uses and shall be permitted in all C2 zones:
         All uses permitted in C1 central business district zones; and, all
uses permitted in R residential zones, so long as such use complies with the
minimum lot requirements and setbacks set forth in Cambridge City Code for R
residential zones, and:
         Amusement or recreation centers.
         Automobile repair shops.
         Bag, carpet and rug cleaning, provided necessary equipment is
installed and operated for the effective precipitation or recovery of dust.
         Bakeries.
         Blacksmith, welding or other metalworking shops, excluding machine
operated tools producing excessive noise.
         Bottling works.
         Builder supply yards, lumberyard.
         Cabinet and carpenter shops.
         Cement and concrete sales establishments.
         Cleaning and dyeing establishments.
         Commercial packing sheds for farm crops.
         Dairy processing and distribution plants.
         Experimental film or testing laboratories, provided no operation shall
be conducted, or equipment used, which would create hazards, and/or noxious or
offensive conditions.
         Frozen food locker plants.
         Gasoline service stations.
         Handicraft products manufacturing centers.
         Ice manufacturing and cold storage plants, creamery and bottling
plants, and distribution stations.
         Laundries.
         Machine shops.
         Manufacturing facilities for bakery goods, candy, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and food products, excluding fish or meat
products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and rendering or refining of fats and
oils.
         Manufacturing facilities for musical instruments, toys, novelties,
rubber or metal stamps, and other small rubber products.
         Manufacturing facilities for optical goods, scientific and precision
instruments.
         Manufacturing of electric and neon signs, billboards and other
commercial advertising structures; light sheet metal products including heating
and ventilating equipment, cornices, and eaves.
         Plumbing shops.
         Printing shops and publishing houses.
         Roofing shops.
         Storage and sale of grain, livestock feed or fuel, provided dust is
effectively controlled.
         Storage warehouses, storage facilities for oil, gasoline and petroleum
products, but not including bulk plants and storage areas.
         Theaters.
         Underground storage facilities for inflammable liquids.
         Upholstery shops.
         Used car lots and used machinery lots.
(Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012; amd. Ord. 6-2025, 8-11-2025)
10-4-4: D INDUSTRIAL ZONE:
   A.   Definition: The D zone shall include tracts devoted to industry and
commercial feedlots and shall be designated as a D zone.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be deemed class D uses and
shall be permitted in all class D zones:
Blacksmith, welding or other metalworking shops, with punch presses of over
twenty (20) tons' rated capacity, drop hammers and other machine operated tools
producing excessive noise.
Commercial feedlots.
Factory or industrial operations not permitted in other zones.
Foundries, casting lightweight nonferrous metals or electric foundries.
Manufacturing facilities for fish or meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast,
and rendering or refining of fats and oils.
Sugar beet dumps.
Veterinary or animal hospitals.
Any other lawful use not prohibited by this or any other city ordinance.
   C.   Prohibited Uses In D Zone: The following uses shall be deemed to be
prohibited in class D zones and shall not be permitted in any class D zones:
Cemeteries.
Churches.
Dwellings, apartment houses, hotels, motels, trailer or mobile home courts, and
other residential uses; provided, however, that a dwelling or apartment for the
residence of a caretaker or watchman or any other employee may be permitted if
it is used in connection with an industrial use or building.
Hospitals, sanatoriums, and nursing homes.
Kindergartens and day nurseries.
Schools. (Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
10-4-5: O OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION ZONE:
   A.   Definition: The O zone shall be an area substantially open to the sky
which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with
the natural environmental features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts,
and other sites of recreational, historic or archaeological value which the
occasion deems desirable. Through streets, structures for habitation and the
like shall not be included.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be deemed to be class O uses
and shall be permitted in all class O zones:
Public parks, playgrounds and other public recreation areas owned and operated
by governmental or other nonprofit institutions.
Traditional agricultural purposes, including the growing of crops and the
raising of livestock and grazing.
   C.   Requirements:
      1.   Covering With Concrete Or Asphalt: No part of land classified open
space may be covered by any impervious material such as concrete or asphalt
except as needed to develop the site for recreational purposes.
      2.   Protect Natural Or Aesthetic Value: Land classified open space
should be used in a way which will protect or enhance the natural, historic,
archaeological or aesthetic value.
      3.   Compliance With Flood Control Provisions: Land classified open space
must comply with the city floodplain zoning ordinance (title 12 of this code).
(Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-4-6: N MIXED LAND USE ZONE:
   A.   Definition: The N mixed land use zone shall include any parcels of land
less than five (5) acres in size with mixed land uses such as commercial,
residential, etc., which existed prior to May 8, 1995.
   B.   Building Permit For Dwelling: After May 8, 1995, a building permit may
be issued for one private dwelling without a variance or zone change in N zones
provided all applicable regulations as set out in this code are met. (Ord. 5-
99, 1-10-2000)
   C.   Variance Or Zone Change Request: If one wishes to change the use of
said small parcels whether agricultural, residential, commercial, etc., it
shall be necessary to present a request for a variance or zone change on a case
by case basis to the city council. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-4-7: MINIMUM YARD AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
10-4-8: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The following shall be the maximum permissible heights of buildings and
structures in the below listed zones; provided, however, that towers and
similar structures may be exempted from the below listed requirements by
conditional use permit: (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000; amd. Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
 
Zone R  35 feet
Zone C1 35 feet
Zone C2 45 feet
Zone D  125 feet
 
(Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000; amd. Ord. 2-2009, 1-12-2009; Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
10-4-9: SETBACK BUILDING LINES:
   A.   A Zones: In zones A1 and A2, no dwelling or any portion thereof, except
steps and uncovered porches less than ten feet (10') in width, shall be erected
within forty feet (40') of the property boundary lines, or within forty feet
(40') of the street right of way, or within fifty feet (50') of any state or
federal highway. No farm or ranch buildings shall be erected within fifteen
feet (15') of the property boundary lines, or within fifty feet (50') of any
state or federal highway.
   B.   R Zone: In zone R, no building or structure or any portion thereof,
except steps and uncovered porches less than ten feet (10') in width, shall be
erected within ten feet (10') of the side property boundary line if roofline
drains toward the side property line and at least six feet (6') if roofline
does not drain toward the side property line, or within twenty feet (20') of
the rear property line (unless the rear property line abuts an alley then a 10
foot setback from rear property line is required), and shall set back from the
front property line thirty feet (30') for a garage, either attached or detached
from the house, and twenty feet (20') for a house or be even with fifty one
percent (51%) of the existing structures along the street. (Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-
2012)
   C.   All C Zones: In zones C1 and C2 no building or structure or any portion
thereof shall be erected within ten feet (10') of the side property boundary
lines unless built with firewalls that meet the IBC in effect and adopted at
the time and roof slopes draining to rear of property, then the building or
structure may be built on the side property boundary lines after securing a
conditional use permit. In zones C1 and C2, buildings or structures may be
erected on the property line adjacent to the street right of way but in no case
may any portion be erected within ten feet (10') of the rear property line or
alley. (Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012; amd. Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
   D.   D Zone: In zone D no building or structure or any portion thereof shall
be erected within thirty feet (30') of the property boundary lines or within
thirty feet (30') of the street right of way or within thirty feet (30') of the
rear property line or rear alley.
   E.   All Zones: Drainage eaves height versus setbacks formula to apply. For
every one foot (1') increase in drainage eaves height above the city standard
of ten feet (10'), a one foot (1') increase, in addition to the established
setback for the individual zone, shall be required. (Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-2012)
10-4-10: STREET RIGHT OF WAY WIDTHS:
   A.   Compliance With Minimum Standards: In all zones all street rights of
way shall be developed in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the
city and as set out in this code.
   B.   Arterial Streets: In addition to the requirements of subsection A of
this section, all arterial street rights of way and all section and section
line street rights of way shall be developed in accordance with the minimum
standards adopted by the city and as set out in this code.
   C.   Business And Industrial Districts: In addition to the requirements of
subsections A and B of this section, in all business and industrial districts,
street rights of way shall be developed in accordance with the minimum
standards adopted by the city and as set out in this code. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-
2000)
10-4-11: PARKING FACILITIES:
   A.   Single Family Principal Dwelling Units and Apartment Houses: All
Principal Dwelling Units and apartment houses shall provide parking space off
the road or street and outside the public right of way, together with means of
ingress and egress thereto for not less than two (2) motor vehicles per
Principal dwelling unit or apartment. Accessory Dwelling Units shall provide
parking space off the road or street and outside the public right of way,
together with means of ingress and egress thereto for one (1) motor vehicle.
   B.   Other Buildings And Facilities: All other buildings, structures, and
facilities shall provide parking spaces and loading zones off the road or
street and outside the public right of way, together with means of ingress and
egress, the number of said required spaces and zones to be determined by the
city council.
   C.   Parking Area Requirements: Each off street parking space shall be not
less than ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet (20') long; shall be accessible
from a street or alley; shall be properly drained; and shall be located within
convenient walking distance of the principal buildings for which the parking
space is required. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995; amd. Ord. 4-2012, 7-9-
2012; Ord. 2-2023, 8-14-2023)
CHAPTER 5
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Continuation Or Abandonment
10-5-2: Completion Of Construction
10-5-3: Repairs And Maintenance Permitted
10-5-4: Restoration Of Damaged Building
10-5-5: Changing Use
10-5-6: Sale Of Property In Agricultural Zone
10-5-1: CONTINUATION OR ABANDONMENT:
A lawful nonconforming use existing at the time this title becomes effective
may be continued, except that if it is voluntarily discontinued for a period of
one year or more, it shall then be deemed abandoned and any further use must be
in conformity with the uses permitted in such zone. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff.
5-8-1995)
10-5-2: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
Any building arranged, intended or designed for a nonconforming use, the
construction of which has begun but not been completed at the time of the
approval and adoption of this title, may be completed and used for the
nonconforming use, provided it is completed and so used within one year after
this title becomes effective. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-5-3: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE PERMITTED:
Ordinary repairs and maintenance shall be permitted; however, a building or
structure devoted to a nonconforming use at the time this title becomes
effective may not be altered or enlarged so as to extend the nonconforming use
nor may the use be enlarged in any other way except by conditional use permit.
(Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000; amd. Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
10-5-4: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDING:
   A.   More Than Sixty Percent Damage: A nonconforming building which has been
damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or public enemy to the extent of more
than sixty percent (60%) of its reproduction value as determined by the city
council at the time of damage, shall not be restored except in conformity with
regulations of the zone in which it is located or upon receipt of a special
variance permit. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
   B.   Less Than Sixty Percent Damage: When damaged to less than sixty percent
(60%) of its reproduction value, a nonconforming building may be repaired or
reconstructed and used as before the time of damage, provided such repairs or
reconstruction are completed within one year of the date of such damage. (Ord.
3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-5-5: CHANGING USE:
A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a use of lower or less restrictive
classification. Such nonconforming use may, however, be changed to another use
of the same or higher classification. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-5-6: SALE OF PROPERTY IN AGRICULTURAL ZONE:
Any property, tracts or lots sold or contracted for sale in a zoned
agricultural district after May 8, 1995, shall bind said buyer and subsequent
buyers to refrain from any action, privately or in compact with others, from
introducing any rules, regulations or legal action regarding dust, spray,
method of application, smoke, noise, odor, insects, flies, livestock density or
placement or in opposition to any other practice common to the established
practice of farming, ranching or other agricultural business and other
established business. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Zoning Administrator And/Or Building Inspector
10-6-2: Planning And Zoning Commission Authority (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-
2008)
10-6-3: Appeals And Review (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-4: Stay Of Proceedings (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-5: Amendments, Variations And Conditional Uses
10-6-6: Failure Of Commission To Act (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-7: Permit Requirements
10-6-8: Building Codes
10-6-9: Abrogation And Greater Restriction
10-6-10: Severability
10-6-11: Violation; Penalty
10-6-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AND/OR BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The position of city zoning administrator and/or building inspector is hereby
created in order to carry out the provisions of this title. The city council
may, in its discretion, employ a zoning administrator and/or building
inspector, may assign the responsibility of carrying out the duties of this
title to another employee or officer; provided, that if a zoning administrator
and/or building inspector is appointed, he shall be qualified as an
administrator and shall have a knowledge of city construction practices. The
city shall supervise the zoning administrator and/or building inspector and
shall determine his salary or compensation. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-
1995)
10-6-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AUTHORITY:
(Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-3: APPEALS AND REVIEW:
(Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-4: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-5: AMENDMENTS, VARIATIONS AND CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Council Authority; Procedure: The city council may, from time to time
by duly enacted ordinance, amend, supplement, change or vary this title, or may
grant a conditional use permit thereunder; however, no such amending ordinance
shall be passed or conditional use permit granted except in the following
manner: (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
      1.   File Petition; Fee: The person or party so desiring such amendment,
variance or change, or conditional use permit shall file a petition in
duplicate, in the form provided by the council, together with a filing fee as
hereby required, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to a regular meeting of
the city council. The city clerk shall immediately forward appropriate copies
of the petition to any officer or administrative department affected by said
petition. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      2.   Determine Time For Hearing; Issue Notices: The council, at its next
regular meeting, shall fix a time for hearing on the petition. Notice shall be
given of the time and place of such hearing not more than thirty (30) days or
less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by publishing the notice
thereof in one or more newspapers published in the county as required by Idaho
Code, as follows:
Idaho Code section 67-6509, recommended adoption for:
Zoning ordinance, Idaho Code section 67-6511
Conditional use permit, Idaho Code section 67-6512
Variance, Idaho Code section 67-6516
(Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
      3.   Conduct Of Hearing On Petition:
         a.   Commission Recommendation To Council: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-
2008)
         b.   Testimony Of Parties In Interest: At such hearing, parties in
interest may appear in person or by agent or attorney and testify and offer
evidence relevant and material to the petition.
   B.   Nonconformities Restricted: No variation, amendment or permit shall be
allowed:
      1.   To permit a nonconforming use which will materially interfere with
use of the adjoining property in conformity with the regulations applicable to
the use zone in which it is located.
      2.   To permit a nonconforming industrial zone use in a commercial zone:
         a.   Unless it is an extension of a permitted nonconforming use by
enlarging a building or erecting additional buildings as part of one
establishment upon a lot or lots adjoining a lot on which such nonconforming
use exists; or
         b.   Unless a separate tract, the title of which was on record on the
effective date hereof, is divided by a district boundary line, but such
variation shall be limited to the use permitted in the adjoining zone and shall
not be extended more than twenty five feet (25') beyond the zone boundary line.
(Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
   C.   Time Limit For Implementation: Any variance or conditional use granted
pursuant to the terms of this section must be fully implemented within one year
(365 days) or the granting of said variance or conditional use shall cease and
no longer be considered granted by the city council. (Ord. 9-2015, 7-13-2015)
10-6-6: FAILURE OF COMMISSION TO ACT:
(Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
10-6-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Building Permit: No building or structure, aboveground or underground,
shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged or
moved unless a building permit has been obtained from the city zoning
administrator and/or building official, or other person designated by the city
council, which permit shall be issued if the plans, specifications and
completed project shall conform with the requirements of this title.
   B.   State Permit For Sewer System: A permit to construct sewer systems is
also required by the state board of health and is necessary in order to obtain
a building permit from the city. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-6-8: BUILDING CODES:
   A.   Codes Adopted: See adopted codes as set forth in section
9-1-1 of this code. (Ord. 4-2003, 4-14-2003)
10-6-9: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where this title imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings
or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules, regulations, or easements, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
10-6-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this title is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this title shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-
1995)
10-6-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Penalty Imposed: It shall be unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure, or to use any
land in violation of any provisions of this zoning title, or any amendment
thereof. Any person, either an owner, lessee, occupant or otherwise, who
violates any of the provisions of this title, or who interferes in any manner
with any person in the performance of a right or duty granted or imposed upon
him by the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days or both. Each day during which such
violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
   B.   Remedial Action: If any building or structure is, or is proposed to be,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained, or used or any land
is proposed to be used, in violation of any provision of this title, the city
council, the county prosecuting attorney, or any owner of real estate within
the zone may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such
unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or use.
(Ord. 3-95, 5-8-1995, eff. 5-8-1995)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIFIC AREA DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-7-1:    Purpose
10-7-2:    Applicability
10-7-3:    Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
   Specific area districts provide guidance for land use, site design, and
building design for unique areas of Cambridge where the zoning district
requirements cannot achieve the desired results or vision for that area.
Specific area districts establish an overlay district boundary that shall be
shown on the Cambridge zoning map and future land use map. Land uses described
in a specific area district may be named differently than those shown on the
Cambridge zoning map and future land use map. When applying specific area
district land use designations to the Cambridge zoning map and fixture land use
map, the Cambridge zoning map and future land use map designations that best
match the specific area district designations shall be used. The Cambridge
zoning designations and future land use designations within an overlay district
shall be subject to the policies in the current Cambridge comprehensive plan
and specific area district that are associated with that land use.
(Ord. 7-205, 8-11-2025)
10-7-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Overlay districts may incorporate any zoning districts that comply with
the Cambridge comprehensive plan, zoning map, future land use map and the
specific area district maps and will allow uses in accordance with those
prescribed zoning districts per Cambridge City Code, unless otherwise specified
herein.
   B.   Specific area districts will provide standards and guidance for
enhanced site design/layout, lot standards, setbacks, maximum height, lot
sizes, land use, streetscape treatments, recreational elements, area themes,
neighborhood characteristics, circulation, infrastructure, transportation
enhancements, architectural design, implementation measures, funding
opportunities and any other details desired by the city and community. These
standards and guidelines shall apply to an overlay district as identified by
the associated specific area district.
   C.   Overlay districts shall be governed by the city council, as per
Cambridge City Code sections pertaining to specific zones, landscaping,
parking, site improvement, and design review unless otherwise indicated in this
chapter.
(Ord. 7-205, 8-11-2025)
10-7-3: CENTRAL RUSH CREEK OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Establishment. The Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone was established on
May 12, 2025.
   B.   Boundaries. The Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone boundaries shall begin
at the intersection of E. Central Blvd and N. Commercial Street heading NW
along the centerline of Central Blvd to the intersection of W. Central Blvd and
the Alley between N, 2nd Street and N. 3 rd Street.
      From 220 W Central Blvd heading NE on North 2nd Street encompassing both
sides of North 2nd Street to the centerline of Rush Creek.
      From 115 N 1st Street heading NE on North 1st Street encompassing both
sides of North 1st Street to the centerline of Rush Creek.
      From 10W Central Blvd heading NE on N Superior Street encompassing both
sides of N Superior Street to the centerline of Rush Creek.
      From 40 E Central Blvd heading NE on N. Commercial Street encompassing
the Westerly side of N. Commercial Street to the centerline of Rush Creek.
   C.   Theme. Properties located within the Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone
shall be detached single-family homes predominantly, but a variety of housing
types including duplexes, triplexes, townhomes, apartments and condominiums are
allowed. Residential densities typically are between 6-14 units/acre on lots
ranging from 3111 square feet or greater. Neighborhood activity centers with
retail, restaurants, employment and other services are encouraged within
walking distance. Pedestrian-oriented streetscapes are desired.
   D.   Additional Requirements and Standards. The requirements and standards
set forth herein this Section
10-7-3 shall be in addition to and not in lieu of those requirements and
standards set forth in applicable provision of Cambridge City Code.
   E.   Minimum Lot Requirements. Lots located within the Central Rush Creek
Overlay Zone shall be at least three thousand one hundred eleven (3,111) square
feet,
   F.   Maximum Density. No more than fourteen dwelling units (including
accessory dwelling units as set forth hereinbelow) per acre of land shall be
constructed within the Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone,
   G.   Setbacks. Building and Structure Setbacks in the Central Rush Creek
Overlay Zone shall be as follows: Front Setback, 5 feet; Side Setback, 5 feet;
Rear Setback, 5 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the eaves of the building
or structure.
   H.   Minimum Parking Spaces, Driveways, and Garages. Each dwelling located
within the Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone shall have a minimum of 2 off street
parking spaces. Parking spaces on a driveway located in front of a garage shall
be calculated toward the minimum parking space requirements and parking spaces
in the garage shall also be calculated toward the minimum parking space
requirements for all residential dwellings that include driveways and garages.
The driveway spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide (per space) and a
minimum of twenty-five feet (25') deep, measured from the back of sidewalk
where applicable. The garage spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide
(per space) and twenty feet (20') deep.
   I.   Maximum Height. The maximum permissible height of buildings and
structures located within the Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone shall be thirty-
seven (37) feet.
   J.   Accessory Dwelling Units. The installation or construction of an
Accessory Dwelling Unit in new or existing single-family dwellings (hereinafter
referred to as “Principal Dwelling Units”) may be allowed in the Central Rush
Creek Overlay Zone, subject to the specific standards listed below, and so long
as the maximum density set forth hereinabove is not exceeded.
      1.   A maximum of one (1) Accessory Dwelling Unit is permitted, per lot
or parcel.
      2.   The Accessory Dwelling Unit structure must comply with all
residential building, health, safety, and fire codes.
      3.   The Accessory Dwelling Unit structure must meet all zone
requirements concerning setbacks and height.
      4.   The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not exceed 75% of the size of the
Principal Dwelling Unit or 800 square feet in floor area, whichever is less.
      5.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall contain no more than two (2)
bedrooms,
      6.   The exterior appearance of an addition or detached Accessory
Dwelling Unit shall be architecturally compatible with the Primary Dwelling
Unit. Compatibility may include, but is not necessarily limited to, exterior
building colors, and roof form and pitch that meets snow load compatibility.
      7.   Separate entrances shall be oriented towards the side or rear yards.
      8.   A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for
each Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      9.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall have separate water, sewer, and power
connections from the Principal Dwelling Unit.
      10.   A temporary Accessory Dwelling Unit may be installed with a
conditional use permit.
   K.   Building Standards. In addition to the building standards set forth in
Cambridge City Code, which shall also apply in the Central Rush Creek Overlay
Zone, all roofs shall meet the standards set forth in Section
9-1-4, Cambridge City Code and all siding materials shall be fire resistant,
including but not limited to fiber cement, brick, stone, stucco, and metal.
   L.   Exceptions to Sidewalk, Curb, and Gutter Requirements. Development
along. N. Superior Street within the Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone shall be
exempt from the sidewalk, curb, and gutter requirements set forth in Cambridge
City Code. All sidewalks along N. Superior Street shall be detached from the
curb. Sidewalks in all other areas of the Central Rush Creek Overlay Zone shall
be attached to the curb.
   M.   Conflicting Regulations. When there is a conflict between any of the
regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations
applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height
of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more
stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 7-205, 8-11-2025)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Applicability
11-1-3: Alternatives To Subdivisions
11-1-4: Subdivision Costs
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of present and future residents of the city and its impact area as well
as to provide for:
   A.   The harmonious development of the city and its impact area.
   B.   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with other
existing or planned streets and roads.
   C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation.
   D.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities.
   E.   The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation,
or other public services.
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
   F.   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created and improved.
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections, or
other facilities shall be installed.
   G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat.
   H.   The assurance of all expenses incurred by the development are paid by
the developer.
   I.   The effective completion of the subdivision.
   J.   The hearing of inputs from concerned and affected residents, agencies,
and schools.
   K.   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approval authorities.
For these reasons, the following regulations of this title for subdividing land
within the city and its impact area are hereby adopted. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations of this title shall apply to the subdividing of all land within
the corporate limits of the city and its impact area being all land lying in
Township 14 North, Range 3 west of the Boise Meridian, in Sections 2, 3, 10 and
11:
   A.   Survey And Plat:
      1.   Every owner proposing a "subdivision", as defined herein, shall
cause the same to be surveyed and a plat made thereof which shall particularly
and accurately describe and set forth all the streets, easements, slopes,
grades, elevations, public grounds, blocks or lots, and other essential
information, and shall record such plat.
      2.   This subsection is not intended to prevent the filing of other
plats.
   B.   Subdividing: See definition of "subdivision" in chapter 2 of this
title.
   C.   Street Dedication: The dedicating of any street or alley through or
along any tract of land.
   D.   Resubdivision: The resubdivision of a lot or parcel into one or more
sublots except as provided for in subsections E and F of this section.
   E.   Readjustment Of Property Lines: A readjustment of property lines as
shown on a recorded plat or established via a survey which does not reduce the
area, frontage, width or depth of each building lot/parcel below the minimum
prescribed by applicable zoning standards. In the case of a readjustment, a
record of survey that conforms to Idaho Code title 55, chapter 19 shall be
required. The following shall be included on the record of survey:
      1.   The original plat lot or parcel line(s) involved in the request;
      2.   The proposed location(s) of the altered line(s);
      3.   The square footage of the adjusted lots, correct street names,
positions of all existing buildings, a note giving the zone standard in effect
for the area or as specifically approved;
      4.   Depiction of all existing easements of record pertinent to the
property(ies) involved and any newly proposed easements;
      5.   Certification and acknowledgment of the owners of property involved
in the request together with a copy of the surveyor's Idaho state certification
or with an imprint of the surveyor's seal or stamp witnessing that they are
licensed in Idaho;
      6.   Certification that no utilities exist within an easement that will
be affected by the lot line and easement adjustment;
      7.   Any recorded easements needing to be vacated be so vacated, by
official action via public hearing review and vote of the city council.
   F.   Exceptions: The platting requirement and regulations governing for
platting contained within this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
      1.   One division of any original lot or parcel of land (after May 8,
1995, zoning ordinance 3-1995) into not more than two (2) lots or parcels may
be done, provided that each building lot or parcel resulting from such a split
meets applicable zoning standards in order to be considered by the city as
"buildable" property. Any subsequent divisions will require filing for
subdivision plat approval.
In the matter of a simple division of a platted lot or nonplatted parcel that
does not involve a change to a recorded public right of way or easement, the
person desiring the division may execute the division via a metes and bounds
description provided the description will close, does not change or interfere
with recorded rights of way or easements (public or private) and does/will not
conflict with contiguous property boundaries. Said description may need to be
written by a professional land surveyor, attorney, real estate broker, title
company or civil engineer. The following shall be required:
         a.   A record of survey that conforms to Idaho Code title 55, chapter
19 shall be required.
         b.   The property owner has submitted the application form, required
supporting information and the applicable fee as established by the adopted fee
schedule.
      2.   Divisions occurring as a result of condemnation.
      3.   A division of land in the settlement of an estate or as part of and
subject to a court ordered property distribution and layout.
      4.   A reduction in the number of lots (executed by a "density reduction
survey") which does not otherwise violate any city ordinance(s).
      5.   A division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more designated
to be used solely for agricultural purposes, and which does not involve any new
street dedication other than dedications widening existing streets. (Ord. 4-
2015, 2-9-2015)
11-1-3: ALTERNATIVES TO SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Short Subdivisions: A short subdivision may be considered if it
consists of four (4) lots or less, where right of way is required, and it meets
all the requirements of subsection 11-3-2E of this title. All platting and
development requirements shall be adhered to, except that the preliminary and
final plats may be presented at the same time. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
   B.   Phasing Of Subdivision:
      1.   Phasing may be allowed. Phasing shall be laid out in a written
agreement, setting forth the area and what is to be developed. Phasing shall
include all development work such as roads, water, sewer, drainage and
irrigation. The work shall also include service to all lots and adequate work
to allow development of the next phase.
      2.   Each phase shall stand alone and shall not depend on the completion
of subsequent phases. Each phase shall require separate approvals of the city
engineer and the city council, and shall comply with all current required
regulations, and shall be recorded with the county recorder separately.
   C.   Granting Of Alternatives: Relief pursuant to subsections A and B of
this section will be granted only after an affirmative vote of the city council
and subject to such conditions or terms as they deem appropriate. (Ord. 8-96,
11-11-1996)
11-1-4: SUBDIVISION COSTS:
   A.   Developer Responsible For Costs: All costs incurred by the city for
engineering and legal fees that are required by the development, shall be paid
by the developer.
   B.   Payment Of Fees; Basis For Costs: All engineering and legal fees that
will be incurred by the city shall be paid prior to any further action on the
subdivision by the commission or the council. Fees shall be based on an hourly
or fee schedule basis as passed by a resolution of the city council.
   C.   Costs Due To Errors: All costs due to errors on the part of the
developer or his agents shall be the responsibility of the developer. (Ord. 8-
96, 11-11-1996)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Meanings Of Terms Or Words
11-2-1: MEANINGS OF TERMS OR WORDS:
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ADMINISTRATOR: An official, having knowledge in the principles and practices of
subdividing, who is appointed by the city council to administer this title.
ALLEY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
BUTT LOT: A lot adjoining another lot, usually behind it.
COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN: The comprehensive plan for the city officially
adopted by the council or current city standards.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street provided with turnaround space at its terminus.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated when accepted by the council as a public
dedication, either by ordinance or entry in the official minutes of the
council.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: A lot bordered front and back by a street.
EASEMENT: A right to use, falling short of ownership, granting the right to use
the land for specific purposes.
ENGINEER: The city engineer.
HEARING: An advertised public meeting for the hearing of testimony about the
merits of the proposed subdivision. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6509, the
procedures adopted for the conduct of hearings are to apply to all hearings
held pursuant to this title.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by the state or federal agency
responsible therefor.
KEY LOT: A pie shaped lot with the narrow portion adjoining the street.
LOT: A portion of a recorded subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for development.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation
having sufficient proprietary interest in land to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings under the regulations of this title.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the
subdivider or his surety to the city clerk which guarantees that the subdivider
will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an approved
plat, and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages
up to the limit of the bond, or surety will itself complete the requirements of
the approved plat.
PLAT, FINAL: A plan of subdivision, dedication or any portion thereof prepared
for filing and recording by the county recorder and containing those elements
and requirements set forth in this title. A final plat, upon its being filed
and recorded by the county recorder, shall be known as an authorized plat,
subdivision or dedication.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision or dedication,
containing the elements and requirements set forth in this title.
RETURN, PROPERTY LINE: A circular lot line that connects two (2) lot lines at a
street intersection.
RIGHT OF WAY: A parcel of land reserved, dedicated, or used for public purposes
which normally includes streets, alleys, walkways or utilities.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The standard specifications for public works of the
city officially adopted by the council and including all subsequent amendments
thereto.
STREET: A right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted by
the council. "Street" includes also the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designated as an arterial street by the council. It
is the primary purpose of an arterial street to carry fast or heavy traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated as a collector street by the council. A
collector street has the primary purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets
to other collector streets and arterial streets.
STREET, COMMERCIAL: A street designated as a commercial street by the council.
It is the primary purpose of a commercial street to provide efficient movement
in a commercial area.
STREET, DEAD END: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not
having provisions for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
STREET, FRONTAGE: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street, which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
STREET, INDUSTRIAL: A street designated as an industrial street to provide for
traffic movement in an industrial area.
STREET, LOOP: A minor street which forms a loop and returns to the same street
from which it originated. A street forming a connection between two (2) other
streets is not considered a loop.
STREET, MINOR: It is the purpose of a "minor street" to provide access to
abutting properties.
STREET, PARTIAL: A dedicated right of way which provides only a portion of the
required street width.
STREET, REVERSE FRONTAGE: Lots that front on more than one street, but have
access to only one street.
SUBDIVIDER: An individual, corporation, firm or group who undertakes the
subdividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or development, including dedicating of streets, or change of street
or lot lines.
SUBDIVISION: A tract of land divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts
or sites for the purpose of sale or development, whether immediate or future.
UTILITIES: The installation of water, sewage, gas or electricity and similar
facilities providing service to and used by the public. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996;
amd. Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000; Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL AND CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
11-3-1: Preapplication
11-3-2: Preliminary Plat
11-3-3: Final Plat
11-3-1: PREAPPLICATION:
   A.   Application: The subdivider may submit a preapplication to the city
council for review and comment on the proposed subdivision. The preapplication
shall include at least one copy of a sketch plan. The sketch plan shall include
the entire proposed subdivision and include the following:
      1.   The general layout and approximate dimension of streets, blocks, and
lots in sketch form.
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site.
      3.   The areas set aside for any public facilities.
      4.   Water rights needed to be handled according to Idaho Code sections
31-3805 through 31-3806, delivery of water. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   B.   Fee: None required. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   C.   City Council Action: Upon receipt of the preapplication sketch, the
council will review the information at the next regular city council meeting to
determine if the planned subdivision is consistent with the comprehensive plan,
and to make recommendations for clarification and improvement of the
subdivision plats. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
11-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Filing Fees: Prior to submitting a preliminary plat, an applicant shall
submit a nonrefundable fee to be set by resolution of the city council to the
city clerk. This fee shall be for publication and notification costs called for
elsewhere in this code. Upon submitting a preliminary plat, an applicant shall
submit a nonrefundable registration fee to be set by resolution of the city
council, plus an additional nonrefundable fee to defray engineering fees and
expenses that the city will incur for checking the preliminary plat. The exact
amount of all of these fees is to be determined from time to time by the
council.
   B.   Filing Preliminary Plat: Any owner desiring to subdivide a piece of
land within the city or within the impact area shall file with the city clerk
copies of the preliminary plat as required, together with a letter requesting
that the preliminary plat be placed on the council's agenda for consideration.
   C.   Preparation, Submittal To City Council: The subdivider shall prepare a
preliminary plat and such supplementary material as may be required to indicate
to the city council the general objectives of the subdivision. The subdivider
shall submit to the city fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the council meeting at which time the preliminary
plat will be considered. The subdivider shall also submit one copy of the
preliminary plat in an eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11")
size.
   D.   Title Report: In making application, the owner shall submit a current
title report or such evidence as is acceptable to the city council. (Ord. 7-
2008, 9-8-2008)
   E.   Combining Preliminary And Final Plats:
      1.   The applicant may request that the subdivision application be
processed as both a preliminary and final plat if all of the following exist:
         a.   The proposed subdivision consists of four (4) lots or less.
         b.   No new street dedication or street widening is involved.
         c.   No major special development considerations are involved, such as
development in a floodplain, hillside development or the like.
         d.   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
      2.   A request to combine both preliminary and final plats into one
application shall be acted upon by the council. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   F.   Administrator Appointed: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   G.   Administrator Review: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   H.   Review And Recommendations By Agencies: The city clerk may transmit one
copy each of the preliminary plat to the following agencies for review and
recommendations and may request recommendations from such other agencies as he
may deem necessary:
      1.   Cambridge Joint School District;
      2.   Washington County planning and zoning;
      3.   Idaho Power Company;
      4.   Irrigation district appropriate to area being platted;
      5.   Southwest District 3 health department;
      6.   Cambridge Cable TV Company;
      7.   Idaho transportation department (if said plat abuts);
      8.   Cambridge fire protection district;
      9.   Cambridge Telephone Company.
   I.   Copy To City Engineer: The city clerk shall transmit one copy to the
city engineer for review and recommendations. The city engineer's review fees
shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   J.   Lack Of Agency Recommendation: If no written recommendation from any
agency listed in subsection H of this section is received within thirty five
(35) days after such notification, the approval of the preliminary plat by such
agency will be considered to be granted. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   K.   Council Consideration: At the next regular council meeting, the council
will consider the preliminary plat application, and if the plat meets all the
requirements, the council will set a hearing date for fifteen (15) days or more
after publication of the public notice. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   L.   Commission Hearing: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   M.   Commission Action: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   N.   Council Action:
      1.   (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      2.   At the council hearing, the council will hear testimony of the
subdivider and any witnesses on his behalf, and the testimony of affected
agencies, affected persons or other interested persons.
      3.   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the council will approve, approve
conditionally, or disapprove the plat based on its findings upon the testimony
produced before it and, within thirty five (35) days, declare its findings.
      4.   The time limits for acting on the preliminary plat, as specified in
this subsection, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the
council. If no action is taken within the time as so extended, the preliminary
plat as filed shall be deemed denied, and it shall be the duty of the city
clerk to certify such denial. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      5.   Upon approval or disapproval, the city council shall submit a letter
detailing to the subdivider the approval or disapproval, and the basis for the
decision. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-3-3: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Preparation, Filing, Accompanying Prints:
      1.   After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat,
the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed
and a final plat prepared in accordance with the preliminary plat as approved.
(Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
      2.   The final plat, prepared in accordance with Idaho Code title 50,
chapter 13, and the provisions set forth in this title, shall be filed with the
city engineer, together with a letter requesting that it be placed on the city
council's agenda for consideration. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   B.   Filing Fees: Upon submission of the final plat of the area, or any part
thereof, an applicant shall submit a nonrefundable fee to be set by resolution
of the city council to the city clerk. This fee shall be for publication and
notification costs called for elsewhere in this code. Also upon submitting a
final plat, or any part thereof, an applicant shall submit a nonrefundable
registration fee to be set by resolution of the city council, plus an
additional nonrefundable fee to defray engineering fees and expenses that the
city will incur for checking the final plat, or any part thereof. The exact
amount of all of these fees is to be as determined, from time to time, by the
city council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996; amd. Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   C.   Accompanying Prints: Such final plat, when submitted, shall be
accompanied by prints thereof, as required, and two (2) sets of prints of the
plans and (complete) construction specifications for all proposed improvements
as required by chapter 6 of this title.
   D.   Filing, Time Constraints:
      1.   Filing of the final plat shall be made within one year after action
by the council on the preliminary plat.
      2.   Failure to file a final plat within one year after action by the
council approving the preliminary plat shall cause all approvals of the
preliminary plat to be voided; provided, however, within a ninety (90) day
grace period and upon application of the subdivider, the council may grant for
reasonable cause a single extension of a one year period of time.
   E.   Guarantee Of Completion Of Improvements: Before filing of the final
plat to the city engineer, the subdivider shall, for required public
improvements, provide a financial guarantee of a performance bond in one or a
combination of financial arrangements for those requirements which are over and
beyond the requirements of any other agency responsible for the administration,
operation and maintenance of the applicable public improvement. (Ord. 8-96, 11-
11-1996)
   F.   Certification By Engineer, Placement On Agenda: Upon receipt of the
final plat and all other required data as provided for by this title, the city
engineer shall certify the application as complete and shall affix the date of
application acceptance thereon. He shall place the final plat on the city
council's agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting. (Ord. 7-2008,
9-8-2008)
   G.   Review And Recommendations By Agencies:
      1.   The city engineer may transmit one copy each of the final plat for
review and recommendation to the agencies listed in subsection 11-3-2H of this
chapter and/or to such agencies as he deems desirable.
      2.   If no written recommendation from any agency to which a copy is
transmitted is received within ten (10) days, the approval of the final plat by
such agency shall be considered to be granted. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   H.   Commission Action: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   I.   Council Action: The council, at its next regular meeting, shall
consider the final plat and any changes from the preliminary plat. If the final
plat conforms with the requirements of state law and of this title or
subdivision ordinance applicable at the time of the preliminary plat, the
council may approve the final plat or the council may reject changes from the
preliminary plat and/or require additional changes. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   J.   Acceptance Of Public Dedications: At the time of approval of the final
plat, the council shall accept offers of dedication to the public shown thereon
and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or
easements, require that the subdivider, at his option, either improve or agree
to improve the streets and easement in accordance with standards established
under chapter 5 of this title.
   K.   City Clerk Certification: Certification and signature of the city clerk
verifying council approval of the final plat and acceptance of streets, alleys,
easements and public land dedications.
   L.   Filing With The County Recorder: Upon approval of the final plat by the
council, the subdivider shall file the plat in the office of the county
recorder.
   M.   Sale Of Lots: Lots may be sold after the plat has been recorded in the
office of the county recorder.
   N.   Filing With The Public Works Department: At the time of acceptance of
the final plat, the subdivider shall file with the public works department
completely detailed construction drawings and complete written construction
specifications for all improvements required for the subdivision.
   O.   Construction: Construction may commence after all of the above has been
completed. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION PLATS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Plats Generally
11-4-2: Preliminary Plats
11-4-3: Final Plats
11-4-1: PLATS GENERALLY:
   A.   When Required: A plat shall be drawn for each subdivision of land and
submitted to the city council, as provided in chapter 3 of this title, and in
this chapter.
   B.   Official Filing; Recording Of Plats Required:
      1.   No plat or description of land subdividing shall be filed in the
office of the county recorder until the same has been acted upon by the council
in preliminary and final plat form as required in this chapter. (Ord. 7-2008,
9-8-2008)
      2.   No lots shall be sold from any plat until the plat has been recorded
in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
      3.   (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      4.   A preliminary plat shall not be accepted nor adopted by the city
council until the council has held a public hearing. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   C.   Council Checking And Inspecting; Charges:
      1.   Conditional Approval Of Final Plat: With respect to financial
guarantees, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall be conditioned on
the accomplishment of a surety acceptable to the city council and shall have
been filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, a negotiable bond,
irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond.
      2.   Checking And Inspection: The council will check the preliminary and
final plats and/or construction drawings for conformance to the standards
contained in this title, and will inspect all construction, or inspection may
be delegated to a building inspector or other authorized agent. The council
will require that the cost of such checking and inspection be borne by the
applicant in addition to the fees provided for in subsection 11-3-2A of this
title.
      3.   Rates And Charges: Service provided by the city in checking of such
plat or construction drawings, and for the full time construction inspections
for which charges are made, shall be charged for on a time and material basis
at rates to be established from time to time by the council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-
1996)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
   A.   Scale, Required Information: Preliminary plats shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), except
that it may be smaller by approval of the city engineer and zoning
administrator, and shall show the following:
      1.   The scale, north point and date;
      2.   The name of the proposed subdivision;
      3.   The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider and
engineer, surveyor or person preparing the plat;
      4.   The names, with locations of intersecting boundary lines, of
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of the city limits if falling within
or immediately adjoining the tract;
      5.   The land contours with appropriate vertical intervals referenced to
datum and at intervals acceptable to the engineer; provided, however, that
where authorized by the engineer, contour data may be provided in form of
elevations at street intersections and in drainage channels;
      6.   The location of existing buildings, water bodies or courses, and the
location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent to; provided, that actual measured distance shall not be
required;
      7.   The boundaries of the tract, as determined by a legal survey area of
the tract, the proposed location, right of way width and pavement width of
streets and alleys, the proposed locations and width of easements, proposed lot
lines, the radius of all curves and approximate lot dimensions;
      8.   The existing zoning boundary lines defining the proposed use of all
portions of the subdivision;
      9.   The proposed street names and system of numbering lots and blocks;
      10.   The locations, approximate size and proposed use of all land
intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property
owners within the proposed subdivision;
      11.   The location of sanitary and storm sewers, irrigation lines and
facilities, water mains, culverts and other surface and subsurface structures
existing within or immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the
locations, layout type of any proposed water mains and storage facilities,
sanitary mains and laterals, storm sewers, irrigation lines and facilities,
culverts and drainage structures, street improvements and any other proposed
utilities;
      12.   The location of all drainage structures and the proposed method of
disposing of all runoff from the proposed subdivision, and the location of all
drainage easements relating thereof, whether they are located within or outside
the proposed plat.
   B.   Streets And Lots, Location Shown: In addition to the information
required by subsection A of this section, a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision shall be submitted at the scale of one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'). Said plat shall show the location of the proposed subdivision
reference to existing or proposed arterial and collector streets and to
government section lines, the size and location of all proposed streets and
roads, all lots drawn to scale, the numbering of all lots and blocks, and the
names, if available, of all streets. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-4-3: FINAL PLATS:
   A.   Scale: The final plat shall be drawn at such scale and contain on the
front lettering of such size, including reference to dedication and affidavit
of survey, as to enable the same to be placed upon a single sheet eighteen
inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") in size, with no part thereof nearer
to the edge of said sheet than one inch (1"), and shall be in full accordance
with provisions of the state law, Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13. The reverse
of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the drawing but may contain
written matter as to dedication and other information.
   B.   Contents: The final plat shall clearly show the following:
      1.   Primary control points, approved by the city engineer, or a
description and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. Such primary control
points must include either a section corner, quarter section corner, or meander
corner according to government survey.
      2.   Location and description of monuments.
      3.   Tract boundary line, property lines, lot lines, and right of way
lines of streets, easements and other rights of way with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and center angles of all curves.
      4.   Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions.
      5.   Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way.
      6.   The length of all lot lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
      7.   The location, dimensions and purposes of all easements.
      8.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "reserved" or "not a part".
      9.   The outline of any property, other than streets or alleys, by
lengths and bearings, with the area marked "public" and showing the proposed
use.
      10.   A title which shall include the name of the subdivision, name of
the city, county and state, and the location and description of the subdivision
referenced to section, township and range.
      11.   Scale, north arrow and date.
      12.   Location, width and name of all existing or platted streets or
other important features, such as the general outline of the following:
existing buildings, watercourses, power lines, telephone lines, railroad lines,
any existing easement, municipal boundaries, section lines and restrictive
covenants as required or assured.
      13.   Certification by a professional engineer or surveyor preparing said
plat certifying the accuracy of the survey and plat shall appear on the front
of said plat.
      14.   Certification by the owner, including dedication of all streets,
rights of way and any sites for public use and grant on any existing or
proposed easements.
      15.   Certification and signature of the city engineer or surveyor
verifying that the accuracy of the survey complies with the requirements of
state law.
      16.   Certification and signature of the city clerk verifying that the
final plat complies with state law, Idaho Code title 50, and with this title.
      17.   Certification and signature of the city clerk verifying council
approval of the final plat and acceptance of streets, alleys, easements and
public land dedications.
      18.   Certification and signature of the county treasurer verifying that
all taxes and levies against said property are currently paid, prior to the
filing of said plat, and pursuant to Idaho Code.
      19.   Final plat shall be lettered using a Leroy pen set or similar
mechanical lettering set. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Generally
11-5-2: Block Requirements
11-5-3: Lot Requirements
11-5-4: Street Requirements
11-5-5: Alley Requirements
11-5-6: Easements
11-5-1: GENERALLY:
In order that the subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the city will
contribute to the development of safe, convenient and attractive residential,
commercial and other areas, and will advance the public welfare, the city
council, in reviewing and acting upon any subdivision plat, shall ensure that
full consideration and weight is given to the following: (Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-
2015)
   A.   The intent and design of the proposed plat shall be in accord with the
provisions of the comprehensive general plan.
   B.   Street patterns in residential neighborhoods shall be designed to
create areas free of through traffic but readily accessible to adjacent
arterial streets.
   C.   In the subdivision of land along arterial and collector streets, the
block length shall be increased so as to limit driveway or other vehicular
access compatible with good design and a reasonable use of land.
   D.   Street intersections in residential areas may be of a "T" rather than a
"+" design wherever such design will not unduly restrict a free movement of
traffic.
   E.   All irrigation and natural drainage courses shall be improved by tiling
in a manner which will improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the
channel as per city specifications.
   F.   Reserve strips controlling access to public streets shall be permitted;
provided, that the control and disposition of land comprising such strips are
placed within jurisdiction of the city under conditions specified by the
council and shown on the plat.
   G.   The initial point of all subdivisions shall be marked with a brass
monument either in concrete or on galvanized iron pipe. If concrete be used, it
shall not be less than six inches by six inches by twenty four inches (6" x 6"
x 24"); and if galvanized iron pipe be used, it shall not be less than two
inches in diameter and thirty inches long (2" x 30") , which said monument
shall be set or driven six inches (6") below the surface of the ground. The
intersections of all streets, avenues, and public highways shall be marked with
a brass monument. All points on the exterior boundary where the boundary line
changes direction shall be marked with monuments either of concrete or
galvanized iron pipe or iron or steel rods; if concrete be used, they shall not
be less than six inches by six inches by twenty four inches (6" x 6" x 24"); if
galvanized iron pipe be used, they shall not be less than one inch in diameter
and thirty inches long (1" x 30"); and if iron or steel rods be used, they
shall not be less than five-eighths of an inch in diameter and thirty inches
long (5/8" x 30"). Points shall be plainly and permanently marked upon
monuments so that measurements may be taken to them to within one-tenth (1/10)
of a foot. All lot corners shall be marked with monuments of either iron pipe
or steel rods, of not less than one-half inch in diameter and two feet long (1/
2" x 2'). (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-5-2: BLOCK REQUIREMENTS:
No block shall be longer than six hundred feet (600') nor less than two hundred
sixty feet (260') between street intersections, and each block shall have
sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots except as provided in
subsection 11-5-3E of this chapter or by a special exception approval by the
council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-5-3: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot area, dimensions and minimum street frontage shall be established
by the city zoning ordinance (title 10 of this code).
   B.   For corner lots, a property return with a radius of not less than
twenty feet (20') shall be provided; however, a larger radius may be required
when, in the opinion of the council, such is necessary to serve an existing or
future need.
   C.   Butt or key lots shall be avoided whenever possible.
   D.   Side lot lines shall be at approximate right angles or radial to the
street line unless a variation from the rule will provide a more desirable
street and lot plan.
   E.   Double frontage lots are prohibited except that, where a showing is
made that unusual topography or other conditions make it impossible to meet
this requirement, an exception may be approved by the council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-
11-1996)
   F.   The minimum area of a corner lot shall be set out in subsection
10-4-2A of this code and must have a minimum street frontage of seventy five
feet (75'). (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
   G.   The minimum area of an inside lot shall be set out in subsection
10-4-2 A of this code with a minimum street frontage of fifty four feet (54')
at the setback line as required by the zoning regulations of the city 1 .
   H.   The placement of lots shall be consistent with neighboring lots and the
frontage of any lot facing any street shall be consistent with the frontage of
neighboring lots. If any lot is being created pursuant to a Short Subdivision
or a Replat of an existing subdivision plat, the frontage of any lot facing any
street shall be consistent with the frontage of neighboring lots and the
frontage of lots set forth in the prior or existing subdivision plat, if any.
The City Council may waive such lot placement/frontage requirements when the
City Council deems that a waiver of such requirements would not be detrimental
to existing utility and street infrastructure.
(Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-2015; amd. Ord. 2025-5, 8-11-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
11-5-4: STREET REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conformance With Comprehensive Plan: The arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the
comprehensive general plan and shall be considered in their relation to
existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land
served.
   B.   Frontage Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street, the council may require frontage streets, reverse
frontage streets or similar treatment for the purpose of creating desirable
neighborhood character and enhancing the movement of traffic.
   C.   Railroad Right Of Way: The council may require a street along a
railroad right of way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land.
(Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   D.   Widths Of Rights Of Way: There shall be provided rights of way of such
width in no case to be less than those defined in the comprehensive plan for
the city and its impact area; provided, however, that the width of said rights
of way shall in no case be less than the following:
 
Regional arterial route 80 feet and up
Arterial street         80 feet to 90 feet
Collector street        80 feet minimum
Minor street            80 feet
 
(Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-2015)
   E.   Street Grades: Street grades shall be such as to provide for the safe
movement of traffic in all weather and for adequate drainage of both streets
and abutting properties. Street grades, whenever feasible, shall be not less
than three-tenths percent (0.3%) and not more than fifteen percent (15%).
   F.   Partial Street Dedications: In general, partial street dedications
shall not be permitted; provided, however, that the council may accept a
partial street dedication when such street forms the boundary of the property
being subdivided and, in addition, is shown on the comprehensive general plan,
or is designated by the council as an arterial or collector street, or is
otherwise officially designated as of major importance as a present or future
trafficway or when such other conditions or restrictions exist or are imposed
by the council so that the eventual completion of such street to its full
required right of way is assured. When a dedicated partial street exists
adjacent to the property to be subdivided, the other portion may be platted
within such subdivision. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   G.   Cul-De-Sac: A cul-de-sac, court or similar type street may be
permitted; provided, that the maximum length for a cul-de- sac shall be four
hundred feet (400') as measured from entrance to the center of the turnaround,
and all cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum radius
of sixty feet (60') at the property line and not less than fifty six feet (56')
at the curb lines. (Ord. 5-99, 1-10-2000)
   H.   Dead End Streets: Dead end streets shall not be permitted with the
exception that such streets terminating at the boundary of a subdivision may be
approved when such street and its extension is shown on the comprehensive
general plan or when, in the opinion of the council, the future extension of
such street is feasible and necessary to the proper development of the city
street pattern. A temporary cul-de- sac shall be constructed at the end of a
dead end street. A temporary fence barricade or other substantial barrier shall
be constructed at the end of any dead end street to prevent vehicles using said
street as a through street. Any abutting landowners who desire to use a dead
end street to reach abutting lands may apply for a permit to do so, and will be
required to bring his portion of the street up to subdivision standards.
   I.   Loop Streets: The maximum length of a loop street shall be one thousand
feet (1,000') and a loop street over this length, though otherwise meeting the
definition of a loop street, shall be required to conform to the standards of a
minor street in its subdivision type; provided, however, that a loop street of
up to one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length containing frontage of
more than twenty four (24) building lots may be permitted.
   J.   Intersect At Right Angles: Streets shall be designed and laid out in
order to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall
intersect any other street at less than seventy degrees (70°).
   K.   Connecting Curves: Where any street deflects an angle of ten degrees
(10°) or more, a connecting curve having a minimum radius of three hundred feet
(300') for arterial and collector streets and one hundred fifty feet (150') for
minor streets may be required by the commission. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   L.   Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets which are
continuations of existing streets shall be given the same names as the existing
streets, and all other street names used shall not duplicate or be of a
spelling or pronunciation of existing streets within the city or within the
adjacent county area. The subdivider shall obtain all street names within the
proposed subdivision before submitting same to the council for final approval.
(Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996; amd. Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-2015)
   M.   Street Trees: Street trees, where provided, shall be of the variety,
size and location approved by the council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-5-5: ALLEY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Width: Alleys may be required at the rear of all business and
residential lots and shall be at least thirty feet (30') in width. Alleys, when
provided in residential blocks, shall be not less than thirty feet (30') in
width.
   B.   Intersecting Alleys: At the intersection of two (2) alleys, the corners
of the abutting property shall be provided with a property line return having a
radius of not less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Dead End Alleys: Except under unusual circumstances, alleys shall not
terminate in a dead end and in no case shall a dead end alley be accepted
unless turnaround facilities are provided to the satisfaction of the council.
(Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-5-6: EASEMENTS:
Where there is no alley, easements shall be provided at least twenty feet (20')
wide for utilities or other public services at the rear of every lot. (Ord. 6-
2015, 4-13-2015)
CHAPTER 6
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Plans, Standards Generally
11-6-2: Preconstruction Filing Of Plans And Bond
11-6-3: Streets And Alleys
11-6-4: Waterworks Requirements
11-6-5: Drainage
11-6-6: Stream Or Drainage Course Easements
11-6-7: Sewer Requirements
11-6-8: Schools Or Parks, Standards Generally
11-6-1: PLANS, STANDARDS GENERALLY:
   A.   Improvements Shown On Construction Plans: The improvements described as
follows in this chapter shall be shown on the construction plans of any
subdivision and installed in accordance with the procedures and requirements
designated in this chapter.
   B.   Compliance With Comprehensive Plan: All improvements shall be in
accordance with all elements of the comprehensive general plan of the city and
its impact area, and the requirements of the Idaho state code, and shall
further be in accordance with the standard specifications of the city and with
all requirements of this chapter. Construction shall be under the supervision
of the city engineer and subject to his approval. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-6-2: PRECONSTRUCTION FILING OF PLANS AND BOND:
   A.   Preparation Of Plans: Plans for the improvements required by this
chapter shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state.
   B.   Filing Of Plans: Prior to the acceptance by the city of any improvement
installed by the subdivider, all building plans and specifications for all
improvements shall be filed with the public works department.
   C.   Bond: The city shall receive a performance bond on all improvements
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the value of the improvements and
the bond shall be received prior to commencement of actual construction. (Ord.
8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-6-3: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Street Type: Street type, whether arterial, collector or minor shall be
determined by reference to the comprehensive general plan of the city and to a
map of the entire area the street serves. When classification of a minor
street, cul-de- sac or loop street is claimed, the entire length of the street
shall be shown on the subdivision plat being proposed or on a previously
approved plat.
   B.   Pavement Width: The pavement width of all streets shall conform to
those widths defined in the comprehensive plan or standard city specifications.
   C.   Intersection With State Or Federal Highway: The paving design of the
intersection of any new street with an existing state or federal highway shall
be in accordance with the standard specifications of the state highway
department, but in no case shall be less than the applicable specification
contained in this section.
   D.   Base, Course Gravel: Pavement, base, leveling course gravel shall be
constructed in accordance with standard city specifications.
   E.   Centerline: In general, the centerline of the street pavement shall
coincide with the centerline of the right of way in which the pavement is
located.
   F.   Curbs And Gutters: All subdivisions shall be constructed with curbs and
gutter in accordance with standard specifications. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   G.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks five feet (5') in width shall be provided on both
sides of any residential zoned collector and other minor residential streets
and six feet (6') in width on any commercial zoned street. Sidewalks shall also
be provided along any other street in a subdivision where deemed by the city to
be essential to public convenience or safety, in accordance with standard city
specifications. The sidewalk shall abut the property line. (Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-
2015)
   H.   Driveways: Driveway curb cuts and driveway approaches shall be made in
accordance with the standard specifications of the city.
   I.   Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be provided by the developer.
   J.   Alleys: Alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
specifications of the city.
   K.   Underground Utilities: All utilities shall be placed underground before
any base street material is laid.
   L.   Signs: Street signs, traffic control signs and posts shall be installed
by the subdivider. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-6-4: WATERWORKS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Water Mains; Hydrants: All water mains, valves, hydrants and
connections to the city water distribution system shall be provided and
installed by the subdivider in accordance with the standards and specifications
of the city and in conformance with existing laws. Fire hydrants shall be no
farther apart than four hundred feet (400') in commercial areas and six hundred
feet (600') in residential areas.
   B.   Irrigation Mains: Irrigation main lines and distribution lines shall be
provided in accordance with standard city specifications. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-
1996)
11-6-5: DRAINAGE:
   A.   Plan Required: Improvement plans providing for the drainage of
stormwater shall include a drainage plan relating to the draining of the
proposed subdivision to the drainage area of which it is a part; a calculation
of the runoff based on the state of Idaho transportation department urban storm
sewer design in a five (5) year period for the watercourses lying within or
running through the subdivision as set forth in the standard specifications of
the city; and a demonstration of the method for disposing of runoff from the
subdivision, including the size, location and dedication of drainage easements.
   B.   Construction Standards: Drainage structures, channel improvements and
storm sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
specifications of the city. These structures, improvements and sewer shall be
so constructed to dispose of the calculated maximum runoff to a point of final
discharge or acceptable wasteway.
   C.   Drainage Ditches: All drainage ditches and wasteways, new or existing,
shall be piped. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-6-6: STREAM OR DRAINAGE COURSE EASEMENTS:
   A.   Requirement: The reservation of an easement along any stream or
important surface drainage course located in an area being subdivided may be
required by the council for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping,
improving or protecting the stream or drainage course.
   B.   Approval From Proper Authority: No ditch, pipe or structure for
irrigation water or irrigation wastewater shall be constructed, rerouted or
changed in any way unless such obstruction, rerouting or change has first been
approved in writing by the ditch company officer in charge; provided, however,
that where such ditch, pipe or structure is held in mutual ownership, said
approval in writing shall be obtained from the engineer.
   C.   Approval Filed With Drawing: A copy of such written approval by the
ditch company officer and/or the engineer shall be filed with the construction
drawing as provided.
   D.   Piping Required: All existing irrigation ditches or irrigation waste
ditches shall be piped. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-6-7: SEWER REQUIREMENTS:
All sewer mains, manholes, appurtenances and connections, if necessary, shall
be provided and installed by the subdivider in accordance with the standards
and specifications of the city and the state of Idaho. Manholes shall be no
farther apart than four hundred feet (400'). (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-6-8: SCHOOLS OR PARKS, STANDARDS GENERALLY:
Whenever the subdivider desires or proposes to reserve an area for schools or
parks, to be so designated on the subdivision plans, such reservations shall
meet standards of the city and/or school district respectively. (Ord. 8-96, 11-
11-1996)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Surety Bond
11-7-2: Deposit Required
11-7-3: Variances And Appeals
11-7-4: Amendments
11-7-5: Inspector On Development Site
11-7-6: Warranty Requirement
11-7-7: Time Of Commencement And Completion Of Improvements
11-7-8: Subdivision Vacation Procedure
11-7-9: Violation; Penalty
11-7-1: SURETY BOND:
   A.   Accrual: The bond shall accrue to the city covering construction,
operation and maintenance of the specific public improvement.
   B.   Amount: The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specific
public improvement, as estimated by the city engineer and approved by the city
council.
   C.   Term Length: The term length in which the bond is in force shall be for
a period to be specified by the city council for the specific public
improvement.
   D.   Bonding For Surety Company: The bond shall be with a surety company
authorized to do business in the state of Idaho, acceptable to the city
council.
   E.   Escrow Agreement: The escrow agreement shall be drawn and furnished by
the city council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-7-2: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Deposit With Escrow Agent Or Trust Company: A cash deposit, certified
check, negotiable bond, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, such surety
acceptable by the city council, shall be deposited with an escrow agent or
trust company.
   B.   Dollar Value: The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check,
negotiable bond, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, shall be equal to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of construction for the
specific public improvement, as estimated by the city engineer and approved by
the city council.
   C.   Escrow Time: The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check,
negotiable bond, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be for a period to
be specified by the city council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-7-3: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   A.   When Permissible: Whenever a tract to be subdivided is of such unusual
size or shape or is surrounded by such developments or unusual conditions that
the strict application of the regulations of this title would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the council may vary or modify such
requirements so that the subdivider may develop his property in a reasonable
manner, but so at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the city
are protected, the general intent and spirit of said regulations are preserved,
and conformity to achievement of the comprehensive general plan is assured.
   B.   Request Procedures:
      1.   In requesting any modification of or variance to the provisions of
this title, a subdivider shall make written request to the city. Expenses
incurred by this variance shall be paid by the subdivider at the time of the
request. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
      2.   Such request, together with such related data and maps as necessary
to fully illustrate the relief sought, shall be referred by the city engineer
in writing to the city council. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      3.   (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      4.   (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
      5.   Approval of such modifications shall require a majority vote of the
regular membership of the council.
   C.   Council Authority To Set Conditions: In granting variances and/or
modifications from the regulations of this title, the council may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the
standards or requirements so varied or modified.
   D.   Right Of Appeal: Any person may appeal the decision of the council to
the district court in the same manner and within the same time as other appeals
may be taken from orders of the council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-7-4: AMENDMENTS:
The council may amend this title from time to time; provided, however, that the
procedure following in such modifications shall be the same as in the original
adoption of these regulations, or in conformity with the then applicable state
law. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
11-7-5: INSPECTOR ON DEVELOPMENT SITE:
The city shall have the right to place an inspector of its own choosing on the
development site, with all expenses to be borne by the developer. (Ord. 8-96,
11-11-1996)
11-7-6: WARRANTY REQUIREMENT:
Developers and engineers shall warrant workmanship, materials and engineering
design for one full year from the time of acceptance by the city. Developers or
engineers, at their own expense, can be required to correct any defects which
may exist, for which they are notified, within one year. Whenever a developer
or engineer is required to make corrections or repairs to any defect, the
warranty period shall be extended for one full year after said repairs or
corrections are completed on the repair work. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-7-7: TIME OF COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Commencement: The developer shall commence all development as proposed
within one year of the date of approval or all permits issued shall be
automatically suspended without notice. If the improvements are not commenced
within that one year period, the city council may review the plans and
specifications for compliance with existing city standards prior to any new
construction and require compliance with presently existing city standards
before allowing construction.
   B.   Completion: Time of completion of improvements shall be as agreed upon
by the subdivider and the city council. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-7-8: SUBDIVISION VACATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing
subdivision, public right of way or easement shall complete and file an
application with the city clerk. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
   B.   Clerk Action: Upon receipt of the completed application, the clerk
shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon. The clerk shall place
the application on the agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting of
the council which is held not less than thirty five (35) days after said date
of acceptance. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   C.   Commission Recommendation: (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   D.   City Council Action: When considering an application for vacation
procedures, the city council shall establish a date for a public hearing and
give such public notice as required by law. The city council may approve, deny,
or modify the application. Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated,
the council shall provide adjacent property owners with a quitclaim deed for
the vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed by law. (Ord.
8-96, 11-11-1996)
11-7-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Denial Of Building Permit: Any person violating any of the provisions
of this title shall not be entitled to the issuance of any building permits for
construction of buildings or otherwise on the land being subject to subdivision
under the provisions of this title.
   B.   Penalties And Enforcement:
      1.   Any person who violates any provision of this title or any person
who fails to comply with any provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed up to six (6)
months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
      2.   Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a new
and separate offense. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
      3.   Nothing contained herein shall prevent the council, any public
official or any private citizen from taking any lawful action to restrain,
prevent or abate any act, proposed act or action which is in violation of or
would violate any provision of this title. Should any person successfully sue
for the restraining, prevention or abatement of any act or proposed act which
would violate this title, that person shall be awarded all costs and fees
incurred in pursuing that action. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   C.   Penalty For Failure To Complete Construction Of Public Improvements: In
the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work within
the period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for the
completion of the public improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the
city council to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish
this, the city council shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof
by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of
credit, or negotiable bond which the subdivider may have deposited in lieu of a
surety bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance
by the bonding or surety company, and as included in a written agreement
between the city council and the subdivider. (Ord. 8-96, 11-11-1996)
CHAPTER 8
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
11-8-1: Purpose
11-8-2: Conditions; Definition
11-8-3: Agreement Proposal (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
11-8-4: Recommendation (Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
11-8-5: Content
11-8-6: Process
11-8-7: Record
11-8-8: Agreement Binding
11-8-9: Termination; Reversal
11-8-10: Subsequent Owners
11-8-11: Council Obligation
11-8-12: Written Consent
11-8-13: Violation; Enforcement
11-8-14: Developer As Applicant
11-8-15: Other Agreements, Terms And Conditions
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of a development agreement is to provide a means for development
in areas where in the opinion of the Cambridge city council (council), a rezone
or a subdivision plat by itself may not ensure that the requirements set forth
in the zoning ordinance or the subdivision ordinance will be complied with
after a rezone or subdivision plat has been approved; but, that a development
agreement will assure compliance with the zoning and subdivision ordinances and
with any required findings, conclusions and orders allowing an annexation, a
rezone, or a subdivision and with the written and oral representations and
agreements of the rezone or subdivision applicant.
(Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999; amd. Ord. 4-2025, 5-12-2025)
11-8-2: CONDITIONS; DEFINITION:
   As a condition of rezoning or the platting of a subdivision (as defined by
Cambridge City Code section 11-2-1), at any time during any stage of the
development process, a development agreement may be required by the council, or
it may be requested by the developer. A "development agreement" is a written
agreement or a commitment which affects the use or development of a parcel of
property which is the subject of a rezone or development request. A written
commitment shall also be known as a development agreement.
(Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008; amd. Ord. 4- 2025, 5-12-2025)
11-8-3: AGREEMENT PROPOSAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
11-8-4: RECOMMENDATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
11-8-5: CONTENT:
A request for a development agreement shall be in addition to an application
for annexation or rezone. A request for a development agreement shall contain
the following:
   A.   An affidavit by the property owner, if the owner is not the same as the
applicant, agreeing that the property subject to the rezone or subdivision plat
may be subject to a binding development agreement.
   B.   The specific use or uses of the property affected by the development
agreement.
   C.   The concept plan, which shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Three (3) site plans and one eight and one-half inch by eleven inch
(81/2" x 11") reduction showing:
         a.   Existing structure(s) which will remain, labeled as to existing
and proposed uses.
         b.   Building footprint(s), height, number of stories, proposed uses
(office, retail, restaurant), and square footage of proposed structures. If
residential, overall density and number of dwelling units per building.
         c.   North arrow.
         d.   Scale.
         e.   Property boundaries.
         f.   Names of applicant, owners if different than applicant, preparer
and project.
         g.   Size of project.
         h.   Existing vegetation.
         i.   Existing and proposed grades for hillside developments.
         j.   Parking areas with total number of parking spaces.
         k.   Locations and widths of right of way, easements, canals, ditches
and property lines.
         l.   Drainage features.
         m.   Conceptual landscape plan.
         n.   Interior streets and access streets.
   D.   The time period for which the agreement is to be valid.
   E.   A statement that failure to comply with all of the commitments in the
approved development agreement shall be deemed a consent to deannex, rezone, or
vacate the subdivision plat of the property to its preexisting state or to the
preexisting zone. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
   F.   If the development agreement is being requested by the applicant, as
opposed to having been required by the council, a statement must be included
wherein the applicant agrees that all time limits set forth by the code are
waived. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
   G.   Any proposed phasing schedule.
(Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999; amd. Ord. 4- 2025, 5-12-2025)
11-8-6: PROCESS:
   A.   Whenever a development agreement is requested or proposed, the city
council shall work with the applicant to prepare the agreement. In addition to
the information required in subsections 11-8-5C1a through C1n of this chapter,
any additional issues may be addressed. Those issues may include, but are not
limited to, density, site design, mitigation of impact on surrounding
neighborhoods, appearance, provision of utilities, public services or public
facilities, and any use restrictions.
   B.   The council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed development
agreement. After conducting its public hearing, the council shall approve, deny
or modify the agreement as the council, in its discretion, deems necessary.
After approval by the council, a development agreement may be modified only by
permission of the council and after complying with the notice requirements as
set forth in Idaho Code section 67-6509.
   C.   The city may require additional information upon the request of the
city engineer, city building inspector, or the public works superintendent. The
additional information may include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Subsurface geological report.
      2.   Environmental impact study.
      3.   Traffic impact study.
      4.   School impact study.
   D.   The contractor's as built report, as described in ISPWC division 1,
article 6.12, shall also include the following:
      1.   Color photographs of each water and sewer main valve or main line
fittings noting location and date.
      2.   One line drawing of all water, sewer, storm drain, and irrigation
mains including location, sizes, lengths, materials, connections, and fittings.
      3.   Photographs and drawings shall be included in a binder.
      4.   Reproducible drawings of as built plans shall include all
construction in the project including water, sewer, storm drains, irrigation
mains, street and road improvements, and inclusions and exclusions from private
property.
      5.   Receipt of said as built report by the city is a necessary prior
condition for final acceptance of the work. (Ord. 6-2015, 4-13-2015)
11-8-7: RECORD:
Development agreements shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder
and shall take effect upon the annexation or upon adoption of the amendment of
the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-8: AGREEMENT BINDING:
Development agreements shall be binding upon the owner or developer as set out
in Idaho Code. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-9: TERMINATION; REVERSAL:
A development agreement may be terminated and the zoning designation upon which
the use is based reversed, upon the failure of the owner or developer or any
successor or assignee thereof to fulfill any of the requirements of the
development agreement within a reasonable time, within the time set in the
agreement or upon the failure of the owner or developer or their successors or
assigns, to act in the manner agreed upon. What is a reasonable time shall be
determined by the council. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-10: SUBSEQUENT OWNERS:
Each subsequent owner, any successor or assignee, or any person who shall
thereafter acquire an interest in the property, shall take that interest
subject to the terms and conditions which are set out in the development
agreement and they shall conform to and abide by the terms and conditions of
that agreement. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-11: COUNCIL OBLIGATION:
By permitting or requiring a development agreement, the council does not
obligate itself to annex any property or to adopt any proposed zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-12: WRITTEN CONSENT:
A written development agreement shall be deemed written consent to rezone the
affected property and the commitment of the owner or developer or any successor
or assignee to comply with the conditions imposed by the development agreement.
(Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-13: VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT:
Development agreements may be enforced by any person through any means
permitted by law. That relief shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
specific performance, injunctive relief, or through the criminal process for
violation of any provision of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-14: DEVELOPER AS APPLICANT:
A "developer" is any person who proposes annexation or proposes to rezone
property to commercial, industrial, residential or for any business purpose. A
developer shall be considered the applicant in any development agreement. In
the event that a developer consists of more than one person or entity, all
persons who will be engaged in the development shall be bound by the agreement.
(Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
11-8-15: OTHER AGREEMENTS, TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
In addition to a development agreement as set forth above, the council may
enter into agreements which require certain terms and conditions to be complied
with as a condition of subdivision approval. One of the terms of any agreement
may be that in the event a developer does not comply with the agreement,
subdivision approval may be withdrawn. (Ord. 4-99, 7-12-1999)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Findings Of Fact
12-1-2: Purpose, Scope And Interpretation
12-1-3: Definitions
12-1-4: Land To Which Chapter Applies
12-1-5: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
12-1-6: Administration
12-1-6-1: Development Permit
12-1-6-2: Administrator
12-1-6-3: Variance Procedure
12-1-7: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-7-1: General Standards
12-1-7-2: Specific Standards
12-1-7-3: Floodways
12-1-8: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-9: Abrogation And Greater Restriction
12-1-10: Violation; Penalty
12-1-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental service, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood
damage, also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
12-1-2: PURPOSE, SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
      1.   To protect human life and health;
      2.   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
      3.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazards;
      6.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      7.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
      8.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
   B.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purpose,
this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
      1.   Prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities; (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
      2.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
      4.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      5.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
   C.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
12-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: Low cost buildings that do not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet, such as detached two (2) car garages, boathouses, small pole barns
and storage sheds (should be classified as minimum investment to be determined
by the community), not to be used for human habitation, shall be constructed
and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters; shall be anchored to prevent flotation which may result in
damage to other structures; service utilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed. (If the community's ordinance does
not contain the above provisions for accessory structures, then a variance will
be needed to be issued to exempt accessory structures from the first floor
elevation or floodproofing requirement.)
APPEAL: A request for a review of the city of Cambridge planning and zoning
administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request
for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one foot (1') to three feet
(3'); a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. AO is
characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood".
Designation on maps always includes the letter A or V.
BASEMENT: The portion of a building with its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard and permanent storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The official form (FEMA form 81-31) used to track
development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with
community floodplain management ordinances, and determine the proper insurance
premium rate with section B completed by community officials.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: An elevation that shall correspond to the elevation
of the one percent (1%) chance flood (100-year flood) plus any increased flood
elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required freeboard.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
"Floodway" is the channel of the river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge and store the floodwater
or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE: A flood insurance claim payment up to thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) directly to a property owner for the cost to
comply with floodplain management regulations after a direct physical loss
caused by a flood. Eligibility for an ICC claim can be through a single
instance of "substantial damage" or as a result of "cumulative substantial
damage". (More information can be found in FEMA ICC manual 301.)
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements found in subsection 12-1-7-2A2 of
this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". For floodplain
management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers,
and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home"
does not include park trailers and recreational vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots or spaces for the placement of manufactured
homes for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date hereof.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis,
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection,
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD: A flood determined to be representative of large floods known
to have occurred in Idaho and which may be expected to occur on a particular
stream because of like physical characteristics. The regulatory flood is based
upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed
or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the watershed. In
inland areas, the flood frequency of the regulatory flood is once in every one
hundred (100) years; this means that in any given year there is a one percent
(1%) chance that a regulatory flood may occur or be exceeded.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before damage occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The market value of the building should be: a) the appraised value
of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or b)
in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" occurs when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences regardless if the alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. The term does not include: a) a project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or b) alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009; Ord. 4-2009, 6-
8-2009)
12-1-4: LAND TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
12-1-5: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD 1 :
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) For Washington County, Idaho And Incorporated Areas"
dated June 16, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) and
other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this
chapter. The FIS and the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are on file at city
hall, Cambridge, Idaho. Special flood hazard areas may include areas that have
been known to flood historically or that have been defined through standard
engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet
incorporated in an FIS. This information may be used as best available data and
be used as the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is adopted that
incorporates the data. (Ord. 4-2009, 6-8-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. Required for approval by FEMA.
12-1-6: ADMINISTRATION:
12-1-6-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Development Permit Required 1 : A development permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within any area of special flood
hazard established in section
12-1-5 of this chapter. The permit shall be for all structures including
manufactured homes, as set forth in section
12-1-3 of this chapter and for all development including fill and other
activities, also as set forth in section
12-1-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
   B.   Application For Development Permit: Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city and may include, but are
not limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: (Ord. 7-
2008, 9-8-2008)
      1.   Elevation in relation to elevation datum; NAVD 1988, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; recorded on a current elevation
certificate (FF 81-31) with section B completed by the local official.
      2.   Elevation in relation to elevation datum; NAVD 1988, to which any
structure has been floodproofed; (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 12-1-7-2B of this chapter; and
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 7-2008, 9-8-2008)
 
Notes
1 2. Required for approval by FEMA.
12-1-6-2: ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment; Functions: The city public works superintendent is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties of the city public works
superintendent shall include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Permit Review:
         a.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
         b.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required 1 .
         c.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of subsection 12-1-7-3A of this chapter are met.
      2.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with section
12-1-5 of this chapter, the city public works superintendent shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer
sections
12-1-7-2 and
12-1-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 4-2011, 9-12-2011)
      3.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained 2 :
         a.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study or required as in subsection B2 of this section, the
administrator shall obtain and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basements) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement. Recorded on a current
elevation certificate (FF 81-31) with section B completed by the local
official. (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
         b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
            (1)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
            (2)   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 12-1-6-1B3 of this chapter.
         c.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provision of this chapter.
      4.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the department of water
resources, state of Idaho, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal insurance
administration.
         b.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
      5.   Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where
needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in section
12-1-6-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. Required for approval by FEMA.
2 1. Required for approval by FEMA.
12-1-6-3: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Appeal Board:
      1.   The city council as established by ordinance shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
city of Cambridge in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      3.   Those aggrieved by the decision of the city council, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the court, as provided in ordinance.
      4.   In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         k.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   B.   Conditions For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      5.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece
of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from flood elevations should be quite rare.
      6.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited
circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry
floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage
potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection B1 of
this section, and otherwise complies with subsections 12-1-7-1A, C and D of the
general standards of this chapter.
      7.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the permitted structure will be built with its lowest floor below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk. (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
12-1-7: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
12-1-7-1: GENERAL STANDARDS 1 :
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required.
   A.   Anchoring:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
      2.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas"
guidebook for additional techniques).
   B.   Construction Materials And Methods:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (Ord. 15-
86, 2-9-1987)
      3.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be elevated or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding. (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
   C.   Utilities:
      1.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      2.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
      3.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   D.   Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
      2.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      4.   Where base flood elevation data have not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
   E.   Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source
(subsection 12-1-6-2B of this chapter), applications for building permits shall
be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from
flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of
historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where
available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2') above grade in these zones
may result in higher insurance rates. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. Required for approval by FEMA.
12-1-7-2: SPECIFIC STANDARDS 1 :
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
12-1-5 or subsection 12-1-6-2B of this chapter, additional standards were
clarified in FEMA technical bulletin 11-01 to allow crawl space construction
for buildings located in the special flood hazard areas; however, adopting this
provision can result in a twenty percent (20%) increase in flood insurance
premiums. The following provisions are required: (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
   A.   Residential Construction:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot
(1') or more above flood protection elevation. (Ord. 4-2009, 6-8-2009)
      2.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
Foundation vent standards required by the IBC/IRC outside the floodplain do not
meet this standard and are often inadvertently permitted. Insurance rates
reflect an "all or nothing" standard, meaning, partially ventilated crawl
spaces may be subject to an additional loading fee of twenty (20) to twenty
five percent (25%) attached to the annual insurance premium. A subgrade crawl
space will be subject to an additional loading fee of twenty percent (20%)
attached to the annual insurance premium.
         d.   Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceeds five feet (5') per second.
         e.   All building utility systems within the crawl space shall be
elevated above base flood elevation or be designed so that floodwaters cannot
enter or accumulate within the system component during flood.
         f.   The interior of a crawl space below the base flood elevation must
not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG)
and the height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade
of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         g.   Below grade crawl spaces constructed in accordance with the
requirements listed in this subsection shall not be considered basements.
However, applicants who construct buildings that have below grade crawl spaces
are hereby advised that such buildings will have higher flood insurance
premiums than buildings that have crawl spaces with interior elevations at or
above the lowest adjacent grade. (Ord. 3-2009, 5-11-2009)
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: Construction and substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall: (Ord. 4-2009, 6-8-2009)
      1.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection 12-1-6-2B3b of this chapter;
      4.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection A2 of this section;
      5.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified
that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1')
below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood
level will be rated as one foot below that level). (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
   C.   Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
or above the flood protection elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 12-1-7-1A of this chapter.
   D.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days, or
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking
system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
      3.   Meet the requirements of subsection C of this section and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. (Ord. 4-2009, 6-8-
2009)
 
Notes
1 1. Required for approval by FEMA.
12-1-7-3: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
12-1-5 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section
12-1-7.
Note: Where base flood elevations have been provided but floodways have not,
this section
12-1-7-3 should read as follows:
12-1-7-3: ENCROACHMENTS: The cumulative effect of any proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1')
at any point.
(Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
12-1-8: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the federal insurance administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987)
12-1-9: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 15-86,
2-9-1987)
12-1-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation A Misdemeanor: No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of
the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-
1987)
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 15-86, 2-9-1987; amd. 1998 Code)
