COUNTY CODE
of
CANYON COUNTY, IDAHO
1996
Code current through:
Ord. 25-014, passed September 30, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the County of Canyon County, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-014, passed September 30, 2025.
Ordinances of the County adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the County office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 96-012
AN ORDINANCE OF CANYON COUNTY, IDAHO, RELATING TO THE CODIFICATION OF THE
ORDINANCES OF CANYON COUNTY, IDAHO; PROVIDING FOR TITLE, STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY,
PURPOSE CLAUSES; PROVIDING FOR OFFICIAL COUNTY CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE
CODIFYING, REVISING, COMPILING OF THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF CANYON COUNTY,
IDAHO AND FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE CANYON COUNTY CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING
FOR OFFICIAL FILING OF CANYON COUNTY CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners for County of Canyon, Idaho:
   Section 1.   TITLE.
   This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Canyon County Code of
Ordinances" or "CCCO."
   Section 2.   STRUCTURE.
   Titles and subtitles of this Ordinance are only used for organization and
structure and the language in each paragraph of this Ordinance should control
with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of the Board of
County Commissioners.
   Section 3.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the codifying, revising and
compiling of all Ordinances of a general and permanent character of Canyon
County, Idaho.
   Section 4.   AUTHORITY.
   This Ordinance is authorized by Idaho Code §§ 31-714, 31-801, 31-828 and
Article 12, Section 2 of the Idaho Constitution.
   Section 5.   OFFICIAL COUNTY CODE.
   From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance the Canyon County Code
of Ordinances, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and hereby approved and
accepted shall be the Official Code of all Ordinances of a general and
permanent character of the County.
   Section 6.   PERPETUAL CODIFICATION AND REVISION.
   There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose
leaf type of binding together with continuous supplemental service whereby each
newly adopted Ordinance of a general nature, amending, altering, adding to or
deleting the provisions of the Canyon County Code of Ordinances is identified
by the proper catch line, and to be inserted in the proper place in each of the
official copies.
   Section 7.   OFFICIAL COPY OF CANYON COUNTY CODE OF
         ORDINANCES.
   At least one (1) official copy of said Canyon County Code of Ordinances
shall at all times be on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners.
   Section 8.   SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   Should any provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this Ordinance in whole or in part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
   Section 9.   EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Ordinance shall be and is hereby declared to be in full force and
effect upon its passage, and approval and publication of the Ordinance as
provided by law in one (1) issue of the Idaho Press Tribune.
   ADOPTED AND APPROVED this 16th day of July, 1996.
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
CANYON COUNTY, IDAHO
CHAPTER 1
COUNTY ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 1
COUNTY CODE
SECTION:
01-01-01: General Provisions
01-01-03: Severability Provisions
01-01-05: Definitions; Construction Of Words
01-01-07: General Penalty
01-01-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (1)   Code's Title: Once this code of ordinances is adopted by ordinance by
the board of Canyon County commissioners, it shall be declared to be and shall
thereafter constitute the official code of Canyon County. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the CANYON COUNTY CODE OF ORDINANCES.
Its publication is authorized by the county commission, and the code shall be
kept up to date as provided herein. If reference is made to a numbered section
of the county code in any legal document, it shall be construed to include also
the penalty or general penalty applicable thereto.
   (2)   Code's Acceptance In The Legal Community: This code in its printed
form shall be received in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the county of general and permanent nature, with the
exception of any ordinances intentionally excluded herefrom.
   (3)   Code Amendments: Whenever an ordinance amends this code, that
ordinance shall set forth the specific number of the section or sections to be
amended. This shall constitute statutory compliance relating to the amendment
or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All amendments or revisions
by ordinance shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy
of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall
be inserted in each individual copy of the code, by the person or persons
responsible for that duty. The county clerk shall see that the replacement
pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the clerk. Any person having in his possession a copy of this code shall make
every effort to keep that copy in an up-to-date state. That person shall see
that new or replacement pages available to him through the office of the county
clerk are immediately placed in his copy of the code.
   (4)   Unlawful Alterations: It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to
alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this
code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or
omitted. (1996 Code)
01-01-03: SEVERABILITY PROVISIONS:
   (1)   Repeal Of General Ordinances: All ordinances of the county passed
prior to the adoption of this code which are not included in the 1993 county
code are hereby repealed. Exceptions would be ordinances which by necessary
implication herein are reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses
contained in the following sections), and also excluded are the following
ordinances: appropriation ordinances; bond ordinances; tax levy ordinances;
ordinances fixing boundaries and creating annexations; and any ordinance which
grants special rights to persons or corporations (such as contract ordinances);
street naming or vacating ordinances; election ordinances; ordinances relating
to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the county; and all
ordinances of a specific nature.
   (2)   Court Proceedings: With regard to offenses committed under former
ordinances which have been repealed by the provisions hereof, a new ordinance
shall not affect any offense committed against such former ordinance. Nor shall
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be affected by such repeal, except that
all proceedings shall comply with the ordinance in force at the time of such
proceeding, as far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be
tempered by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may, with the
consent of the affected parties, be applied to any judgment after the effective
date of the new ordinance.
This information shall extend to all repeals, both specifically set out or if
implied, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon
the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (3)   Separability: If any word or wording of this code or any part thereof
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The
county commission hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses
or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1996 Code)
01-01-05: DEFINITIONS; CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   (1)   Word Construction: Any word in any section of this code signifying the
plural number when used to describe or refer to any matter shall be deemed to
include the singular number. Any word referred to in this code by the singular
number only shall be deemed to include the plural number. If wording indicates
the masculine gender, females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that this shall not be applied to any wording
of this code which contains any express information making this information
invalid.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the county may have been
changed in the content of this code to chapter, article, section or even
subsection for clarification purposes only. Such change to county ordinances is
not meant to be a wording nor a penalty amendment.
   (2)   General Definitions:
    AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
   CODE (this code or county code, too): The code of the County of Canyon,
State of Idaho.
   COUNTY EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a county
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
of Canyon County.
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the county for the carrying on of a business
or endeavor.
   INFRACTION: Shall be as defined in the Idaho Code.
   LICENSE: Written permission from the county for the carrying on of a
business or endeavor.
   MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State
law 1 .
   NUISANCE: Anything of extreme inconvenience, considered offensive or
obnoxious to the inhabitants of the county. Also, any act or thing repugnant
to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person or to the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a county officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words of Canyon
County.
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any business or endeavor.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the direct sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities to consumers.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WHOLESALER: The term "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase such items for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1996 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. Idaho Code, section 18-111.
01-01-07: GENERAL PENALTY:
   (1)   Misdemeanors: Any person convicted of a violation of any section or
provision of this code which is deemed a misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not
to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the offense and may be confined
in jail for a period of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine
and imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so
convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
   (2)   Infractions: Unless otherwise provided, any person found in violation
of any provision of County ordinance is guilty of an infraction and may be
fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the second offense and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the
third offense. Fourth and subsequent offenses are misdemeanors and punishable
as provided in of this chapter. In addition to such penalty, any person so
sentenced shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
   (3)   Applicability:
      A.   Unless a penalty is specifically otherwise provided, the penalty
provisions herein shall be applicable to every section of this code as though
it were a part of each and every separate section. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day a required duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code. So, whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this county code and there
shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this section shall apply.
      B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created
by different clauses or sections of this code, the Canyon County prosecuting
attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty
so as to bar any other penalty from being enforced.
      C.   Canyon County Sheriff or other person empowered to enforce this code
is authorized to issue a uniform citation upon his own observation of a
violation without the necessity of a citizen complainant's signature on said
citation. By signing the citation, the officer or person is certifying that he
has reasonable grounds to believe that the person cited committed the offense
contrary to law. (1996 Code; amd. Ord. 10-002, 4-20-2010; Ord. 21-030, 10-14-
2021)
ARTICLE 3
COUNTY GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
01-03-01: Generally
01-03-03: Board Of County Commissioners
01-03-05: Other County Officials
01-03-07: Reserved Parking For Canyon County-Issued Permit Holders And United
States Veterans
01-03-01: GENERALLY:
All elected County officials are constitutional officers, elected to specific
terms of office and charged to perform the functions and duties of their office
as outlined and enumerated in Idaho law. (1996 Code)
01-03-03: BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS:
   (1)   Form; Number; Terms Of Office: Canyon County operates under a
commission form of government with three (3) elected Commissioners. The three
(3) member Board of County Commissioners is the Governing Body of the County
government in Idaho. The Board acts as both the executive branch and the
government branch and exercises some quasi-judicial duties and is responsible
for all duties not specifically mandated to other elected officials. Two (2)
County Commissioners are elected each biennium; one for a two (2) year term and
one for a four (4) year term. There shall be one Commissioner elected for each
voting district. (Ord. 92-001, 8-31-1992; amd. Ord. 94-001, 1-6-1994)
   (2)   Meeting Times And Days:
      A.    Short Title And Purpose: This subsection (2) shall be known as the
CANYON COUNTY REGULAR MEETING TIMES ORDINANCE. The Board of County
Commissioners has determined that County business requires regular public
meetings be held more often than once per month. The purpose of this subsection
(2) is to establish days and times for the conduct of County business in
accordance with Idaho Code sections 31-710(1) and 74-204. (Ord. 15-014, 7-1-
2015)
      B.    Regular Meeting Times And Places: Regular meetings of the Board of
Canyon County Commissioners shall be held Monday through Friday, eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., normally excluding lunchtime, in the
Commissioners' meeting room at the Canyon County Courthouse, 1115 Albany
Street, Caldwell, Idaho. At times, the Board of County Commissioners may hold
lunchtime meetings conducted between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and one
o'clock (1:00) P.M. or including the time between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
and one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and meetings between the hours of five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
      C.    General Topics: The meetings shall commence with routine
deliberation and action on documents and expenditures such as, but not limited
to, the County warrant register, contracts submitted in the normal course of
business, assessor's changes and rebates, licenses, resolutions and ordinances,
land use/land division matters, County grant applications, and other matters of
County business with the County's department heads and elected officials as
shall lawfully come before the Board of County Commissioners. The meetings
shall include an executive session, if required, for the purpose of
deliberating and deciding medical indigency matters or if otherwise required
and authorized by law.
      D.    Additional Meetings Held During Board Of Equalization: In order to
accommodate the Board of Equalization hearings which shall convene at least
once in each month up to the fourth Monday of June and from the fourth Monday
in June until the second Monday in July, the Board of Canyon County
Commissioners will hold additional regular meetings Monday through Friday
commencing at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. in the Commissioners' meeting room at
the Canyon County Courthouse, 1115 Albany Street, Caldwell, Idaho, and
continuing until the matters then before the Board of County Commissioners have
been concluded. Board of Equalization hearings shall also be conducted by the
County Commissioners on the fourth Monday of November and shall be completed on
or before the first Monday of December except as otherwise provided in Idaho
Code section 63-501.
      E.    Additional Meetings Allowed: The Board of Canyon County
Commissioners shall retain the power to call such other meetings as from time
to time may be needed as authorized by the Open Meeting Law. (Ord. 09-004, 12-
21-2009)
01-03-05: OTHER COUNTY OFFICIALS:
   (1)   Elected Officials: There shall be such other elected officials for
Canyon County as are set by statute. This shall include, but may not be limited
to, the following officials whose term of office shall be four (4) years:
      County Assessor;
      County Clerk;
      County Coroner;
      County Prosecuting Attorney;
      County Sheriff;
      County Treasurer.
   (2)   Appointed Officials: There shall be such other County officials as are
from time to time determined necessary for the proper operation of the County's
government. (1996 Code)
01-03-07: RESERVED PARKING FOR CANYON COUNTY-ISSUED PERMIT HOLDERS AND UNITED
STATES VETERANS:
   (1)   Reservation Of Parking Spaces: Certain parking spaces, as described
below, are hereby reserved in County owned parking lots from the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through Friday. These
parking spaces are located as shown in this section, and as shown on the maps
on file with the Board of County Commissioners.
      A.    Canyon County-issued permit holders:
         1.    Twenty two (22) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned
by the County on the northeast corner of Albany Street and 12th Avenue,
Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 7 as shown in exhibit A on file in the County;
         2.    Three (3) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County on the north side of Albany Street and the west side of 12th Avenue,
Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 11 as shown in exhibit A on file in the County;
         3.    Three (3) parking spaces located in the northwest corner of the
parking lot owned by the County south of Albany Street and east of 11th Avenue
along the 10th Street overpass, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 9 as shown in
exhibit B on file in the County;
         4.    Three (3) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County on the west side of the County Administration Building north of Albany
Street, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 1 as shown in exhibit B on file in the
County;
         5.    Eight (8) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County on the west side of the County Crime Lab/Coroner's Office south of
Belmont Street, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 2 as shown in exhibit B on file
in the County;
         6.    Five (5) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County on the north side of Belmont and west of 11th Avenue, Caldwell, Idaho,
labeled as Lot 8 as shown in exhibit C on file in the County;
         7.    Ten (10) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County on the east side of the Elections Building, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as
Lot 3 as shown in exhibit C on file in the County;
         8.    Fourteen (14) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by
the County on the north and south side of the east sally port on the east side
of 11th Avenue, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 4 as shown in exhibit D on file
in the County;
         9.    Six (6) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County along the northern side of the west sally port west of 12th Avenue,
Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 5 as shown in exhibit D on file in the County;
         10.    Three (3) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by
the County on the east side of 12th Avenue directly behind the Problem Solving
Courts Building, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 6 as shown in exhibit E on
file in the County;
         11.    Three (3) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by
the County on the corner of Chicago Street and the east side of 12th Avenue
next to pod 5, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 6 as shown in exhibit E on file
in the County.
      B.    United States veterans:
         1.    Four (4) parking spaces located in the parking lot owned by the
County located on the south side of Albany Street and the west side of 12th
Avenue, Caldwell, Idaho, labeled as Lot 10 as shown in exhibit F on file in the
County.
   (2)   Violation; Penalty: Violation of this section is hereby declared to be
an infraction as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject to a fine in
such amount as prescribed in Idaho Infraction Rules, rule 9, and as such may be
amended. The second violation of this section within a year from the date of
the first violation is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor as defined in Idaho
Code section 18-111 and subject to penalty as provided in Idaho Code section
18-113.
   (3)   Towing Of Unauthorized Vehicles: Any unauthorized vehicle or vehicle
not displaying a Canyon County-issued permit occupying a reserved parking space
is subject to being towed at the owner's expense. (Ord. 18-035, 12-17-2018)
ARTICLE 5
CANYON COUNTY PERSONNEL SYSTEM
SECTION:
01-05-01: Established
01-05-03: Purpose
01-05-05: Authority
01-05-07: Personnel System Rules
01-05-09: Administration Of System
01-05-11: Repealing Clause And Its Affect
01-05-13: Saving Clause
01-05-01: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the Canyon County personnel system. (Ord. 86-001,
1-20-1986)
01-05-03: PURPOSE:
This article and implementing rules are designed to establish and maintain a
uniform at will system of personnel administration for Canyon County. The
disciplinary and grievance provisions of the rules established to implement
this article are designed to implement a true at will personnel system,
including all employment protections guaranteed by law. The purpose of this
article is to effect economy and efficiency in the administration of county
government, thereby providing for the safety, promoting the health and
prosperity, peace and good order, comfort and convenience of the county and the
inhabitants thereof, and protecting the property therein. (Ord. 13-015, 9-30-
2013)
01-05-05: AUTHORITY:
This personnel article is adopted pursuant to article 18, section 6, and
article 12, section 2, of the Idaho constitution and Idaho Code, sections 31-
601, 31-602, 31-604, 31-801, 31-802, 31-813, 31-816, 31-817, 31-820, and 31-
828. (Ord. 86-001, 1-20-1986)
01-05-07: PERSONNEL SYSTEM RULES:
   (1)   The board of county commissioners shall have the power and authority
to issue rules as necessary for the implementation and maintenance of the
Canyon County personnel system.
   (2)   The "Canyon County Personnel Rules" shall be the official manual of
procedures for the operation of Canyon County personnel system. (Ord. 86-001,
1-20-1986; amd. 1996 Code)
   (3)   Any changes in these rules shall be in writing and shall be adopted
only upon a properly noticed and executed resolution of the board of county
commissioners. Any change shall be delivered to the employees by the elected
official or department administrators prior to the effective date. (Ord. 13-
015, 9-30-2013)
01-05-09: ADMINISTRATION OF SYSTEM:
   (1)   Human Resources Director:
      A.    The human resources director shall be appointed by the board.
      B.    The duties of the human resources director shall be specified in
the "Canyon County Personnel Rules". (Ord. 13-015, 9-30-2013)
01-05-11: REPEALING CLAUSE AND ITS AFFECT:
   (1)   Repealer And Recision: Canyon County ordinance 83-009 ("Canyon County
personnel ordinance") and the July 10, 1985, and September 17, 1985,
resolutions of the Canyon County board of county commissioners (relating to a
county employee disciplinary and grievance procedure and selection procedure
for a Canyon County personnel hearing officer), be, and the same ordinance is
hereby repealed, the resolutions rescinded, and all are replaced with the
article set forth herein.
   (2)   Meaning Or Interpretation: Provisions of this article or the rules
implemented hereunder are not to be taken as a statement of intent by the board
regarding the meaning or interpretation of any provision of the ordinance
(ordinance 83-009, "Canyon County personnel ordinance") being repealed and the
July 10, 1985, and September 17, 1985, resolutions of the Canyon County board
of county commissioners (relating to a county employee disciplinary and
grievance procedure and selection procedure for a Canyon County personnel
officer) being rescinded. (Ord. 86-001, 1-20-1986)
01-05-13: SAVING CLAUSE:
The provisions of this article and subsequently adopted rules are hereby
declared to be severable. If any provision of this article and subsequently
adopted rules or application of such provisions to any person or circumstance
is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this article or subsequently adopted
rules. (1996 Code)
ARTICLE 7
FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
01-07-01: County Administrative Fees
01-07-03: Taxation Provisions
01-07-01: COUNTY ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
   (1)   Motor Vehicle Licensing Fees 1 :
      A.    Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
the county and the inhabitants thereof by fixing reasonable fees for certain
county gratuitous services. This subsection will alleviate the proper tax
burden of financing said services by substituting reasonable fees to finance
services, the county will shift most of the burden for said services from the
general populace to the user of the service.
      B.    Fees Set: In the motor vehicle divisions of the county assessor's
office, there shall be set and collected the following fees:
         1.    An administrative fee of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) for the
handling of motor vehicle licensing.
         2.    A vehicle identification number (VIN) inspection fee of three
dollars ($3.00).
         3.    For inquiries regarding registrations and titles there shall be
a fee of four dollars ($4.00) per vehicle registration or title.
         4.    When a transfer of ownership arises, a penalty of twenty dollars
($20.00) for presentation of a previously issued certificate of title shall be
assessed against the new owner when the presentation for transfer of title
occurs more than thirty (30) days after the vehicle was transferred. (Ord. 81-
008, 6-23-1981; amd. Ord. 83-011, 12-22-1983, eff. 1-1-1984; Res. dated 5-20-
1988; Res. dated 4-25-1989; 1996 Code)
      C.    Reservation Of License Plate Numbers: Pursuant to Idaho Code 49-443
(2), license plates and their corresponding numbers shall be valid for a period
of seven (7) years beginning with the date of issuance of new plates.
The Idaho Transportation Department will have a plate number reservation
program beginning prior to the 1999 plate issue for a limited plate number
sequence.
         1.    Individuals desiring to reserve their license plate numbers must
submit the reservation of license plate number application form to the Motor
Vehicle Division of the Canyon County Assessor's office during the open
reservation period established by the Idaho Department of Transportation.
         2.    The following fees must be included with the reservation of
license plate number application form: the license plate number reservation fee
shall be three dollars ($3.00) and the license plate mailing fee shall be two
dollars twenty five cents ($2.25). (Ord. 98-001, 2-18-1998)
   (2)   County Tax Deed Property Redemption Fee:
      A.    Statutory Authority: This subsection is authorized by Idaho Code
31-714, 31-828 and 31-870.
      B.    Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare for the citizens of Canyon County by fixing
a fee to be paid by tax deed redemptioners when said redemptioners redeem
property issued to the county by tax deed after the time the county has
advertised said property for auction sale. The fee required by this Article
will be used to defray the advertising and administrative costs incurred in
placing county property up for auction sale. The fee required by this Article
is to be charged in addition to the redemption fees required by Idaho Code 63-
1124.
      C.    Service Fee: There shall be a service fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) to be paid by all redemptioners of county tax deed property when said
property is redeemed after the county has advertised said property for auction
sale.
This service fee shall not apply to a redemptioner who redeems county tax deed
property prior to the county advertising said property for auction sale. (Ord.
81-008, 6-23-1981; amd. Ord. 83-011, 12-22-1983, eff. 1-1-1984; Res. dated 5-
20-1988; Res. dated 4-25-1989; 1996 Code)
   (3)   Fees For Warrants Of Distraint:
      A.    Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
the county and the inhabitants thereof by fixing a reasonable fee to be paid
for the issuance of warrants of distraint as allowed by Idaho Code section 63-
1013. The fee required by this section shall be used to defray the costs of
preparing the warrants of distraint and various administrative actions involved
in the collection of property pursuant to the warrants, which costs exceed the
sum for the fee adopted herein. (Ord. 11-004, 3-16-2011)
      B.    Treasurer's Administrative Fee: There shall be an administrative
fee of ten dollars ($10.00) added to all warrants of distraint issued by the
Canyon County treasurer, which fee is to be recovered from the sums collected
by the sheriff and forwarded to the treasurer.
      C.    Sheriff's Fees: Additional fees for services provided by the
sheriff will also be collected, as applicable, as provided in Idaho Code
section 31-3203 or a resolution adopted pursuant to that section. (Ord. 15-019,
10-15-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance relating to these fees: Ord. 81-001, 10-9-1980, eff. 10-
  14-1980.
01-07-03: TAXATION PROVISIONS:
   (1)   Exemption For All Unimproved Real Property Within The Nampa Fire
Protection District From Taxation For That District:
      A.    Authorization: This subsection (1) is authorized by Idaho Code 31-
714, 31-801, 31-828 and 31-1422.
      B.    What Is Exempted: Upon the application, recommendation, and request
of the board of commissioners of the Nampa fire protection district, a
governmental subdivision of Canyon County, Idaho, and after notice of intent to
adopt this article was accomplished in conformity with Idaho Code 67-6511(b),
only the following categories of real property within the Nampa fire protection
district shall be exempt from the annual ad valorem levy of said Nampa fire
protection district:
 
Category 01 Irrigated agricultural
Category 02 Irrigated pasture
Category 03 Nonirrigated agricultural
Category 04 Irrigated meadow
Category 05 Dry grazing
 
Furthermore, each category of property shall be treated uniformly under this
article pursuant to Idaho Code 31-1422(2). (Ord. 81-002, 12-2-1980, eff. 12-10-
1980; amd. Ord. 82-001, 12-14-1982, eff. 1-1-1983; Ord. 85-001, 6-25-1985; Ord.
93-004, 12-27-1993)
   (2)   Mobile Home Assessments; Stickers:
      A.    Authorized: This subsection (2) is authorized by Idaho Code 31-714
and 31-828.
      B.    Purpose: The purpose of this article is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace and good order of the county and the
inhabitants thereof by requiring the affixation of a mobile home registration
sticker on mobile homes in a visible place. Said affixation requirement will
facilitate identification of the mobile homes for taxing purposes and will help
ensure that each mobile home owner properly registers his/her mobile home.
      C.    Stickers Provided By Assessor: The county assessor of Canyon
County, or his deputy, having assessed a mobile home located in Canyon County
shall, after first assessing said mobile home, and once every three (3) years
thereafter, affix to said mobile home, or furnish to the owner or occupant of
said mobile home for affixing, a mobile home registration emblem or sticker,
which emblem or sticker shall be printed and furnished at county cost and said
emblem or sticker shall be affixed so that it is visible from the public
roadway. Said emblem or sticker shall be used to facilitate identification of
mobile homes for taxing purposes.
      D.    Exception: The emblem or sticker addressed by this article shall
only be required for mobile homes that are not currently considered to be real
property as provided for in Idaho Code 63-304.
      E.    Penalty: Except as provided for in subsection (2)D of this section,
it shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor by fine of not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail of not to
exceed six (6) months, or of both such fine and imprisonment for any person to
occupy or own a mobile home in Canyon County for a continuous period in excess
of seventy two (72) hours without having displayed, as described in subsection
(2)C of this section, the emblem or sticker described in subsection (2)C of
this section, after said emblem or sticker has been provided to the person who
owns or occupies said mobile home. (Ord. 00-004, 5-26-2000)
ARTICLE 9
INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS
SECTION:
01-09-01: General Regulations
01-09-03: Definitions
01-09-05: Number Of Petitioners Required
01-09-07: Petition Requirements
01-09-09: Examination, Removal And Certification Of Signatures
01-09-11: Election
01-09-13: Severability
01-09-15: Effective Date
01-09-01: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Short Title: This Article shall be known as the INITIATIVE AND
REFERENDUM PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.
   (2)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this Article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this Article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the Board of County Commissioners.
   (3)   Purpose: The purpose of this Article is to provide a procedure by
which the people of Canyon County may enact ordinances through the initiative
process and repeal ordinances through the referendum process, according to law.
   (4)   Authority: This Article is authorized by Idaho Code 31-714, 31-717,
31-801, and 31-828 and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution.
   (5)   Repealer: On the effective date of this Article, the current Chapter
1, Article 9 of this Code shall be repealed and replaced with this Initiative
and Referendum Procedures Ordinance.
   (6)   Interpretation: Nothing within the terms and language of this Article
should be considered or interpreted to allow for procedures herein to divest or
otherwise interfere with the normal powers and duties of the Board of County
Commissioners regarding their right to adopt or repeal any ordinance pursuant
to state law; nor shall the language of this Article be considered or
interpreted to allow for the violation of substantive or procedural
requirements of state law or the Idaho constitution. (Ord. 98-005, 4-28-1998)
01-09-03: DEFINITIONS:
INITIATIVE: The right of the people at an election to adopt, amend or repeal a
county ordinance.
REFERENDUM: The right of the people at an election to approve or reject a
county ordinance adopted by the Board of County Commissioners. (Ord. 98-005, 4-
28-1998)
01-09-05: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
Petitioners for initiative or referendum shall be equal to twenty percent (20%)
of the qualified electors voting in the county in the last general election.
(Ord. 98-005, 4-28-1998)
01-09-07: PETITION REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Form Of Petition:
      A.    Initiative Petition: The initiative petition shall be in
substantially the following form:
   THIS INITIATIVE (OR REFERENDUM as the case may be) PETITION IS BEING
CIRCULATED BY A PAID SIGNATURE GATHERER. THE SIGNATURE GATHERER IS EMPLOYED BY
OR HAS CONTRACTED WITH.........., THE MAIN OFFICE OR HEADQUARTERS OF WHICH IS
LOCATED AT (city and state). (In Bold Red Type)
   Or
   THIS INITIATIVE (OR REFERENDUM as the case may be) PETITION IS BEING
CIRCULATED BY AN UNPAID VOLUNTEER. (In Bold Red Type)
   WARNING
It is a felony for anyone to sign any initiative or referendum petition with
any name other than his own, or to knowingly sign his name more than once for
the measure, or to sign such petition when he is not a qualified elector.
Initiative Petition to the Canyon County Commissioners. We the undersigned
citizens and qualified electors of Canyon County, State of Idaho, respectfully
demand that the following proposed ordinance, to wit (setting out the full text
of the measure proposed) shall be submitted to the qualified electors of Canyon
County, State of Idaho, at an election to be held on           day of
             , 19      , and each for himself says: I have personally signed
this petition; I am a qualified elector of Canyon County, my residence and post
office are correctly written after my name.
Signature Printed Name Residence City or State Street & Number Post Office
(Here follow numbered lines for signatures)
      B.    Referendum Petition: The petition for referendum on any ordinance
passed by the Canyon County Commissioners shall be in substantially the same
form as the initiative petition with appropriate title and changes, setting out
in full the text of the ordinance to be subject to referendum.
   (2)   Time For Filing Petitions:
      A.    For Referendum: Initial petitions for referendum containing not
fewer than twenty (20) signatures of qualified electors of the county shall be
filed not less than thirty (30) days following the final publication of the
ordinance to be subject to referendum as provided in Idaho Code 31-717. After
the initial filing of the petition, the provisions of subsection (3) of this
Section shall apply. Completed petitions, with the requisite number of
signatures, shall be filed with the county Clerk not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days after the date of approval of the form in subsection (3)D of
this Section.
      B.    Initial And Completed Petitions For Initiative: Initial petitions
for the initiative shall contain not fewer than twenty (20) signatures of
qualified electors of the county. Completed petitions, with the requisite
number of signatures for initiative, shall be filed with the county Clerk not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of approval of the form
in subsection (3)D of this Section.
   (3)   Certificate Of Review:
      A.    Before beginning to circulate any petition for an initiative or for
a referendum on any ordinance passed by the Board of County Commissioners, the
person or persons or organization or organizations under whose authority the
measure is to be initiated or referred shall send or deliver to the county
Clerk a copy of such petition duly signed by at least twenty (20) qualified
electors of the county which shall be filed by said officer in his office, and
who shall immediately transmit a copy of the petition to the Prosecuting
Attorney for the issuance of the certificate of review as provided in Idaho
Code 34-1809.
      B.    After reviewing a copy of the petition from the county Clerk, the
Prosecuting Attorney may confer with the petitioner and shall, within ten (10)
working days from receipt thereof, review the proposal for matters of
substantive import and shall recommend to the petitioner such revision or
alteration of the measure as may be deemed necessary and appropriate. The
recommendations of the Prosecuting Attorney shall be advisory only and the
petitioner may accept or reject them in whole or in part. The Prosecuting
Attorney shall issue a certificate of review to the county Clerk certifying
that he has reviewed the measure for form and style and that the
recommendations thereon, if any, have been communicated to the petitioner, and
such certificate shall be issued whether or not the petitioner accepts such
recommendations.
Within fifteen (15) working days after the issuance of a certificate of review,
the petitioner, if he desires to proceed with his sponsorship, shall file the
ballot measure with the county Clerk for assignment of a ballot title. Other
requirements shall be as provided in Idaho Code 34-1809.
      C.    Preparation of the ballot title by the Prosecuting Attorney shall
be as prescribed in Idaho Code 34-1809.
      D.    After the form of the initiative or referendum petition has been
approved by the county Clerk, the petition shall be printed by the person or
persons or organization or organizations under whose authority the measure is
to be initiated or referred and circulated in the county for the signatures of
legal voters. The above requirements are pursuant to Idaho Code 31-717(6)(a–d).
   (4)   Verification Of Signatures: Verification of petition and signatures
shall be as prescribed in Idaho Code 34-1807. Each and every sheet of every
such petition containing signatures shall be verified on the face thereof in
substantially the following form, by the person who circulates said sheet of
said petition, by his/her affidavit thereon, and as a part thereof:
State of Idaho
   ss.
County of Canyon
   I,                           being first duly sworn, say: That I am a
qualified elector of Canyon County, the State of Idaho: that every person who
signed this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in
my presence: I believe that each has stated his or her name, post office
address and residence correctly, that each signer is a qualified elector and a
resident of the County of Canyon, Idaho.
   Signed                                            
   Post Office Address                          
Subscribed and sworn to before me this        day of    
19       .
(Notary Seal)Notary Public                                
   Residing at                                   
(Ord. 98-005, 4-28-1998)
01-09-09: EXAMINATION, REMOVAL AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
   (1)   The county Clerk shall, within sixty (60) calendar days of the
deadline for the submission of the signatures, verify the signatures contained
in the petition.
   (2)   The signer of any initiative or referendum petition may remove his or
her own name from the petition by crossing out, obliterating or otherwise
defacing his or her own signature at any time prior to the time the petition is
presented to the county Clerk for signature verification.
   (3)   The signer of any initiative or referendum petition may have his or
her name removed from the petition at any time after presentation of the
petition to the county Clerk but prior to verification of the signature, by
presenting or submitting to the county Clerk a signed statement that the signer
desires to have his or her name removed from the petition. The statement shall
contain sufficient information to clearly identify the signer. The county Clerk
shall immediately strike the signer's name from the petition and adjust the
total of certified signatures on the petition accordingly. The statement shall
become attached to, and become a part of the initiative or referendum petition.
   (4)   Any person who circulates any petition for an initiative or referendum
shall be a qualified elector of Canyon County, Idaho. Each and every sheet of
every such petition containing signatures shall be verified on the face thereof
in substantially the form prescribed by subsection
01-09-07(4) of this Article.
In addition to said affidavit, the county Clerk shall carefully examine said
petitions and shall attach to the signature sheets a certificate.
   State of Idaho
      ss.
   County of Canyon
I,                                , County Clerk of Canyon, do hereby certify
that                 signatures on this petition are those of qualified
electors.
   Signed                                    
   County Clerk or Deputy
(Seal of office)
The forms herein given are not mandatory and if substantially followed in any
petition, it shall be sufficient, disregarding clerical and merely technical
error.
Any petition upon which signatures are obtained by a person not a qualified
elector of Canyon County, Idaho, shall be void. (Ord. 98-005, 4-28-1998)
01-09-11: ELECTION:
   (1)   Upon final certification of the petition, the county Clerk shall order
an election to be held pursuant to Idaho Code 34-106.
   (2)   A special election for initiative or referendum shall be held on the
nearest of the following dates which falls more than forty five (45) days after
the county Clerk orders that such initiative or referendum election shall be
held:
      A.    The first Tuesday in February;
      B.    The fourth Tuesday in May;
      C.    The first Tuesday in August;
      D.    The Tuesday following the first Monday in November.
   (3)   If the petition is for a referendum, the Canyon County Commissioners
shall have thirty (30) days from the date of certification of the petition to
repeal the ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the
Commissioners repeal the ordinance, no election shall be held.
   (4)   If the petition is for an initiative petition, the Canyon County
Commissioners shall have thirty (30) days to pass an ordinance as proposed by
the petition. In the event the Commissioners pass such an ordinance, no
election shall be held.
   (5)   In the event the Canyon County Commissioners neither repeal the
ordinance which is the subject of a referendum petition, nor enact an ordinance
which is the subject of an initiative petition, a county-wide election shall be
held pursuant to subsection (2) of this Section.
   (6)   Any initiative measure shall take effect and become a law when it is
approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon, and not otherwise.
   (7)   If a referendum measure, referred to the people in the county, is
rejected by a majority vote, such ordinance referred to in the measure shall be
null and void. (Ord. 98-005, 4-28-1998)
01-09-13: SEVERABILITY:
Should any action or provision of this Article be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of this Article as a whole or in part thereof other
than the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 98-005, 4-28-
1998)
01-09-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication, as provided by law, in one issue of the Idaho Press-Tribune. (Ord.
98-005, 4-28-1998)
ARTICLE 11
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
SECTION:
01-11-01: Creation; Name
01-11-03: Board
01-11-05: Powers And Limitations
01-11-07: Charter
01-11-09: Conflicts Of Interest
01-11-11: Corporation Business Dealings
01-11-13: Earnings Of The Corporation
01-11-01: CREATION; NAME:
   (1)   Canyon County (the "county") does hereby create a public corporation
to carry out the purposes of the act. This article shall not be construed to
limit or restrict the purposes of the act 1 , but shall be liberally construed
to effect such purposes.
   (2)   The name of the public corporation shall be the industrial development
corporation of Canyon County (the "corporation"). (Ord. 83-005, 6-30-83, eff.
7-6-83)
 
Notes
1 1. Title 50, chapter 27, Idaho Code.
01-11-03: BOARD:
   (1)   Members; Term: The board of directors of the corporation (the "board")
shall be comprised of five (5) residents of the county appointed by the board
of county commissioners. Of the members first appointed, one member shall serve
for a term of one year, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, and two
(2) members for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, upon expiration of a
term of appointment, each member shall be appointed to a three (3) year term.
If a vacancy occurs during an unexpired term, the board of county commissioners
shall appoint a member who shall also be a resident of the county to serve the
remainder of the unexpired term. A majority of the members of the board of
directors shall constitute a quorum, and the approval of a majority of a quorum
shall be necessary for the board to take any action.
   (2)   Officials Of Board; Conduct Of Business: The affairs of the
corporation shall be conducted and carried out by the board. The board shall
elect officers from among its own members. Such officers shall be elected at
the initial meeting of the board in each calendar year, shall serve until their
successors have been duly elected, and shall include a president and a
secretary and may include a vice president and an assistant secretary. The
board may elect such other officers as it shall from time to time determine to
be necessary or desirable. The board shall adopt bylaws and/or rules and
regulations governing the election of officers, the power and duties of such
officers, the filling of vacancies in offices, the scheduling, giving notice
of, and conduct of meetings, and the conduct of the corporation. Such bylaws,
rules and regulations may be amended from time to time by the board, provided
that any such amendments shall be consistent with the provisions hereof.
   (3)   Members Serve Without Compensation: Members of the board shall serve
without compensation but with reimbursement of expenses as may be provided in
the bylaws, rules and regulations of the board, all such reimbursements to be
paid from fees paid by applicants. (Ord. 83-005, 6-30-83, eff. 7-6-83)
01-11-05: POWERS AND LIMITATIONS:
The corporation shall have all the powers granted by the act. Such powers shall
include, without limitation, all powers set forth in the charter. (Ord. 83-005,
6-30-83, eff. 7-6-83; 1996 Code)
01-11-07: CHARTER:
A charter (the "charter") is hereby issued by the county to the corporation.
The charter grants to the corporation all powers authorized by the act. A copy
of the charter is attached to Ordinance 83-005 as Exhibit A and is incorporated
herein by reference as fully as if set forth at length herein. The charter is
hereby approved pursuant to section 50-2703(1) of the act. The charter may be
amended from time to time by the board of county commissioners. The existence
of the corporation commences at the time the enactment of this article becomes
effective. (Ord. 83-005, 6-30-83, eff. 7-6-83)
01-11-09: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
No director, officer, agent, employee or official of the corporation shall have
a direct or indirect financial interest in any property to be included in or
any contract for property, service or materials to be furnished or used in
connection with any industrial development facility financed through the
corporation. (Ord. 83-005, 6-30-83, eff. 7-6-83)
01-11-11: CORPORATION BUSINESS DEALINGS:
The county may not give or lend any money or property in aid of the corporation
except as expressly authorized by the act. This provision shall not preclude
the county from dealing with the corporation on an arms-length basis. (Ord. 83-
005, 6-30-83, eff. 7-6-83)
01-11-13: EARNINGS OF THE CORPORATION:
Any net earning of the corporation beyond those necessary for retirement of
indebtedness incurred by it and those necessary for reimbursement of expenses
to its directors and as provided by this article, shall inure annually, at the
end of the corporation's fiscal year as fixed by the board of directors, to the
county and not for the benefit of any other person. Alteration of the charter
of or dissolution of or audits of the corporation shall be as provided by the
act and by subsequent ordinances of the county. Upon dissolution of the
corporation, title to all property owned by the corporation shall vest in the
county. (Ord. 83-005, 6-30-83, eff. 7-6-83)
ARTICLE 13
MEDICAL INDIGENCY HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
01-13-01: Title, Structure, Purpose, Authority
01-13-03: Definitions
01-13-05: Submission Of Potential Witness List And Exhibits
01-13-07: Submission Of A Hearing Brief And Proposed Decision
01-13-09: Conduct Of Hearing
01-13-11: Record
01-13-13: Reopening The Record
01-13-15: Decision By The Board
01-13-17: Severability Clause
01-13-19: Applicability
01-13-21: Effective Date
01-13-01: TITLE, STRUCTURE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Short Title: This Article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY MEDICAL
INDIGENCY HEARING PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.
   (2)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this Article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this Article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the Board.
   (3)   Purpose: The purpose of this Article is to provide a procedure by
which the Board shall conduct hearings in medical indigency matters which, by
federal, state or county law, require the receipt of evidence, whether a
testimony, documents or otherwise, and a response from the Board in the form of
a written decision based on the record. Any conflict between this Article and
state law, particularly title 31, chapter 35, Idaho Code, shall be resolved in
favor of state law.
   (4)   Authority: This Article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714,
31-801 and 31-828 and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution. (Ord.
97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-03: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Article, words shall have the following meanings:
APPELLANT: The person or entity seeking a decision from the Board.
APPLICANT: The person or entity originally applying for Medical Indigency
Assistance from Canyon County.
BOARD: The Board of Canyon County Commissioners.
LEGAL REPRESENTATION: Attorneys appearing on behalf of an interested person.
RESPONDENT: The representative from the Canyon County Welfare Department.
STAFF: Any Canyon County officer or employee present during the hearing. (Ord.
97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-05: SUBMISSION OF POTENTIAL WITNESS LIST AND EXHIBITS:
Each party in a medical indigency case shall file with the Board a list of
potential witnesses they may call and copies of all exhibits they may introduce
into evidence at the hearing. The list and exhibits must be filed and lodged
with the Board five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure to comply
with this Section may result in the exclusion of the applicable documents,
evidence or witnesses. The Board may grant exception to this requirement upon
good cause shown. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-07: SUBMISSION OF A HEARING BRIEF AND PROPOSED DECISION:
The County encourages any interested party to a medical indigency hearing
before the Board to submit a hearing brief containing a synopsis of the matter
and legal foundation and arguments. Hearing briefs should not exceed ten (10)
pages. The parties are also encouraged to submit a proposed decision (including
findings of fact and conclusions of law, if applicable). Any brief, argument or
proposed decision must be received by and lodged with the Clerk of the Board
prior to commencement of the hearing. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-09: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
In accordance with Idaho Code section 31-3505E, as amended, the Board shall
hold a medical indigency hearing on an appeal of the Board's initial
determination within seventy five (75) days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
Medical indigency hearings before the County officials shall be conducted in
general conformance with the following procedure:
   (1)   Generally: The Board or its designee may limit testimony and scope of
the hearing as necessary. The Board, or its designee, if any, may at any time
during the hearing freely inquire of anyone at the hearing, including staff.
The Board desires to conduct hearings in a less formal setting rather than
follow a rigid, trial-style procedure. An interested party may have legal
representation at the hearing.
   (2)   Staff Report: The staff or respondent shall briefly review the
proceedings in the particular case culminating in the hearing pending before
the Board.
   (3)   Opening Statements: Any party may make a brief opening statement
commencing with the appellant(s)/applicant(s) and followed by the respondent
(s).
   (4)   Applicant/Appellant: The applicant(s)/appellant(s) bear the initial
burden of proof and shall be allowed an opportunity to present testimony,
documents, and other evidence which supports their position. An applicant/
appellant may be represented by counsel.
   (5)   Respondent: When the applicant(s)/appellant(s) have concluded their
case, the respondent shall be provided an opportunity to present any further
testimony, documents, or other evidence.
   (6)   Applicant/Appellant Rebuttal: When the respondent has concluded its
case, if any, the applicant(s)/appellant(s) shall be allowed a brief period for
rebuttal. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-11: RECORD:
The Board determines the admissibility into the record of any testimony,
documents or evidence presented by the parties. The briefs of the parties shall
become part of the record as shall any documents or evidence admitted at the
medical indigency hearing, and all testimony given at the hearing. At the
conclusion of the medical indigency hearing the Board shall close the record
unless the Board determines in its discretion additional evidence and/or
briefing is required, in which event, it may proceed as follows: close the
record with the exception of allowing the submission of specifically requested
information, leave the entire record open for the submission of additional
evidence and/or briefing to a date certain at which time it will automatically
be closed without further action of the Board, or continue the hearing to a
date certain for the purpose of receiving additional evidence and/or briefing
and conducting such further proceedings as may, in its discretion, be
advisable. The Board may not continue the medical indigency hearing or leave
the record open for more than forty five (45) days unless mutually stipulated
by the Board and the applicant(s)/appellant(s). (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-13: REOPENING THE RECORD:
Prior to issuing a written decision, the Board may, in accordance with Idaho
Code section 31-3505E, for good cause demonstrated, reopen the record for the
purpose of receiving additional evidence and/or briefing. An interested party
may seek to reopen the record by filing a timely motion to reopen the
proceedings containing information therein to demonstrate good cause and paying
any costs which will be incurred by the County to comply with applicable law.
The Board shall decide an applicant/appellant's motion to reopen the record
within five (5) working days of the receipt thereof. The Board may, within the
time allowed herein, reopen the record for good cause on its own motion. If the
Board determines to reopen the record, it shall thereafter comply with
applicable law, if any, governing notice and hearings. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-15: DECISION BY THE BOARD:
When the record has been closed, the Board may issue a decision or take the
matter under advisement for the purpose of deliberating towards a decision
based on the record. The Board shall render a written decision within thirty
(30) days of the conclusion of the hearing as required by Idaho Code section
31-3505E, as amended. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-17: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Should any action or provision of this Article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Article as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-19: APPLICABILITY:
This Article shall apply to any matter currently pending for which no hearing
has been held and to all other qualifying matters hereafter considered by the
Board. (Ord. 97-009, 4-28-1997)
01-13-21: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication, as provided by law, in one issue of the Idaho Press-Tribune. (Ord.
97-009, 4-28-1997)
ARTICLE 15
CANYON COUNTY PERSONNEL HEARING PROCEDURES
(Rep. by Ord. 05-008, 3-14-2005)
Any pending matter, as hereafter defined, shall proceed to conclusion under the
Canyon County personnel rules in effect prior to the effective date hereof. The
term "pending matter" is defined as a signed written complaint or signed
written grievance which a Canyon County employee has provided to the Canyon
County commissioners, the Canyon County prosecuting attorney, the Canyon County
sheriff, the Canyon County treasurer, the Canyon County clerk, the Canyon
County assessor, the Canyon County coroner, the Canyon County human resources
director, the trial court administrator for the third judicial district of the
state of Idaho or the Canyon County cooperative extension office chair which
has not been concluded under the Canyon County personnel rules in effect prior
to March 21, 2005.
ARTICLE 17
LAND USE/LAND DIVISION HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
01-17-01: Title; Structure; Purpose; Authority
01-17-03: Definitions
01-17-05: Minimum Requirements For Hearing Cases
01-17-07: Deadlines
01-17-09: Conduct Of Hearing
01-17-11: Record
01-17-13: Decision By Presiding Party
01-17-01: TITLE; STRUCTURE; PURPOSE; AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Short Title: This article shall be known as the LAND USE/LAND DIVISION
HEARING PROCEDURES ORDINANCE.
   (2)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (3)   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to provide a procedure which
the presiding party shall follow in order to conduct land use/land division
hearings which by federal, state, or county law require the receipt of
evidence, whether testimony, documents, or otherwise, and a response from the
presiding party in the form of a written decision based on the record.
   (4)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714,
31-801 and 31-828 and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution. (Ord.
97-022, 8-1-1997)
01-17-03: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT/APPELLANT:  The person or entity seeking a decision from the
                      commission, board or hearing examiner.
BOARD:                The Board of Canyon County Commissioners.
COMMISSION:           The Planning and Zoning Commission of Canyon County,
                      Idaho.
DIRECTOR:             The Director of the County Development Services
                      Department or his/her designee.
                      The county employee or an independent contractor
                      conducting hearings instead of the planning and zoning
HEARING EXAMINER:     commission, pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho
                      Code section 67-6520 of the local land use planning act
                      of 1975 and section 07-03-07 of this code.
                      This term refers to the commission, hearing examiner, or
INITIAL HEARING BODY: director whose decision or recommendation that is before
                      the board for final review.
                      This term broadly refers to any written comments,
MATERIALS:            documents, exhibits, visual presentations, or similar
                      items that are to be transmitted to the presiding party
                      as evidence for review, regardless of format.
PRESIDING PARTY:      This term includes the board, commission, or hearing
                      examiner.
                      Any Canyon County officer or employee present during the
STAFF:                hearing. (Ord. 97-022, 8-1-1997; amd. Ord. 05-002, 1-19-
                      2005; Ord. 24-004, 4-27-2024)
 
01-17-05: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR HEARING CASES:
   (1)   Complete Applications: Staff shall perform a completeness review prior
to the official acceptance of an application by the County to determine if the
application meets the minimum application requirements of the County. In the
event that it is determined that an application is incomplete, the applicant
will be notified regarding what is necessary to complete the application and
the application returned. In the event that an incomplete application is
returned more than two (2) times, additional application fees may be required
according to the County's fee schedule. All plans, ordinances or processes in
place at the time of the application passes its completeness review and
application fees are paid, will apply.
   (2)   Scheduling Application for Hearing: Once it is determined by the
County that an application is complete, the application materials will be
reviewed by County staff for technical compliance with applicable code
provisions. At a minimum, a case will not be scheduled for hearing until:
      A,   The application satisfies all application requirements enumerated in
the substantive County ordinance(s) governing the application;
      B.   The application includes all information or documentation the
Director deems necessary for the hearing body's review of the application.
   (3)   Closure for Inactivity: After acceptance of the application, the
applicant shall diligently pursue any action or information deemed necessary by
the Director to prepare their application for hearing and provide any
supplemental information requested by staff. The burden of proof of meeting all
applicable criteria, as listed in Canyon County Code, Chapter 7 is upon the
applicant. An application shall be closed due to inactivity ninety (90) days
after the date where a necessary action or information by the applicant is
formally requested by staff. The Director, at their discretion, may grant a
request for an extension of time to complete a necessary action. If closed for
inactivity, any fees paid will not be refunded. If an application is closed for
inactivity, a new application and the applicable fee will be required. All
plans, ordinances or processes in place at the time of the new application
acceptance date will apply.
   (4)   Appeal: The Director's determination may be appealed in accordance
with section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision. (Ord. 97-022, 8-1-1997;
amd. Ord. 24-004, 4-25-2024)
01-17-07: DEADLINES:
Hearings before the presiding party shall be conducted in general conformance
with the following procedure:
   (1)   Minimum Notice: Notice of a hearing shall be provided as required by
applicable law and ordinance. When practical, staff may provide advance notice
in order to provide additional opportunity for review and comment on an
application or appeal. Internal policies, procedures and timelines related to
noticing shall be developed and implemented as the Director determines is
needed. Providing discretionary advance or extended notice shall not alter the
minimum notice requirements set by applicable law and ordinance.
   (2)   Materials Deadline:
      A.   All materials to be transmitted to Presiding Party to be relied on
as part of the record must be received by the materials deadline, which shall
be at a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. Materials
received by the deadline will be automatically made a part of the record. This
deadline is to provide ample time for inclusion in the staff report packet,
hearing body review, and full transparency and access for the public. The
submission of late documents or other materials does not allow all parties time
to address the material or allow sufficient time for public review.
      B.   After the materials deadline, any input may be verbally provided at
the public hearing to become part of the record. (Ord. 97-022, 8-1-1997; amd.
Ord. 24-004, 4-25-2024)
01-17-09: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
Hearings before the presiding party shall be conducted in general conformance
with the following procedure:
   (1)   Generally: The Presiding Party may choose to limit testimony and scope
of the hearing as necessary. The Presiding Party may, at any time, freely
inquire of anyone during public testimony. The hearing body may request items
of clarification from staff at any time during public testimony or during
deliberation.
   (2)   Staff Report: At the hearing, the report may be written and/or oral
and may be presented at any time in the hearing order at the discretion of the
Presiding Party.
   (3)   Applicant/Appellant Presentation: Hearings before the Presiding Party
shall commence with a presentation from the applicant, their representative, or
counsel.
   (4)   Following the Applicant/Appellant Presentation, those favoring the
application shall be allowed an opportunity to testify.
   (5)   Following the those in favor of the application, those neutral to the
application shall be allowed an opportunity to testify.
   (6)   Following the those in neutral to the application, those opposing the
application shall be provided an opportunity to testify.
   (7)   Applicants/Appellant Rebuttal: After public comment has been received
from those in favor, neutral and/or opposed, the applicant/appellant shall be
allowed a brief period for rebuttal.
   (8)   Exclusive of the staff report and staff presentation, any materials
and/or presentations relied upon and to be desired to be admitted into the
record shall be provided by the established materials deadline. (Ord. 97-022,
8-1-1997; amd. Ord. 24-004, 4-25-2024)
01-17-11: RECORD:
   (1)   Staff Materials: The staff report and any staff presentation shall
automatically become part of the record as shall any materials submitted from
all parties by the materials deadline(s). All verbal testimony given at the
hearing(s) also shall automatically become part of the record.
   (2)   Remand:
      A.   The Board may remand an application/appeal back to the initial
hearing body for reconsideration of their decision if the Board determines that
the official record is incomplete, or that the application has had substantial
additions, amendments or modifications from the application presented to the
Commission, Hearing Examiner, or Director or that procedural steps required
were not followed. The taking of additional testimony and evidence on remand
shall be limited to those issues stated by the Board as per its written
directive. Additional notice shall be required.
      B.   Additional remand fees shall be paid by the applicant/appellant
according to the County's fee schedule. Remand fees may be waived for good
cause.
      C.   If after hearing the new testimony or evidence as directed by the
Board, the Commission, Hearing Examiner or Director's decision or
recommendation is changed, new recommendations and/or findings of fact and
conclusions of law shall be sent to the Board for further action. If the
Commission, Hearing Examiner, or Director's decision or recommendation is not
changed, supplemental explanation and/or expanded recommendations and/or
findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be sent back to the Board for
further action.
   (3)   Closing of the Record: At the conclusion of a hearing, the Presiding
Party shall close the record unless the Presiding Party determines, in its
discretion, additional information and/or materials is required, in which
event, it may proceed as follows:
      A.   Continue the hearing to a date certain, or uncertain, and close the
record with the exception of allowing the submission of specifically requested
information; or
      B.   Continue the hearing to a date certain, or uncertain, and leave the
entire record open for the submission of additional evidence, at which time it
will automatically be closed without further action of the Presiding Party; or
      C.   Continue the hearing to a date certain for the purpose of receiving
additional evidence and conducting such further proceedings as may, in its
discretion, be advisable. (Ord. 97-022, 8-1-1997; amd. Ord. 24-004, 4-25-2024)
01-17-13: DECISION BY PRESIDING PARTY:
When the record and public testimony has been closed, the Presiding Party shall
take the matter under advisement for the purpose of deliberating toward a
decision on the record. After deliberating, the Presiding Party may then
immediately render a decision or recommendation complying with applicable law,
or may continue the matter to a date and time certain for further deliberation
and decision. The decision or recommendation may be a subsequent and
administrative action of the Presiding Party. (Ord. 15-014, 7-1-2015; amd. Ord.
24-004, 4-25-2024)
ARTICLE 19
COUNTY FAIR ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
01-19-01: Designation As Advisory Board And Purpose
01-19-03: Membership
01-19-05: Rules, Officers, Meetings
01-19-07: Powers And Duties
01-19-01: DESIGNATION AS ADVISORY BOARD AND PURPOSE:
The board shall be a body advisory to the board of county commissioners, and
shall have as its purpose the provision of nonbinding advice to the fair
director or board of county commissioners concerning the operation and
administration of the fair and other uses of the fair's facilities and grounds.
(Ord. 15-022, 12-10-2015)
01-19-03: MEMBERSHIP:
   (1)   Membership on the fair advisory board is set at seven (7) voting
members representing, as nearly as possible, the various industries and
localities of Canyon County.
   (2)   Each fair advisory board member shall serve at the pleasure of the
board of county commissioners, with appointment terms of four (4) years each.
   (3)   Members shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed by the county
for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their duties. (Ord. 15-022,
12-10-2015)
01-19-05: RULES, OFFICERS, MEETINGS:
   (1)   The fair advisory board shall maintain rules of procedure and bylaws
governing its internal process for approval by the board of county
commissioners.
   (2)   The fair advisory board shall elect officers from among its members at
the first meeting of the advisory board in each calendar year. A chairperson,
vice chairperson, secretary, and treasurer shall be appointed. Other positions
may be appointed at the discretion of the fair advisory board. The chairperson
shall preside at meetings, and the vice chairperson shall perform such duties
in the absence of the chairperson. The director may serve as treasurer and
secretary. The treasurer shall maintain communication with the county
controller and board of county commissioners as to budgetary matters, and the
secretary shall produce minutes of each meeting and perform related tasks.
   (3)   The fair advisory board shall convene at least twelve (12) times per
year. Special meetings may be called from time to time by the fair director,
chairperson, or board of county commissioners. All meetings of the fair
advisory board shall be subject to Idaho's open meetings law, Idaho Code
sections 74-201 through 74-208, and as may be amended from time to time. (Ord.
15-022, 12-10-2015)
01-19-07: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The fair advisory board shall have those powers and perform those duties
assigned by the board of county commissioners not inconsistent with those
contemplated by Idaho Code section 22-204 or its authority as an advisory body.
(Ord. 15-022, 12-10-2015)
ARTICLE 21
RESERVED
[Reserved by Ord. 25-005, passed 4-8-2025.]
ARTICLE 23
CANYON COUNTY BUSINESS INVESTMENT INCENTIVE
SECTION:
01-23-01: Title
01-23-03: Authority And Purpose
01-23-05: Definitions And Acronyms
01-23-07: Preliminary Negotiations
01-23-09: Project Plan
01-23-11: Application
01-23-13: Approval Process
01-23-15: New Business Investment
01-23-17: New Investment In Existing Business
01-23-19: Additional Exemption For Demonstrated Indirect Benefits (Rep. by Ord.
18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-21: On-Going Valuation Of Property
01-23-23: Annual Report And Review
01-23-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY BUSINESS INVESTMENT INCENTIVE
ORDINANCE OF 2017. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-03: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This article is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by article 12, section
2, Idaho Constitution, and Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-801, 31-828, and 63-
602NN.
The purpose of this article is to provide objective criteria for determining
the amount of incentive tax relief that is proportional to the significant
economic benefits produced by a proposed project. Placing these criteria in an
ordinance provides prospective applicants with information for planning and
makes the process more transparent.
Because Property Tax incentives effectively shift the tax burden to other
taxpayers, it is important that significant benefits accrue to the public good,
primarily in the form of high-paying jobs and increased property values. As a
result, exemptions should not be granted unless the Board of County
Commissioners ("Board") finds that a combination of direct and indirect
benefits to the community from a proposed project substantially exceeds the
projected cost of the tax shift. These criteria are intended to help make those
determinations.
While the purpose of Property Tax incentives is to both attract new businesses
and retain existing business, relevant incentives may differ. Therefore, in
some respects, new and existing businesses are evaluated differently. The
provisions of this article will also be applied to applications filed under
Idaho Code section 63-606A, except when specifically inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-05: DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS:
The words and phrases included in this article shall be given their regular and
ordinary meaning. Legal terms shall be given the meanings applicable to Idaho
Code section 63-602NN when applicable, and when not defined therein, as
otherwise provided by applicable Idaho law. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-07: PRELIMINARY NEGOTIATIONS:
Prospective applicants, or their authorized agents, may request to meet with
the Board to engage in preliminary negotiations and discussions regarding
incentives. Applicants may operate under a pseudonym and meetings may be held
in executive session under Idaho Code section 74-206(1)(e) if an agent of the
prospective applicant with authority to negotiate is present, and when approved
by the Board. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-09: PROJECT PLAN:
Prior to completing an application, prospective applicants should prepare a
written project plan that addresses all requirements under Idaho Code section
63-602NN. The project plan can be used during preliminary negotiations, and
must be included as part of any application. A spreadsheet showing the nature
and timing of investments and proposed exemptions should be part of the project
plan. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-11: APPLICATION:
In order to be considered, an application must include a project plan. An
application can be filed under a pseudonym, but no application will be granted
until: 1) the prospective applicant has secured the right to obtain or secure a
particular property, and 2) the applicant is prepared to make the project
public. No exemption can be granted under a pseudonym. Application must be made
on a form provided by the Assessor's Office. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-13: APPROVAL PROCESS:
Applications will initiate final negotiations and preparation of documents that
will be necessary for the Board to consider and approve an exemption. Once
documents are prepared, a public meeting will be placed on the Board's agenda
and notice will be provided as required by Idaho Code section 63-602NN(5). At
the public meeting, the Board will consider the application and make
determinations regarding whether exemptions will be granted, and if so, to what
extent. In doing so, the Board will be guided by the criteria set forth in this
article. Applicants must be prepared to have their identity made public once
the public meeting is scheduled. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-15: NEW BUSINESS INVESTMENT:
It is the intent of the Board to provide incentives for investments in new
business where the new business:
   (1)   Demonstrates and certifies that "but for the incentive", the business
would not locate in the County but would locate at another specific locale;
   (2)   Creates jobs that pay competitive wages that exceed the average wage
(including benefits) for the County as determined by the State of Idaho;
   (3)   Demonstrates significant indirect benefits; and
   (4)   Agrees to all terms and conditions imposed by the Board, including,
but not limited to, recoupment provisions that might encumber project property.
Businesses that meet these criteria may be eligible for the following
incentives:
 
Level I investment:     
 Investment           $500,000.00 to $3,000,000.00
 Net new job creation 10 or more
 Exemption            Maximum 40 percent for up to 3 years
 
Level II investment:
 Investment                        $3,000,000.01 - $499,999,999.99
 Net new job creation              20 or more
 Maximum exemption:                Multiplier < 2.0 Multiplier > 2.0
  Real & personal property year 1 75%              90%
  Real & personal property year 2 75%              80%
  Real & personal property year 3 50%              70%
  Real & personal property year 4 25%              60%
  Real & personal property year 5 25%              50%
                                                  
Level III Investment:
 Investment:                       $500,000,000 or more
 Net new job creation:             350 or more
 Maximum exemption:                Multiplier < 2.0 Multiplier > 2.0
  Real & personal property year 1 90%              100%
  Real & personal property year 2 80%              100%
  Real & personal property year 3 70%              100%
  Real & personal property year 4 60%              100%
  Real & personal property year 5 50%              100%
 
The multiplier is the “employment multiplier” as determined for that project by
the Idaho Department of Commerce. A 2.0 multiplier means that for every job
created by the project, one additional job is created indirectly. Both the
investment and job creation requirements of a level must be met to be eligible
for that level. Investment includes only qualified investments as defined by
Idaho Code section 63-602NN. In no event can an exemption be made unless it
qualifies under Idaho Code section 63-602NN. Exemptions are only available
under level I for projects located outside of Nampa and. Exemptions are not
available under levels I, II, and/or III investments for housing and
residential buildings or facilities.
(Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018; amd. Ord. 22-020, 9-13-2022)
01-23-17: NEW INVESTMENT IN EXISTING BUSINESS:
It is the intent of the Board to provide incentives for investments in existing
business under the same criteria and limitations as set forth in section
01-23-15: of this article, with the following modifications:
   (1)   Investment includes only qualified investments as defined by Idaho
Code section 63-602NN, not including replacement equipment; and
   (2)   If existing business does not meet job thresholds but does not reduce
employment from the previous three (3) years average, the existing business may
be eligible for a reduced exemption as identified in the table below:
   (3)   If expansion does meet job thresholds as noted in section
1-23-15, the below criteria applies:
Level I investment:
 Investment                        $500,000.00 to $3,000,000.00
 Exemption                         Maximum 25 percent for up to 3 years
Level II investment:
 Investment                        $3,000,000.01 or more
 Maximum exemption:                Multiplier <2.0 Multiplier > 2.0
  Real & personal property year 1 50%             70%
  Real & personal property year 2 40%             60%
  Real & personal property year 3 30%             50%
  Real & personal property year 4 20%             40%
  Real & personal property year 5 10%             30%
 
Exemptions are not available under levels I and/or II investments for housing
and residential buildings or facilities.
(Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018; amd. Ord. 22-020, 9-13-2022)
01-23-19: ADDITIONAL EXEMPTION FOR DEMONSTRATED INDIRECT BENEFITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-21: ON-GOING VALUATION OF PROPERTY:
In order to avoid value disputes immediately after the expiration of any
exemptions granted under this article, as a condition of receiving an
exemption, a recipient must agree that all property subject to an exemption
will, after expiration of the exemption, be valued for assessment purposes at
no less than the capitalized value for the life of the investment using State
Tax Commission schedules. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
01-23-23: ANNUAL REPORT AND REVIEW:
No later than March 1 each year, beginning the year an exemption is effective,
and continuing each year thereafter until the exemption ends, each recipient of
an exemption under this article shall submit a report and certification of
compliance. The report shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
   (1)   The average number of full-time employees during the previous calendar
year;
   (2)   A schedule of the employee positions, together with salaries paid, and
employee benefit costs listed separately, together with copies of each Employer
Quarterly Unemployment Insurance Tax Report for the previous calendar year;
   (3)   An itemized list of all new equipment and the cost and capitalization
of each; and
   (4)   A compliance statement explaining whether recipient is in compliance
with the terms and conditions of the exemption, and fully explaining any areas
of non-compliance.
Failure to timely submit a complete annual report is grounds for immediately
terminating an exemption.
The annual report shall be submitted to the Assessor's Office, with a copy
provided to the Economic Development Office of the jurisdiction where the
investment was made. (Ord. 18-031, 11-15-2018)
ARTICLE 25
SOLID WASTE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
01-25-01: Designation As Advisory Board And Purpose
01-25-03: Membership
01-25-05: Rules, Officers, Meetings
01-25-07: Powers And Duties
01-25-01: DESIGNATION AS ADVISORY BOARD AND PURPOSE:
The Committee shall be a body advisory to the Board of County Commissioners,
and shall have as its purpose the provision of nonbinding advice to the Solid
Waste Director or Board of County Commissioners concerning the operation and
administration of the Pickles Butte Sanitary Landfill and to otherwise improve
the management of solid waste in Canyon County.
(Ord. 22-019, 8-30-2022)
01-25-03: MEMBERSHIP:
   (1)   Membership on the Solid Waste Advisory Committee is set at seven (7)
voting members representing, as nearly as possible, the various industries and
localities of Canyon County as further defined in the by-laws.
   (2)   Each member of the Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board of County Commissioners, with appointment terms of two
(2) years each.
   (3)   Members of the Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall serve in such
capacity without pay, but may be reimbursed by the County for reasonable
expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
(Ord. 22-019, 8-30-2022)
01-25-05: RULES, OFFICERS, MEETINGS: 
   (1)   The Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall maintain rules of procedure
and bylaws governing its internal process for approval by the Board of County
Commissioners.
   (2)   The Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall elect officers from among its
members at the first meeting of the advisory board in each calendar year. A
chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary shall be appointed. Other
positions may be appointed at the discretion of the Solid Waste Advisory
Committee. The chairperson shall preside at meetings, and the vice-chairperson
shall perform such duties in the absence of the chairperson. The Director may
serve as secretary and shall maintain communication with the County Controller
and Board of County Commissioners as to budgetary matters, and shall produce
minutes of each meeting and perform related tasks.
   (3)   The Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall convene at least two (2)
times per year. Special meetings may be called from time to time by the Solid
Waste Director, Chairperson, or Board of County Commissioners. All meetings of
the Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall be subject to Idaho's Open Meetings
Law, Idaho Code Sections 74-201 through 74-208, and as may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 22-019, 8-30-2022)
01-25-07: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall have those powers and perform those
duties assigned by the Board of County Commissioners not inconsistent with
those contemplated by this ordinance or its authority as an advisory body.
(Ord. 22-019, 8-30-2022)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC HEALTH
ARTICLE 1
PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
02-01-01: Title
02-01-03: Authority And Purpose
02-01-05: Definitions
02-01-07: Public Nuisance Unlawful; Responsible Party
02-01-09: Civil Enforcement Procedure
02-01-11: Criminal Enforcement Procedure
02-01-13: Interference With Authorized Person
02-01-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY PUBLIC NUISANCES OF 2018.
(Ord. 18-016, 6-27-2018)
02-01-03: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This article is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by article 12, section
2, Idaho Constitution, and Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-801, 31-828, 63-902,
and 63-1311. Its purpose is to provide for, and further, the health and/or
safety of the public by providing a procedure for abating public nuisances
which can create traffic safety hazards, fire hazards, health hazards, and
other harm upon the health and/or safety of the public. (Ord. 18-016, 6-27-
2018)
02-01-05: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ABATEMENT: The affirmative act of removing, repairing, or taking other steps as
may be necessary to remedy a nuisance.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: A public nuisance is a condition or use of property which is
harmful or injurious to, or creates a danger of harm or injury to the health,
safety, or welfare of the neighborhood, community, or members of the public, or
which is so offensive to the senses or such an obstruction of the free use of
property as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by
the neighborhood, community, or members of the public, including by way of
example the following:
   (1)   A condition or use of premises or property which creates a fire hazard
or any traffic or safety hazard to members of the public.
   (2)   A condition or use of premises or property which creates a health
hazard by permitting, allowing, or fostering the harboring and nesting of
rodents, vermin and/or insects, or which creates any other type of health
hazard to members of the public.
   (3)   A condition or use of premises or property which allows the open
storage, deposit, or scattering of scrap lumber or wood, waste petroleum
products, scrap or waste paper, trash, garbage, junk, boxes, recyclable
materials or debris of any type.
   (4)   A condition or use of premises or property which allows the open
storage, deposit, or scattering of scrap, abandoned, discarded, or unused
objects such as furniture, appliances, cans, containers, tires, tools, or
mechanical parts.
   (5)   A condition or use of premises or property which allows the open
storage, deposit, or scattering of dismantled or partially dismantled, wrecked,
junked, scrapped, discarded and nonoperating motor vehicles or parts thereof,
provided, however, that no public nuisance shall exist under this subsection
unless two (2) or more motor vehicles or parts thereof not in operating
condition remain standing on the property for more than ten (10) calendar days.
   (6)   A condition or use of premises or property which allows the growth of
weeds, grasses, bushes, shrubs, trees, or other plant life to such a size and
in such a condition as to cause, or reasonably threaten to cause a fire hazard
because of their dried and unkept condition, or a traffic or safety hazard
because they obstruct sight, applying the measurements and standards contained
in Idaho Code section 49-221, at intersections or other points at which
driveways, lanes, or highways come together.
   (7)   A condition or use of premises or property which allows the growth of
weeds, grasses, bushes, shrubs, trees or other plant life to such a size and in
such a condition as to cause, or reasonably threaten to cause a health hazard
because they provide nesting areas for rodents, vermin and/or insects, or the
growth of weeds to such a size or in such a condition as to interfere with the
free and comfortable use of adjacent and neighboring premises and properties.
SUMMARY ABATEMENT: The abatement of a public nuisance by the County, or by a
contractor hired by the County, without obligation to give prior notice of the
abatement action to the owner or occupant of the property.
WEEDS: Undesirable or objectionable and nonuseful plant growth but shall not
include noxious weeds as defined by Idaho Code, section 22-2402(17). (Ord. 18-
016, 6-27-2018)
02-01-07: PUBLIC NUISANCE UNLAWFUL; RESPONSIBLE PARTY:
   (1)   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to create, cause, maintain or
knowingly allow to exist a public nuisance on any premises or real property
which the person owns, rents, leases, occupies, manages or of which the person
has charge or possession.
   (2)   Agricultural Operations: The application and enforcement of this
article shall not contravene title 22, chapter 45 of the Idaho Code in that no
public nuisance shall exist under this article if the use or condition of the
property exists pursuant to an agricultural operation in accordance with
generally recognized agricultural practices.
   (3)   Administration And Enforcement: The Canyon County Sheriff, and/or
designated Code Enforcement Officer(s), shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
   (4)   Responsible Party: Where a nuisance exists upon property that is
vacant, abandoned, and/or uninhabited; the owner of record, whether a natural
person or persons or an entity of any kind, shall be presumed to be responsible
for creating, causing, committing, maintaining, and/or allowing such nuisance.
Such owner of record shall be subject to any and all penalties imposed as set
forth herein, and shall be responsible for payment of any and all costs
incurred in abating the nuisance. The owner of record shall bear the burden of
rebutting this presumption. (Ord. 18-016, 6-27-2018)
02-01-09: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
   (1)   Request For Voluntary Compliance: If it is determined by a Code
Enforcement Officer that a nuisance exists on any property, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause a written request for voluntary compliance to
be issued to the owner, occupier, and/or person in control of such property.
Such request for voluntary compliance shall contain the street address and
parcel number of the property, describe the nuisance existing thereon, request
voluntary action to eliminate the nuisance, and establish the time period for
voluntary elimination of said nuisance, which shall be ten (10) days from the
date of the request for voluntary compliance.
   (2)   Order Of Abatement: If, following the issuance of a request for
voluntary compliance pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, a Code
Enforcement Officer finds that a nuisance still exists on any property, the
officer shall cause an order of abatement to be issued to the owner, occupier,
and/or person in control of such property. Such order of abatement shall
contain the street address and parcel number of the property, describe the
nuisance existing thereon, order the abatement of the nuisance, establish the
time period for abatement, specify the penalty for noncompliance, and describe
the opportunity and time for appeal. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue
such order of abatement to the owner, occupier, or person in control of the
property on which the nuisance exists in one or more of the following ways:
      A.    By hand delivery upon such owner, occupier, or person in control of
the property; or
      B.    By certified mail to such owner, occupier, or person in control of
the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as
otherwise known; or
      C.    By posting such notice and order at a conspicuous place on the
property.
   (3)   Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner,
occupier, or person in charge or control of any property where any nuisance
exists, to abate such nuisance within ten (10) calendar days from notice
pursuant to this section, however, the Code Enforcement Officer may require
summary abatement of a nuisance condition where such condition presents an
imminent threat to human health or safety.
   (4)   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Code
Enforcement Officer from requiring, undertaking, or causing summary abatement
of a nuisance condition where such condition presents an imminent threat to
human health or safety.
   (5)   Appeal: Within seven (7) calendar days from the date of service,
mailing, or posting of the order of abatement, the owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property may appeal to the Board by
filing a written appeal with the issuing Code Enforcement Officer, which appeal
shall enumerate the grounds for appeal. The Board shall consider written and
oral testimony from the appellant and shall affirm, withdraw, or modify the
order of abatement. The decision of the Board shall be final. If the Board
affirms the order, the appellant shall have five (5) calendar days from the
date of such affirmation to abate the nuisance as ordered.
   (6)   Abatement Procedures: The Board, upon recommendation by the Code
Enforcement Officer and after providing notice as provided herein, may abate or
cause the abatement of any nuisance where the owner, occupant, agent or person
in control of property does not comply with abatement notice. If the Board
directs the abatement of the nuisance a service fee shall be imposed against
the owner of the subject property for services provided. The fees imposed
pursuant to this section shall be reasonably related to, but shall not exceed,
the actual cost of the service being rendered. The Board shall cause the fee to
be collected in the following manner:
      A.   Recovery Of Abatement Service Fee: Canyon County shall send to the
owner, occupier, and/or person in control of the subject property, by regular
mail, a billing statement requiring payment to cover the costs of abating the
nuisance and the administrative services as established by fee schedule. Unless
paid as voluntarily, as provided below, such charge shall be collected in the
same manner provided by law for the collection of real and personal Property
Taxes.
      B.   Automatic Lien Of Abatement Service Fee: Upon abatement, an
automatic lien in the amount of the abatement service fee shall attach to the
subject property, and a notice of lien shall be recorded within seventy two
(72) hours. Upon payment of the charges in full the lien shall be released.
      C.   Certification Of Abatement Costs: If full payment is not made within
thirty (30) days of the mailing of the billing statement requiring payment of
abatement service fee, the Board shall certify such charge to be placed on the
Property Tax roll.
   (7)   Certificate Of Noncompliance: In lieu of abatement, the Board may
record a Certificate of Noncompliance detailing the violations existing on the
property. Such certificate shall be removed upon remedy of the enumerated
violation.
   (8)   Injunction: The County may also take civil action to obtain an order
enjoining the ongoing maintenance of such property free from nuisance, and/or
to recover any and all costs enforcement and/or litigation including, but not
limited to attorney fees and court costs. (Ord. 18-016, 6-27-2018; amd. Ord.
22-005, 3-29-2022)
02-01-11: CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person who allows the existence of a public
nuisance to continue after a request for voluntary compliance. Each and every
day in which any such violation continues after ten (10) days from the date of
the request for voluntary compliance may be deemed a separate offense. Upon
conviction violations shall be punishable according to section
01-01-07 of the County's Ordinance, General Penalty. Criminal enforcement shall
not foreclose use of other remedies in this chapter. The Canyon County Sheriff
and/or designated Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall have the authority to issue
citations to violators of this article (Ord. 18-016, 6-27-2018; amd. Ord. 21-
030, 10-14-2021)
02-01-13: INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED PERSON:
It shall be unlawful, and shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Idaho Code section 18-113, to interfere with the Sheriff, Code Enforcement
Officer, or any law enforcement officer in the performance of duties connected
with enforcement of this article. Such interference shall include, but not be
limited to, removal of notices posted on the property pursuant to this article
or impediment or harassment of the authorized person in the performance of
their duties under this article. (Ord. 18-016, 6-27-2018)
ARTICLE 3
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
02-03-01: Solid Waste Disposal Site Designated
02-03-03: Transportation Of Solid Waste
02-03-05: Definitions
02-03-07: Only Waste Generated In Canyon County Allowed; Exemptions
02-03-08: Mandatory Solid Waste Disposal
02-03-09: Fees For Use Of Disposal Site
02-03-11: Disposal Regulations
02-03-13: Prohibited Acts
02-03-15: Penalty
02-03-01: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE DESIGNATED:
The only lawful site(s) for the dumping and depositing of solid waste in Canyon
County shall be at those areas designated at Pickles Butte, Canyon County,
Idaho, or any other site specifically approved by the board of Canyon County
commissioners. The Pickles Butte landfill site shall be maintained and operated
by the solid waste division of the department of administration of Canyon
County, under the direction of the solid waste administrator and the general
supervision of the board of county commissioners. (Ord. 93-001, 1-26-1993, eff.
2-1-1993)
02-03-03: TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE:
   (1)   Purpose: The public highways, as well as public and private lands
adjacent to said public highways, leading to the various solid waste disposal
sites in Canyon County are being littered with paper, cans, bottles and trash
of every description because a small number of the people transporting solid
waste to solid waste disposal sites are not properly covering or securing their
loads and are thereby allowing solid waste of all kinds to blow, fall and
scatter from the vehicles transporting the solid waste. It is the purpose of
this section and the duty of the board of county commissioners to require that
all persons hauling garbage, refuse, rubbish, tree limbs, trash or solid waste
of any kind, provide a proper cover and secure their load so as to prevent the
scattering, blowing or loss of the materials being so transported. This section
is enacted pursuant to authority given to the board of county commissioners by
article 12, section 2, of the Idaho constitution which authorizes the county to
make and enforce within its limits all such local policies, sanitary and other
regulations as are not in conflict with the general laws, and Idaho Code
section 31-714 which empowers the board of county commissioners to pass all
ordinances and rules and make all regulations, not repugnant to law, necessary
for carrying into effect or discharging the powers and duties conferred by the
laws of the state of Idaho, and such as are necessary or proper to provide for
the safety, promote the health and prosperity, improve the morals, peace and
good order, comfort and convenience of the county and the inhabitants thereof,
and for the protection of property therein.
   (2)   Definitions: The following definition of terms shall apply to this
section:
    BURN BARREL: Any barrel, vat, tub, or other container used to burn or
incinerate garbage, refuse, rubbish, solid waste, semisolid waste or trash.
   GARBAGE: Putrescible waste resulting from the storage, processing,
distribution, preparation, cooking and serving of food and wastes from the
handling, processing, storage, distribution and sale of products.
   REFUSE: Garbage, rubbish and animal carcasses.
   RUBBISH: All nonputrescible solid waste except abandoned vehicles and car
bodies or car body parts, industrial solid waste and agricultural solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE: As defined in section
02-03-05: of this article.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE 1 : The only lawful site(s) for the dumping and
depositing of solid waste in Canyon County shall be at those areas designated
at Pickles Butte in Canyon County, Idaho, or any other site specifically
approved by the board of county commissioners.
   TRASH: Includes papers, bottles, nails and refuse of all kinds not otherwise
described or referred to herein.
   (3)   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person hauling garbage,
refuse, rubbish or trash of any kind upon the public highways of Canyon County
outside the corporate limits of any municipality within Canyon County to haul
garbage, refuse, rubbish or trash without covering and securing such garbage,
refuse, rubbish or trash in such a manner as to prevent scattering or blowing
or loss of the material being so transported. (Ord. 05-011, 4-6-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  02-03-01: of this article.
02-03-05: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings set out in this section:
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Such waste as defined in Idaho Code sections 29-4403(7) and
(12), as amended.
LIQUID WASTE: As defined in 40 CFR 258.28(c)(1).
SOLID WASTE: Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water
supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and
from community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved materials in
domestic sewage or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges that are point sources subject to permits under 33 USC 1342, or
source, special, nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the atomic energy
act of 1954, as amended; 68 statute 923. (Ord. 93-001, 1-26-1993, eff. 2-1-
1993)
02-03-07: ONLY WASTE GENERATED IN CANYON COUNTY ALLOWED; EXEMPTIONS:
Dumping and depositing of solid waste at the Pickles Butte site or any other
site specifically approved by the board of county commissioners shall be
limited to persons and companies who generate waste and reside in or whose
principal place of business is within the boundaries of Canyon County, Idaho.
This limitation is enacted in order to assure the continued availability of the
Pickles Butte site to Canyon County users. An exemption to this prohibition may
be granted by the administrator of solid waste department, in his discretion,
up to five (5) cubic yards for each load. Exemptions in greater amounts may be
granted by the board of county commissioners based upon clear and convincing
evidence of fact: 1) that such waste was generated out of county by Canyon
County residents, or 2) that the continued availability for the Pickles Butte
site to Canyon County users will not be adversely affected by the acceptance of
out of county waste, or 3) the county has entered into a contract with another
governmental entity evidencing a factual basis for the above 1) or 2) factors.
Conditions may be attached to the grant of an exemption as are believed by the
board of county commissioners to be reasonably related to the health, safety,
and welfare of Canyon County residents. If the board denies an application for
an exemption, the unsuccessful applicant must file for a reconsideration of the
denial and request a reconsideration hearing within five (5) days of the denial
of their application. The reconsideration hearing before the board shall be
conducted in accordance with Idaho Code, sections 67-5210, 67-5211 and 67-5212,
as may be amended from time to time. The failure to timely request a
reconsideration hearing shall mean the applicant forfeits his right to a
reconsideration hearing. Said hearing shall be held within ten (10) days of the
date the request for hearing is filed with the board. Any appeal of the board's
decision shall be made to district court and shall be subject to procedures set
forth at IRCP 83(C), 83(K), and 83(U). Such an appeal is to be heard as an
appellate proceeding and shall not involve a trial de novo. (Ord. 93-001, 1-26-
1993, eff. 2-1-1993)
02-03-08: MANDATORY SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL:
To maintain the public health, safety and aesthetics of the county, all persons
in unincorporated Canyon County shall utilize one or all of the following
methods for disposal of solid waste:
   (1)   Utilize solid waste collection services where available and pay for
such services.
   (2)   Dispose of solid waste at a permitted municipal solid waste disposal
site in a reasonable time and manner.
   (3)   Burn solid waste pursuant to a valid permit issued by an authority
having jurisdiction in accordance with subsection
02-03-13(4) of this article. (Ord. 05-012, 4-12-2005)
02-03-09: FEES FOR USE OF DISPOSAL SITE:
   (1)   Usage Fees: Because of the increased costs of operating the solid
waste program at the Pickles Butte landfill and to continue to implement the
county's goal of effectuating a self-supporting solid waste program, the fees
charged for the use of the solid waste site may be established, changed or
modified by resolution of the board of county commissioners. The fees charged
shall defray the costs of operating the Pickles Butte landfill or any other
site specifically approved by the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Collection Of Fees: The fees provided for in subsection (1) of this
section shall be collected by the solid waste division at the Pickles Butte
site. All fees shall be paid at the time of dumping, unless previous charge
arrangements have been made by the user and approved by the solid waste
administrator.
   (3)   Billings And Charges:
      A.    Those persons or companies desiring to charge the fees provided for
in subsection (1) of this section must complete a charge application provided
by the solid waste division and approved by the solid waste administrator.
      B.    Those persons or companies who have applied for, and been extended
charge privileges, will be billed monthly by the solid waste division, and
payment must be made within thirty (30) days of the billing. Late payments will
result in assessment of one and one-half percent (11/2%) late payment charge on
the fees owed. (Ord. 05-011, 4-6-2005)
02-03-11: DISPOSAL REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Liquid Wastes: Liquid waste may be dumped at the Pickles Butte site or
any other site specifically approved by the board of county commissioners only
in accordance with title 39, chapter 74 of the Idaho Code as amended.
   (2)   Medical Wastes: All medical waste shall be disposed of at the landfill
in a form required by Idaho and federal law.
   (3)   Screening For Hazardous Wastes: In order to reject hazardous waste,
the solid waste administrator is authorized to adopt and implement appropriate
hazardous waste screening procedures as defined in the landfill's operating
record.
   (4)   Directing Disposal To Proper Area: The solid waste administrator is
authorized to direct waste to the landfill for appropriate disposal or to
recycling or storage or composting areas approved by the board of county
commissioners. (Ord. 93-001, 1-26-1993, eff. 2-1-1993)
02-03-13: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (1)   Unlawful Dumping: It shall be unlawful for any person or company to
dump or deposit solid waste in any area or at any place in Canyon County other
than the Pickles Butte site unless such site is specifically approved by the
board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Waste Accumulating On Public Or Private Property 1 : It shall be
unlawful for any person or company to permit or allow to accumulate solid waste
in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any adjacent street,
alley or sidewalk owned, leased, used or occupied by such person or company.
Provided however, that compost piles may be maintained for fertilization
purposes, and matter used for fertilization purposes only may be transported,
kept and used, provided the same shall not constitute a nuisance.
   (3)   Interference With Operations At Waste Disposal Site: It shall be
unlawful for any person or company to interfere with the operation of the solid
waste site provided in section
02-03-11: of this article by dumping or depositing solid waste at the Pickles
Butte site without paying the fees provided for in section
02-03-09: of this article.
   (4)   Limitation On Burning:
      A.    Open Burning Of Certain Solid Wastes Prohibited: No person may
allow, suffer or cause the burning of materials which emit toxic contaminants
or smoke or particulates (including, but not limited to: household garbage,
tires or other rubber materials or products, junked motor vehicles or any
materials resulting from motor vehicle salvage operation, plastics, petroleum
products, dead animals or parts thereof, commercial waste, asphalt or
composition roofing or any other asphaltic material or product, drywall,
sheetrock, tar, tarpaper, floor underlayment, insulation, insulated wire,
lumber or timber treated with preservatives, wet materials, pathogenic wastes,
hazardous wastes, paint or chemicals, or any other materials that would
otherwise be allowed under this subsection but the burning of which is
determined to be a nuisance or hazard by the authority having jurisdiction and
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of regulations for the
prevention and control of fires) for the purpose of disposing of such waste.
      B.    Open Outdoor Burning Allowed: Materials not specifically prohibited
by subsection (4)A of this section may be burned if the open burning is
conducted on the property where the solid waste was generated and is one of the
following categories of open burning:
         1.    Recreational And Warming Fires: Open outdoor fires used for the
preparation of food or for recreational purposes (e.g., campfires, ceremonial
fires, and barbecues) or fires set for hand warming purposes are allowable
forms of open burning.
         2.    Training Fires: Open outdoor fires used by qualified personnel
to train firefighters in the methods of fire suppression and firefighting
techniques, or to display certain fire ecology or fire behavior effects are
allowable forms of open burning. Training fires shall not be allowed to smolder
after the training session has terminated.
         3.    Industrial Flares: Industrial flares, used for the combustion of
flammable gases are allowable forms of open burning.
         4.    Residential Solid Waste Disposal Fires: Open outdoor fires used
to dispose of solid waste (e.g., tree leaves, yard trimmings, gardening waste,
etc.) is an allowable form of open burning. However, open burning of garbage
produced by the operation of a domestic household is prohibited pursuant to
subsection (4)A of this section.
         5.    Orchard Fires: The use of heating devices to protect orchard
crops from frost damage and the use of open outdoor fires to dispose of orchard
clippings are allowable forms of open burning.
(A) Open Pot Heaters: The use of stackless open pot heaters is prohibited.
(B) Heating Device Emissions: All heaters purchased after September 21, 1970,
shall emit no more than one gram (1.0 g) per minute of solid carbonaceous
matter at normal operating conditions as certified by the manufacturer.
(C) Orchard Clippings: The open burning of orchard clippings shall be conducted
on the property where the clippings were generated.
         6.    Prescribed Burning: The use of open outdoor fires to obtain the
objectives of prescribed fire management burning is an allowable form of open
burning.
(A) Burning Permits Or Prescribed Fire Plans: Whenever a burning permit or
prescribed fire plan is required by the department of lands, USDA forest
service, or any other state or federal agency responsible for land management,
any person who conducts or allows prescribed burning shall meet all permit and/
or plan conditions and terms which control smoke.
(B) Rights Of Way Fires: The open burning of woody debris generated during the
clearing of rights of way shall be open burned according to Idaho Code sections
38-101 and 38-401, and these rules.
         7.    Dangerous Material Fires: Open outdoor fires used or permitted
by a public or military fire chief to dispose of materials (including military
ordnance) which present a danger to life, valuable property or the public
welfare, or for the purpose of prevention of a fire hazard when no practical
alternative method of disposal or removal is available are allowable forms of
open burning. Dangerous materials burning is exempt from subsection (4)A of
this section.
         8.    Infectious Waste Burning: Upon the order of a public health
officer, open outdoor fires used to dispose of diseased animals or infested
material is an allowable form of open burning. Infectious waste burning is
exempt from subsection (4)A of this section. (Ord. 05-011, 4-6-2005)
         9.    Weed Control Fires: Open outdoor fires used for the purpose of
weed abatement such as along fence lines, canal banks, and ditch banks is an
allowable form of open burning. (Ord. 10-005, 7-12-2010)
      C.    Additional Prohibitions: Provided that all open burning, even if
allowed in subsection (4)B of this section is prohibited when: (Ord. 05-011, 4-
6-2005)
         1.    The Idaho department of environmental quality (DEQ) air quality
index (AQI) reaches seventy five (75) or higher for any pollutant measured
within Canyon County, Idaho. It is the responsibility of the person intending
to engage in allowed open burning to determine the level of the air quality
index prior to igniting any open burning. The air quality index may be
determined by calling DEQ or visiting DEQ's webpage, or (Ord. 10-005, 7-12-
2010)
         2.    Any time the sustained (10 minute average) winds exceed twenty
(20) miles per hour and/or wind gusts exceed thirty five (35) miles per hour or
any time that the national weather service - Boise (NWS) has issued or has in
effect a "red flag" warning for any portion of Canyon County, indicating
conditions representing a high to extreme fire danger. NWS warnings may be
determined by calling NWS or visiting the NWS webpage.
      D.    Constantly Attended Fire: All open burning conducted pursuant to
subsection (4)B of this section shall be constantly attended until the fire is
fully extinguished.
      E.    Compliance: Compliance with the provisions of this subsection (4)
does not exempt or excuse any person from complying with applicable laws,
rules, or policies of other governmental jurisdictions responsible for fire
control or hazardous material disposal or from liability for damages or
injuries which may result from open burning. (Ord. 05-011, 4-6-2005)
      F.    Investigation Of Complaints: The Canyon County sheriff or his
designated code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the investigation
of complaints, upon request of the authority having jurisdiction and
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of regulations for the
prevention and control of fires.
   (5)   Unlawful Burning Times: It shall be unlawful to build, ignite, or
maintain any fire for field burning, disposing of waste matter in irrigation
ditches and fencerows, weed control, piled tree leaves and tree and brush
pruning remnants from agricultural sources in the unincorporated areas of
Canyon County, Idaho, at any time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-
half (1/2) hour before sunrise, inclusively, unless the authority having
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of regulations for the
prevention and control of fires specifically exempts a person or company from
this requirement. (Ord. 10-005, 7-12-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. For public nuisance regulations, see article 1 of this chapter.
02-03-15: PENALTY:
   (1)   Violations; Penalty: The first violation of section
02-03-08: or subsection
02-03-13(4) of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
punishable as an infraction as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject
to a fine in such amount as prescribed in Idaho infraction rules, rule 9, and
as such may be amended. The second violation of section
02-03-08: or subsection
02-03-13(4) of this article within a three (3) month period from the date of
the first violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be punishable
as an infraction as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject to a fine
in such an amount as prescribed in Idaho infraction rules, rule 9, and as such
may be amended. The third violation of section
02-03-08: or subsection
02-03-13(4) of this article within a one year period from the date of the first
or second violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be punishable
as a misdemeanor as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject to a fine
of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (2)   Other Violations; Penalty: Any person violating any section of this
article, other than section
02-03-08: or subsection
02-03-13(4) of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each separate
violation hereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00).
   (3)   Uniform Citation: Enforcement of this article may be by uniform
citation issued pursuant to rule 5 of the Idaho infraction rules and/or rule 5
of the misdemeanor criminal rules and by a law enforcement officer defined in
rule 2(g) of the Idaho infraction rules and/or rule 2(g) of the misdemeanor
criminal rules. A law enforcement officer for purposes of this article shall
include, but is not limited to, a Canyon County sheriff's deputy. A uniform
citation for violation of this article shall be personally served upon the
owner, if known, or the occupant or person in charge of the possession of the
premises or property on which the nuisance is found. The Canyon County solid
waste department's code enforcement officer is authorized as a law enforcement
officer only for the enforcement of applicable state and county codes
pertaining to solid waste within the boundaries of county owned landfill
property. (Ord. 05-012, 5-12-2005)
ARTICLE 5
CANYON COUNTY HOURS OF BURNING REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 10-005, 7-12-2010)
ARTICLE 7
ORCHARD PESTS
SECTION:
02-07-01: Title, Structure, Purpose And Authority
02-07-03: Definitions
02-07-05: Orchard Review Board
02-07-07: Control Procedures
02-07-09: Right Of Entry
02-07-11: Severability Clause
02-07-13: Effective Date
02-07-15: Intent To Supersede
02-07-01: TITLE, STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Short Title: This article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY
ORDINANCE REGULATING ORCHARD PESTS.
   (2)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (3)   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to enable Canyon County to
more effectively control and prevent the spread of orchard pests, and by these
actions protect the viability, productiveness, and competitiveness of the
orchard industry in Canyon County, and ensure the industry's continued
contribution to the economy of Canyon County.
   (4)   Authority: The authority to control agricultural pests is granted to
the board of commissioners by Idaho Code section 25-2601. (Ord. 99-005, 6-25-
1999)
02-07-03: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD: The orchard review board.
NEGLECTED OR ABANDONED: Refers to any orchard or private orchards where
standard orchard or private orchard management practices as described in state
and regional publications are not being met and one or more pest, pathogen,
disease, or conditions of economic consequence to the particular crop being
grown exist.
ORCHARD: An area that has fruit trees, wild or cultivated, and is currently or
has been used for commercial purposes.
PREMISES: For purposes of this article, "premises" means any real property not
owned by Canyon County.
PRIVATE ORCHARD: Privately owned fruit trees, fruit from which is used solely
for the consumption of the owner's family members. (Ord. 99-005, 6-25-1999)
02-07-05: ORCHARD REVIEW BOARD:
   (1)   Authority: Pursuant to the authority granted under Idaho Code section
25-2603, the Canyon County board of commissioners hereby creates an orchard
review board to control orchard pests. The orchard review board is vested with
the power to control pests as provided in this article, subject to review by
the Canyon County board of commissioners.
   (2)   Creation And Composition: The board shall be composed of five (5)
members appointed by the Canyon County board of commissioners. Each board
member shall serve a two (2) year term. Two (2) of the members shall be from
the commercial orchard industry, one shall be a private citizen and resident of
Canyon County with no commercial ties to the orchard industry, one member shall
be a private orchardist or retired commercial orchardist or have some
background or knowledge of orchard management and fruit production, and the
fifth member shall be that person employed by the University of Idaho as the
Canyon County agricultural extension agency. The board members shall serve for
a term of two (2) years and shall serve without a salary or other compensation.
   (3)   Duties: It shall be the duty of the board to review and act on all
complaints involving orchard pests in orchards private or otherwise. (Ord. 99-
005, 6-25-1999)
02-07-07: CONTROL PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Only signed written complaints shall be reviewed and investigated by
the board. Upon receipt of a complaint, the board shall immediately notify the
landowner of the complaint and name a voting member to act as a contact for the
landowner. That board member shall arrange with the landowner a time for the
appointed investigatory team to examine the orchard or private orchard in
question.
   (2)   The board shall appoint three (3) investigators to carry out the field
inspection of any orchard or private orchard under review by the board. The
investigatory team shall be composed of that board member named as the contact
person for the landowner, and that person employed by the University of Idaho
as the Canyon County agricultural extension agency to act as an advisor. The
other member of the investigatory team shall be determined by the board.
   (3)   The board in conjunction with that person employed by the University
of Idaho as the Canyon County agricultural/University of Idaho agricultural
extension service, any other agricultural extension specialist deemed
necessary, and a representative of the Idaho department of agriculture,
division of plant industries, will establish the inspection procedures to be
used by any board investigatory team. Such procedures shall be reviewed by the
Canyon County board of commissioners and must be approved by the Canyon County
board of commissioners prior to implementation.
   (4)   If the investigatory team finds that an orchard or private orchard
does in fact contain orchard pests, the landowner in question shall be given
written notice to control such pests within ten (10) days of receipt of the
notice. Such notice shall comply with Idaho Code section 25-2607.
   (5)   If the landowner fails to control the specified pest or pests within
ten (10) days, the landowner in question shall be given notice, not less than
seven (7) days before the hearing, to appear before the board to show cause why
the board should not initiate steps to control the pest or pests.
   (6)   Unless the landowner can show that the agricultural pests do not
exist, or that they do exist but it is not necessary to control them, such
landowners shall be requested to enter into a contract with the board
specifying a time in which such pests will be controlled by the landowner, and
any other provisions determined by the board to be necessary for the
fulfillment of the purposes of this article.
   (7)   It shall be the duty of the board and the landowner to examine all
possibilities and mechanisms to resolve the situation, including, but not
limited to, funding, education, contract spraying, orchard or private orchard
destruction and uprooting, and chemical herbiciding of tree stumps.
   (8)   Any landowner subject to an investigation by the board or under an
agreement with the board may at any time request through their board contact
person a hearing before the board. Granting of the request for a hearing shall
be at the discretion of the board.
   (9)   If the landowner does not appear at the hearing, or does appear, but
refuses to enter into the contract as requested by the board, or fails to
comply with the terms of the contract, the board may cause control procedures
to be initiated as soon as practicable at the owner's expense. All expenses
incurred in carrying out the provisions of this article shall be a legal charge
against the property upon which the control procedures were performed and if
not paid within thirty (30) days from the time when demand therefor is first
made upon the owner of such property, shall be certified to the tax collector
of Canyon County and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon such property; and
shall be added by the tax collector to the general taxes assessed against said
property which becomes due next thereafter and shall be collected by him in the
same manner and with the same penalties as such other taxes. In the event that
the Idaho department of agriculture reimburses Canyon County for the expenses
incurred in carrying out the provisions of this article, said lien and/or tax
assessment shall be in favor of the Idaho department of agriculture, otherwise,
it shall be in favor of Canyon County. Nothing contained in this provision
shall be construed to require satisfaction of the obligation imposed hereby in
whole or in part from the sale of property or to bar the application of any
other or additional remedy otherwise available. (Ord. 99-005, 6-25-1999)
02-07-09: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Any agent authorized by the board to carry out an inspection on its behalf may
enter upon any property within Canyon County for the purpose of administering
this article and any other power exercisable pursuant thereto, including the
taking of specimens, general inspection, and the performance of such acts as
are necessary for the controlling and preventing the spread of orchard pests
and diseases as follows:
   (1)   Any agent authorized by the board who desires to enter any premises to
fulfill any of the acts authorized by this article shall first seek to obtain
consent from the owner, or any agent of the owner who is authorized to make
such consent, to enter the property for the purpose of performing the act so
desired.
   (2)   Should any such authorized agent of the board be denied consent to
enter such property to perform any act authorized by this article, the board
shall apply to any court of competent jurisdiction seeking a warrant granting
the right to enter said property and perform any act authorized by this
article. Such warrant shall issue upon a finding of probable cause that the
orchard or private orchard for which entry is sought contains pests or disease
or is in such a state or condition that it is likely that it contains pests or
disease. (Ord. 99-005, 6-25-1999)
02-07-11: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Should any action or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of
this article as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 99-005, 6-25-1999)
02-07-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication, as provided by law, in one issue of the "Idaho Press-Tribune".
(Ord. 99-005, 6-25-1999)
02-07-15: INTENT TO SUPERSEDE:
This article supersedes all previous ordinances and resolutions dealing with
abandoned orchards in Canyon County. (Ord. 99-005, 6-25-1999)
ARTICLE 9
AMBULANCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
02-09-01: Purpose
02-09-03: Definitions
02-09-05: Name Of The District
02-09-07: Use Of Tax Levied
02-09-09: Fees For Services
02-09-11: Capital Improvement Account
02-09-13: Administration Of District Services
02-09-15: Advisory Board
02-09-17: Authority Of The District
02-09-19: District Authorization Required For Operation
02-09-21: Civil Action To Secure Compliance
02-09-23: Annexation, Deannexation, Or Dissolution Of The District
02-09-01: PURPOSE:
Trauma involved in medical emergency situations results in severe risk to life
and health. In a rural county such as Canyon County it is critical to the
public health, safety and welfare that coordinated, quality ambulance and
emergency medical assistance be available promptly. In November 1977, a group
of concerned citizens filed a petition, pursuant to Idaho Code section 31-3908,
requesting that an ambulance district be established. The board of
commissioners of Canyon County established the Canyon County ambulance district
which has continued to serve the ambulance and emergency medical needs of the
whole county.
Such needs are served by the equipment and personnel of the Canyon County
ambulance district, by a network of quick response units and by volunteer
ambulance services. In the years since the Canyon County ambulance district was
first established, the population of Canyon County has increased dramatically.
In addition to its continued rural nature, the county has become an integral
part of the industrial development of southwest Idaho and serves as a critical
link in the transportation corridor which ties Boise and Ada County to eastern
Oregon. During this time there have been new developments in emergency
communications and medical techniques. The Idaho board of medicine and the
emergency medical service bureau of the Idaho department of health and welfare
have established standards for licensing and certification of equipment and
personnel. Canyon County is now served by an enhanced 911 emergency dispatch
system. As these developments have occurred, it has become even more important
to maintain coordination of the ambulance and emergency medical services
available to the county's residents. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-03: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall, for the purposes of this article, unless otherwise
specified, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ADVISOR, BOARD: Emergency medical services advisory board established by this
article.
AMBULANCE: Any privately or publicly owned ground vehicle, nautical vessel,
fixed wing aircraft or rotary wing aircraft used for, or intended to be used
for, the transportation of a sick or injured person who may need medical
attention during transport.
AMBULANCE OPERATORS OR AMBULANCE BUSINESSES: Any person engaging in the
business of transporting sick or injured persons, for hire, or who, by
advertising, representation or otherwise, holds itself out as engaging in such
business.
AMBULANCE PERSONNEL: Employees and agents of an ambulance operator or ambulance
business and all other persons who engage in the transportation of a sick or
injured person for and under the direction of an ambulance operator or
ambulance business.
AMBULANCE SERVICE: Emergent or nonemergent medical services dispatched or
requested to treat and/or transport a sick or injured person and which meets
the requirements of the rules governing emergency medical services IDAPA
16.02.03, rule 300, and its subsequent amendment(s). This definition is not
intended to include "quick response unit (nontransport agencies)", as
subsequently defined herein.
BOARD: Board of Canyon County, Idaho, commissioners which serves as the board
of Canyon County ambulance district commissioners.
DISPATCH AGENCY: An agency that provides the means by which emergency resources
are directed to the scene of an incident or event.
DISTRICT: Canyon County ambulance district.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES: The service used to respond to a perceived
individual need for immediate care to prevent loss of life or aggravation of
physiological or physiological illness or injury.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ("EMS") PERSONNEL: Individuals performing emergency
medical services as described in rules governing emergency medical services
IDAPA 16.02.03, and its subsequent amendment(s).
MEDICAL TRANSFERS: Medical transfers which are nonemergent, require special
equipment and/or vehicles and personnel with certified expertise as described
within the rules governing emergency medical services IDAPA 16.02.03, and its
subsequent amendment(s), and authorized by Canyon County.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
group of individuals acting together for a common purpose or organization of
any kind, including any governmental agency.
QUICK RESPONSE UNIT (NONTRANSPORT AGENCIES): Any vehicle or organizational
configuration licensed by the department of health and welfare, EMS bureau,
pursuant to rules governing emergency medical services IDAPA 16.02.03, rule
301, and its subsequent amendment(s), operating with the intent to provide
personnel or equipment for medical stabilization at an emergency scene, but not
intended as the vehicle that moves any sick or injured person from that
location. This definition is not intended to include the term "ambulance
service" as defined herein. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-05: NAME OF THE DISTRICT:
The ambulance district established pursuant to Idaho Code, section 31-3908 has
been, and shall continue to be, named the Canyon County ambulance district
(hereinafter "district"). (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-07: USE OF TAX LEVIED:
The tax levied pursuant to Idaho Code, section 31-3908(4) shall be used solely
for the operations and needs of the district and shall not be used to pay for
or reimburse other entities who decide to provide additional service beyond
that provided by the district except as otherwise approved by the board. (Ord.
03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-09: FEES FOR SERVICES:
The board shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees to be charged by
the district for emergency ambulance, medical and transport services rendered
by the district as authorized by title 31, chapter 39, Idaho Code. Fees for
ambulance, medical and transport services collected pursuant to title 31,
chapter 39, Idaho Code, for services rendered by the district shall not be used
to pay for or reimburse other entities. Nothing in this article prohibits the
district, at the sole discretion of the board, from entering into agreements
with other entities regarding fees. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-11: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT ACCOUNT:
Pursuant to Idaho Code, section 31-3908(5) there is hereby created a capital
improvement account for the purpose of purchasing buildings, land and equipment
necessary for the operation of the district. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-13: ADMINISTRATION OF DISTRICT SERVICES:
   (1)   Board: The board shall perform all functions and powers pursuant to
title 31, chapter 39, Idaho Code.
   (2)   District: The district shall coordinate all ambulance services within
the district pursuant to title 31, chapter 39, Idaho Code. The district may
enter into joint powers agreements with other governmental entities to
facilitate ambulance service pursuant to section 67-2328, Idaho Code.
   (3)   Director: The district director shall be appointed by and shall serve
at the will and pleasure of the district board. The director shall report
directly to the board, subject to such liaison and coordination as the board
may direct. The director shall have responsibility for direction and
supervision of the personnel and management of the facilities and equipment of
the district.
   (4)   Physician Medical Director:
      A.    Director shall recommend to the board a licensed physician to serve
as the physician medical director. The director may also recommend to the board
one or more physicians to serve as assistants to the physician medical
director.
      B.    The position of physician medical director and any assistant
medical director shall be a contract position. The contract with the physician
or physicians holding the position shall set forth the duties and
responsibilities of the physician medical director and any assistant, the rate
of remuneration to be paid and the term of appointment.
   (5)   Providers Committee: The district shall establish by resolution a
voluntary committee, consisting of the quick response and ambulance service
providers operating within the district, to conduct regular meetings regarding
the interface and operations between such providers and may provide
recommendations to the district. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-15: ADVISORY BOARD:
The board shall establish an advisory board to be known as the emergency
medical services advisory board, whose primary function shall be to identify
and address issues of mutual concern that affect the healthcare system and the
interface between the hospitals in Canyon County and their clinics and the
district.
   (1)   The advisory board shall be chaired by the district's medical director
who shall call a meeting of the membership quarterly and, if necessary, when
issues for the advisory board have been identified. The members listed below
shall be considered standing memberships selected by their respective agencies
and serving at the pleasure and discretion of those agencies.
   (2)   The members shall include:
      A.    The district physician medical director or codirectors.
      B.    The hospital administrators of West Valley Medical Center and Mercy
Medical Center or their designees.
      C.    The emergency department medical directors of West Valley Medical
Center and Mercy Medical Center, or their designees.
      D.    The emergency department nurse managers from West Valley Medical
Center and Mercy Medical Center.
      E.    One district paramedic.
      F.    One Canyon County commissioner.
   (3)   The presence of four (4) or more members shall constitute a quorum
sufficient for conducting business as defined in this article.
   (4)   The district director, district assistant director and district office
manager shall serve as resources to the advisory board.
   (5)   The advisory board shall have the authority to appoint and work
through subcommittees charged with particular functions and shall, in addition,
work with such other county officials and/or advisory committees as may be
designated by the district director or the board. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-17: AUTHORITY OF THE DISTRICT:
The district responds to all emergency medical services requests within the
district as part of its governmental function pursuant to title 31, chapter 39,
Idaho Code. The district's response shall begin from the time of the EMS
request or dispatch until the patient is released from the district's medical
care to appropriate medical care, or until such time the patient refuses
treatment. District personnel are authorized to provide medical care consistent
with the scope of practice approved by the district's medical director as set
forth in the district's medical protocols. The district is the sole provider of
EMS emergent and nonemergent ambulance transport service within the district
boundaries, except as otherwise provided by this article. Nothing in this
article prohibits the district, at the sole discretion of the board, from
entering into joint powers agreements with other governmental entities for the
purpose of providing ambulance services currently provided by the district.
(Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-19: DISTRICT AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED FOR OPERATION:
   (1)   District Authorization Required: It shall be unlawful for any person,
as owner, agent, or otherwise, to conduct or operate an ambulance, ambulance
service or medical transfers within Canyon County unless authorized by the
district. Such authorization shall be made by resolution of the board unless
otherwise set forth in this article or its subsequent amendment(s). Any such
authorization shall also meet the requirements IDAPA 16.02.03 and its
subsequent amendment(s). This is not intended to interfere with any quick
response unit (nontransport agencies) or rural fire district operating within
the district.
   (2)   Exemptions: The district authorization requirement shall not apply to
the following:
      A.    An ambulance or ambulance service currently operated by an agency
of the United States, an agency of the state of Idaho, or any political
subdivision of the state of Idaho, within their jurisdictional boundaries on or
before October 1, 2003, and including any annexations to any political
subdivision of the state of Idaho, described above, occurring after October 1,
2003.
      B.    An ambulance which, at the request of the district, is rendering
assistance to the district in the event of a major catastrophe or emergency in
which the district seeks assistance from other resources.
      C.    A quick response unit/nontransport agency which, at the request of
the district, is rendering assistance to the district in the event of a major
catastrophe or emergency in which the district seeks assistance from other
resources.
      D.    An ambulance operated from a location or headquarters outside of
Canyon County which transports patients picked up outside of Canyon County to
locations within Canyon County.
      E.    An ambulance used solely for educational purposes which do not
include transporting patients or rendering of emergency medical service.
      F.    Aircraft of any type, fixed wing or helicopter. (Ord. 03-013, 12-
11-2003)
02-09-21: CIVIL ACTION TO SECURE COMPLIANCE:
The board may institute an appropriate civil action to enjoin operation by any
person or entity providing emergent or nonemergent ambulance service in
violation of this article and/or to secure compliance with the provisions of
this article. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
02-09-23: ANNEXATION, DEANNEXATION, OR DISSOLUTION OF THE DISTRICT:
Pursuant to Idaho Code 31-3908(1)(f), the board of county commissioners of
Canyon County shall, by resolution, establish procedures for annexation,
deannexation, or dissolution of the district, which, such resolution may be
amended, repealed or replaced by the board of county commissioners at their
sole discretion. (Ord. 03-013, 12-11-2003)
ARTICLE 11
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCES
SECTION:
02-11-01: Authority And Name
02-11-03: Purpose
02-11-05: Definitions
02-11-07: Burning Solid Fuel Or Refuse
02-11-09: Air Quality Designations And Alert Criteria
02-11-11: Air Pollution Alert; Additional Restrictions
02-11-13: Air Pollution Alert Exemptions
02-11-15: Solid Fuel Heating Appliance Sales Or Installation
02-11-17: Violation And Penalty
02-11-19: Severability Clause
02-11-21: Effective Date
02-11-01: AUTHORITY AND NAME:
These provisions are authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-801, 31-828,
and the Idaho constitution, article 12, section 2. This article shall be cited
as the CANYON COUNTY SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE AND FIREPLACE ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-03: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect air quality resources vital to the
public health, safety, and welfare of Canyon County residents and the economic
future of Canyon County by controlling emissions from solid fuel and refuse
burning. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-05: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations all have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any contaminant or
combinations thereof in such quality or of such nature and duration and under
such conditions as would be injurious to human health or welfare, to plant or
animal life, or to property, or to interfere unreasonably with the enjoyment of
life or property.
AIR QUALITY INDEX (AQI): A system used by the department of environmental
quality (DEQ) to report local, daily air pollution levels to the public.
Monitored air pollution levels are converted to a uniform scale ranging from 0
(good) to 500 (hazardous) with the pollutant that has the highest ambient
concentration measured in a given area determining the AQI.
BUILDING: Any structure, dwelling, office, industrial plant, garage or barn,
whether publicly or privately owned or any other structure as defined by the
international building code and international residential code as adopted by
chapter 6, article 1, of this code.
BURN DOWN: That period of time following the declaration of an air pollution
alert required for the cessation of combustion within solid fuel heating
appliances or incineration included within this article.
CLEAN BURNING APPLIANCE: A solid fuel heating appliance that has been certified
as clean burning by the United States environmental protection agency at the
time of its manufacture.
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: Fifty percent (50%) or less of Canyon County's median income
as established by the U.S. department of housing and urban development.
FIREPLACE: A residential solid fuel burning device with an air to fuel ratio of
greater than thirty (30) which is a permanent structural feature of a building.
A fireplace is made up of a concealed masonry or metal flue and a masonry or
metal firebox enclosed in decorative masonry or other building materials. A
residential solid fuel burning device which is freestanding or which is
installed into an existing "fireplace" opening is not included in the
definition of "fireplace".
HEAT OUTPUT: The British thermal unit (BTU)/hour output of a solid fuel heating
appliance measured under the testing criteria as adopted by Canyon County.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Any gas borne particles resulting from incomplete
combustion, consisting predominantly, but not exclusively, of carbon and other
combustible matter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or governmental entity.
REFUSE: All solid waste materials which emit toxic contaminants or smoke or
particulates when burned including, but not limited to: household garbage,
tires or other rubber materials or products, junked motor vehicles or any
materials resulting from motor vehicle salvage operation, plastics, petroleum
products, dead animals or parts thereof, commercial waste, asphalt or
composition roofing or any other asphaltic material or product, drywall,
sheetrock, tar, tarpaper, floor underlayment, insulation, insulated wire,
lumber or timber treated with preservatives, wet materials, pathogenic wastes,
hazardous wastes, paint or chemicals, or any other materials that would
otherwise be allowed under this definition but the burning of which is
determined to be a nuisance or hazard by the authority having jurisdiction and
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of regulations for the
prevention and control of fires.
REFUSE INCINERATOR: Any device designed or operated to reduce the volume of
refuse. Natural gas fired pathological incinerators are excluded.
SOLE SOURCE: One or more solid fuel heating appliances which constitute the
only source of heat in a building for the purpose of space heating. No solid
fuel heating appliance shall be the sole source of heat if the building is
equipped with a permanently installed furnace or heating system designed to
heat the building and connected or unconnected from its energy source,
utilizing oil, natural gas, electricity or propane.
SOLID FUEL: Any form of untreated wood or coal.
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE: Any enclosed device designed for solid fuel
combustion that meets all of the following criteria:
   (1)   An air to fuel ratio averaging less than thirty five to one (35:1);
   (2)   Firebox volume less than twenty (20) cubic feet;
   (3)   Minimum burn rate less than five kilograms (5 kg) per hour; and
   (4)   Maximum weight of less than eight hundred kilograms (800 kg).
Explicitly excluded are furnaces, boilers, cook stoves, and open fireplaces.
(Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-07: BURNING SOLID FUEL OR REFUSE:
   (1)   No person shall cause or allow refuse or coal to be burned in a solid
fuel heating appliance designed for wood fuel.
   (2)   No person shall cause or allow refuse to be burned in a fireplace.
   (3)   No person shall cause or allow a refuse incinerator or solid fuel
heating appliance to be operated contrary to the design, specifications, and
manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-09: AIR QUALITY DESIGNATIONS AND ALERT CRITERIA:
   (1)   The quality of Canyon County's air shall be determined by referencing
pollutant levels reported by DEQ.
   (2)   In order to prevent the existence of air quality that is unhealthful,
an air pollution alert will be in effect whenever the DEQ air quality index
reaches seventy four (74) or higher for any pollutant within Canyon County, Ada
County, or Elmore County, Idaho, and air stagnation conditions are forecasted
to continue for at least twenty four (24) hours. It is the responsibility of
the person operating a solid fuel heating appliance, fireplace, or refuse
incinerator to monitor and be aware of the air quality index and air stagnation
forecast. The air quality index and air stagnation forecast may be determined
by calling DEQ or visiting the DEQ's web page. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-11: AIR POLLUTION ALERT; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
   (1)   At the onset and during the pendency of an air pollution alert, the
following additional restrictions apply:
      A.    No person shall cause or allow, after a three (3) hour burn down,
the operation of a solid fuel heating appliance or fireplace unless exempt
under section
02-11-13: of this article.
      B.    No person shall cause or allow the operation of a refuse
incinerator. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-13: AIR POLLUTION ALERT EXEMPTIONS:
   (1)   The following shall be exempt from air pollution alert restrictions:
      A.    A solid fuel heating appliance or fireplace that is the sole source
of heat for the building in which it is situated; or
      B.    Using alternative heating would cause an unreasonable economic
hardship; or
      C.    The solid fuel heating appliance is a certified clean burning
appliance. The owner of the solid fuel heating appliance shall be required to
provide proof of the appliance being certified by the United States
environmental protection agency upon request.
   (2)   Any building constructed after the effective date of this article
shall not be eligible for an exemption under subsection (1)A of this section.
(Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-15: SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE SALES OR INSTALLATION:
It shall be unlawful on or after February 2, 2004, for any person in
unincorporated Canyon County to: offer to sell for installation, or install in
any new or existing building a solid fuel heating appliance which is not a
clean burning appliance. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-17: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   (1)   Violations Of Section
02-11-07: Or 02-11-11: The first violation of section
02-11-07: or 02-11-11 of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
may be punishable as an infraction as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and
subject to a fine in such an amount as prescribed in Idaho infraction rules,
rule 9, and as such may be amended. The second violation of section
02-11-07: or 02-11-11 of this chapter within a three (3) month period from of
the date of the first violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
punishable as an infraction as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject
to a fine in such an amount as prescribed in Idaho infraction rules, rule 9,
and as such may be amended. The third violation of section
02-11-07: or 02-11-11 of this chapter within a three (3) month period from the
date of the first violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
punishable as misdemeanor as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject
to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 04-005, 2-9-2004, eff. 2-
13-2004)
   (2)   Violation Of Section
02-11-15: Violation of section
02-11-15: is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be punishable as a
misdemeanor as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject to a fine of
three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (3)   Investigation Of Complaints: The director of the Canyon County
development services (hereinafter referred to as the director), or their
designated code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the investigation
of complaints.
   (4)   Uniform Citation: Enforcement of this article may be by uniform
citation issued pursuant to rule 5 of the infraction criminal rules and/or rule
5 of the misdemeanor criminal rules and by a law enforcement officer defined in
rule 2(g) of the infraction criminal rules and/or rule 2(g) of the misdemeanor
criminal rules. A law enforcement officer for purposes of this subsection shall
include, but is not limited to, a Canyon County sheriff's deputy. A uniform
citation for violation of this article shall be personally served upon the
owner, if known, or the occupant or person in charge of the possession of the
premises or property on which the nuisance is found. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-19: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Should any action or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this article as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
02-11-21: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be and is hereby declared to be in full force and effect on
February 2, 2004, and upon its passage, approval and publication as provided by
law in one issue of the "Idaho Press-Tribune". (Ord. 04-001, 1-28-2004)
ARTICLE 13
TALL GRASS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
02-13-01: Title
02-13-03: Purpose And Intent
02-13-05: Definitions
02-13-07: Land Subject To Regulations
02-13-09: Prohibition Of Nuisance Grass And Weeds
02-13-11: Enforcement
02-13-13: Interference With Enforcement
02-13-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY TALL GRASS AND WEEDS
ORDINANCE and may be so cited. (Ord. 25-004, 3-13-2025)
02-13-03: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Canyon County hereby finds that tall grass and weeds can have a blighting
effect on neighborhoods, can constitute a fire hazard and can provide a refuge
for vermin and insects. The purpose of this article is to secure the public
health, safety and general welfare of the residents and property owners of
Canyon County by regulating tall grasses and weeds in unincorporated Canyon
County. (Ord. 25-004, 3-13-2025)
02-13-05: DEFINITIONS:
 
                            The affirmative act of cutting, burning, applying
                            herbicide, removing or taking other steps as may be
ABATEMENT:                  necessary to remedy a violation of this article and
                            includes intermediate measures such as creating a
                            firebreak.
                            Person in the employ of the Board of County
COUNTY WEED SUPERINTENDENT: Commissioners pursuant to Title 22, Chapter 24 of
                            the Idaho Code, as amended.
                            Any plant having the potential to cause injury to
                            public health, crops, livestock, land or other
NOXIOUS WEEDS:              property which has been designated as noxious
                            pursuant to Title 22, Chapter 24 of the Idaho Code,
                            as amended.
                            Any person who is in control of or occupying a
                            parcel of property pursuant to a verbal or written
OCCUPANT:                   agreement with the owner thereof or any person who
                            is in control of or occupying a parcel of property
                            pursuant to an assertion of legal interest in the
                            property.
                            Any person holding an ownership interest in land in
                            Canyon County. For the purposes of this article,
OWNER:                      the name and address listed on the County property
                            tax roll shall indicate ownership interest in such
                            land.
                            Land in Canyon County as identified by the County
PARCEL:                     Assessor for the purpose of collecting property
                            taxes including any easement appurtenant. (Ord. 25-
                            004, 3-13-2025)
 
 
02-13-07: LAND SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS:
This article does not apply to the following:
A.   Land used for agricultural or pasture purposes, including weeds in fields
devoted to growing any small grain crops such as wheat, oats, barley or rye.
B.   Portions of lands used for gardens and/or ornamental plants.
C.   Naturally wooded areas, wetlands, rangelands or riparian areas.
D.   Privately owned lands subject to a conservation easement or maintained for
a wildlife and/or pollinator habitat in partnership with a non-profit
organization.
E.   Lands owned by the United States, State of Idaho, or a local government
entity.
F.   Residential subdivisions subject to recorded covenant, conditions and
restrictions that provide a private remedy and/or can be enforced by a
homeowners' association.
G.   Noxious weeds designated pursuant to Title 22, Chapter 24 of the Idaho
Code, as amended. (Ord. 25-004, 3-13-2025)
02-13-09: PROHIBITION OF NUISANCE GRASS AND WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any parcel ofland within
unincorporated Canyon County to cause, allow, permit or suffer any grass, weed
or other plant to such a size and/or in such a condition as to cause, or
reasonably threaten to cause a fire hazard, a safety hazard, or detriment to
public health to remain standing or growing on such parcel. It shall be the
duty of all said owners and/or occupants either to cut down or otherwise
dispose of by lawful means any grass, weeds or other plant in violation of this
article. (Ord. 25-004, 3-13-2025)
02-13-11:ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Official: This article shall be enforced by the county weed
superintendent and the superintendent's designees.
   B.   Right of Entry: The Enforcement Official, and his or her designees, are
hereby empowered to enter upon any land in Canyon County for the purpose of
inspecting, removing and/or destroying of tall grass and weeds prohibited under
this article. No person shall harass or interfere with such person or persons
while they are engaged in carrying out the provisions of this article.
   C.   Violation Notice: After inspection, if any property is determined to be
in violation of this article, a violation notice will be sent to the property
owner and/or occupant of said premises. The notice shall be sent by first class
mail and by posting a copy of said notice on the property. The notice shall
give the property owner and/or occupant seven (7) days from the date of mailing
of the notice and posting of the notice to cut the tall grass and/or remove
weeds.
   D.   Failure to Comply: If the violation of this article is not remedied
within seven (7) days after the mailing and posting of a violation notice, the
Enforcement Official, and his or her designees, shall have the authority to
enter upon the land to cause the nuisance to be abated. Canyon County, its
agents and representatives, shall not be responsible for damage to buildings,
vehicles, landscape, trees, shrubs, etc., during the abatement of property in
violation of this article.
   E.   Assessment of Costs: All expenses of such abatement, to include
equipment usage, transportation, man-hours involved and overhead, including any
and all cost incurred in the removal or relocation of debris, junk or other
miscellaneous obstructions which would be necessary or convenient to carry out
the requirements of this article shall be paid by the owner of such land plus
an administrative charge of fifteen percent (15%) thereof per parcel, per
abatement. The assessment of costs shall also include an administrative fee
establish by resolution of the Board of County Commissioners to recover costs
related to the collection of the abatement assessment.
   F.   Payment of Costs: Canyon County shall submit a bill to the property
owner for the cost of such abatement. If the property owner does not pay the
bill within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice the cost of such
abatement shall be charged against the parcel and it shall become an automatic
lien upon the property. A notice of lien shall be recorded upon the property
and shall not be released until payment is made in full.
   G.   Certification of Costs: If full payment is not made within thirty (30)
days of the mailing of the billing statement, the Board of County Commissioners
shall certify such charge to be placed on the property tax roll.
   H.   Season: The Enforcement Official shall only issue notices of violation
of this article from April 1st to September 30th of each year. (Ord. 25-004, 3-
13-2025; amd. Ord. 25-009, 6-17-2025)
02-13-13: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
It shall be unlawful, and shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Idaho Code section 18-113, to interfere with the Enforcement Official, or his
or her designees, in the performance of duties connected with enforcement of
this article. Such interference shall include, but not be limited to, removal
of notices posted on the property pursuant to this article or impediment or
harassment of the authorized person in the performance of their duties under
this article. (Ord. 25-004, 3-13-2025)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC SAFETY
ARTICLE 1
OFFENSES
SECTION:
03-01-01: False Fire Alarms
03-01-03: Minors; Running Away From Parental Control
03-01-01: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
   (1)   Authorization: This section is authorized by sections 31-714 and 31-
828 of the Idaho Code.
   (2)   Fire Alarm Defined: For the purpose of this section, a fire alarm
shall mean the giving, signaling or transmission to any public fire station or
company or to any officer or employee thereof, whether by telephone, spoken
word or otherwise, information to the effect that there is a fire at or near
the place indicated by the person giving, signaling or transmitting such
information.
   (3)   Unlawful Acts: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to:
      A.    Give, signal or transmit in any manner any false fire alarm;
      B.    Cause or permit to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner
any false fire alarm; or
      C.    Tamper with or maliciously injure any fire alarm equipment
maintained for the purpose of transmitting fire alarms to the fire department.
   (4)   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be punished as provided in Section
01-01-07: of this Code. (Ord. 80-005, 9-3-80, eff. 9-12-80; 1996 Code)
03-01-03: MINORS; RUNNING AWAY FROM PARENTAL CONTROL:
   (1)   Running Away: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons under the
age of eighteen (18) years living or found outside the incorporated limits of
any city in Canyon County, Idaho, to run away from his parents, guardian or
other legal custodian.
   (2)   Out of Parental Control: It shall further be unlawful for any person
or persons under the age of eighteen (18) years living or found outside the
incorporated limits of any city in Canyon County, Idaho, to commit any act or
acts placing him beyond the control of his parents, guardian or other legal
custodian. (Ord. 68-001, 4-1-68)
ARTICLE 3
FIREARMS
SECTION:
03-03-01: Concealed Weapon Permits
03-03-03: Hours That Discharging A Firearm For Recreational Purposes Is
Prohibited
03-03-01: CONCEALED WEAPON PERMITS:
   (1)   Authority: This section is established pursuant to Idaho Code sections
18-3302, 31-714 and 31-870.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish an application
fee for permits to carry concealed weapons. This fee will be used to defray the
expenses of the Canyon County sheriff's office in complying with its duties
under Idaho Code section 18-3302.
   (3)   Fee: There shall be a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for all
applications made with the Canyon County sheriff's office for permits to carry
concealed weapons. This fee shall be paid at the time of applications and shall
be nonrefundable. (Ord. 92-001, 3-24-92, eff. 4-6-1992)
03-03-03: HOURS THAT DISCHARGING A FIREARM FOR RECREATIONAL PURPOSES IS
PROHIBITED:
The discharge of firearms for recreational purposes within the unincorporated
areas of Canyon County, Idaho, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. is prohibited. Violators of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in Section
01-01-07: of this Code. (Ord. 77-003, 3-22-77; 1996 Code)
ARTICLE 5
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
03-05-01: Title
03-05-03: Purpose And Authority
03-05-05: Definitions
03-05-07: Enforcement
03-05-09: Kennel Licensing
03-05-11: Canines; Collar And Tag
03-05-13: Rabies, Disease And Quarantine
03-05-15: Running At Large Prohibited
03-05-17: Impounding
03-05-19: Impound And Boarding Fees
03-05-21: Prohibited Acts
03-05-23: Vicious Animals
03-05-25: Uniform Summons; Prosecution; Fine Schedule
03-05-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS OF
2011. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-03: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
This article is intended to help solve the problems caused by unowned, unwanted
and undisciplined canines running at large in Canyon County, Idaho, and to
provide for determination, registration and disposal of vicious animals in the
county. This article is also designed to help solve the problems caused by
"livestock", "fowl" or "poultry", and other animals as defined herein, except
felines, domestic or feral, from running at large in the county. This article
is enacted upon the authority derived from Idaho Code, sections 25-2801 et
seq., 31-801, 31-828 and 31-714 to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the public. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-05: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDON: To completely forsake and desert an animal previously under the
custody or possession of a person without making reasonable arrangements for
its proper care, sustenance and shelter.
ABUSE: Any case in which an animal has been the victim of intentional or
negligent conduct resulting in the animal's bruising, bleeding, malnutrition,
dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of bones, subdural hematoma, soft
tissue swelling or death and lack of veterinary care and attention.
ANIMAL: Any member of the animal kingdom (Animalia) other than humans.
Domestic (Pet): An animal that lives in or near the habitations of humans,
often tame, which is kept for companionship or utility but not for commercial
purposes, including, but not limited to: amphibians (nonvenomous), felines,
canines, hybrids, birds (excluding licensed birds of prey), reptiles (lizards,
nonvenomous snakes), rodents (hamsters, gerbils, mice, rats, ferrets), aquarium
fish, rabbits (although these are often "farmed"), poultry (chickens, turkeys),
fowl (ducks, geese, peacocks) and insects.
Exotic: Animals not usually considered to be pets or livestock. The term
connotates unique or special in nature (see definition of Animal: Exotic,
Wild).
Exotic, Wild: Species (including hybrids) not native to the state of Idaho,
whether or not in captivity, including, but not limited to: chukar, red fox,
squirrels, lions, tigers, elephants, monkeys, dangerous reptiles (alligators,
crocodiles, gila monsters), valley quail, pheasants, emus (also includes feral
animals).
Feral: An animal that belongs to a domestic or livestock species but behaves
like a wild, free ranging species. They may or may not belong to humans.
Native Wild: Free ranging species (including hybrids) presently native to the
state of Idaho including: bats, black bears, beavers, birds of prey (eagles,
falcons, hawks, vultures, owls), magpies, mountain quail, mink, muskrats,
bobcats, cougars, deer, elk, moose, kit fox, coyotes, gray wolf, skunks,
weasel, badgers, raccoons, chipmunks, marmots, pocket gophers, ground
squirrels, rabbits, mice, wood rats, river otters, porcupines, lizards,
turtles, snakes, toads, frogs, songbirds, waterfowl (ducks, geese), ravens,
crows, various fish and insects.
Stock: See definition of Livestock.
Wild: Any animal of any size or species considered potentially dangerous or to
have a greater than average chance to create nuisance and thereby disturb the
public or whose presence in the community is an abnormality. These are animals
not normally kept in captivity and may include, but are not limited to, the
animals listed under the definitions of Animal: Exotic, Wild and Animal: Native
Wild. Other animals normally associated with a zoo environment or considered
protected or endangered species, are included here as well. (Note: Persons,
groups, or centers commonly associated with maintaining wild animals include
rehabilitators, falconers, and game ranches who are all to be licensed by
various state and federal agencies.)
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person designated by the sheriff, whether a sworn
deputy or civilian employee, whose primary duties involve the enforcement of
this article.
AT LARGE: (1) Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or other
means of physical restraint.
   (2)   On the premises of the owner and not confined by substantial fence of
sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom or
secured on the premises by a metal chain, cable, adequately functional
electronic containment fence, or other nondestructive device sufficient in
strength to prevent the animal from escaping from premises and so arranged that
the animal will remain upon the premises and not come any closer than six feet
(6') to a public walkway or sidewalk when the restraint leash is stretched to
full length.
BOARD: The Canyon County, Idaho, board of county commissioners.
CANINE: Shall include either male or female, whether neutered or spayed,
whether fully domesticated canine or domestic hybrid.
COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho, or the unincorporated areas of Canyon County,
Idaho.
COUNTY ANIMAL SHELTER: Premises selected by the sheriff as a suitable facility
for the requirements of this article, or a facility which has contracted with
the board to meet the requirements of this article.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or
causing containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be
taken by the owner such as tethering of the animal. Such enclosure shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and
shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping.
FELINE: Shall include either male or female cat of any breed or mixed breed
whether neutered or spayed.
FOWL: See definition of Animal: Domestic (Pet).
HYBRID: An animal resulting from the crossbreeding between two (2) different
species or types of animals. A cross between a domestic animal and a wild
animal such as a wolf-dog cross or coyote-dog cross, would be considered a
domestic animal whereas a cross between two (2) wild animals would be
considered a wild animal.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody of the sheriff as provided in this article.
LIVESTOCK: Horses, mules, donkeys, burros, llamas, cattle, sheep, buffalo,
goats and pigs.
MICROCHIP: An integrated circuit which is implanted subcutaneously in the flesh
of a canine.
MISUSE: The intentional causing of an animal to perform a noncustomary task
which could be dangerous or harmful to the animal.
MUNICIPALITY: Either the county or the city that has enacted the ordinance
codified in this article.
OWNER: Shall be construed to include any person owning, harboring, keeping,
possessing, caring or having custodial duties over any animal.
POULTRY: See definition of Animal: Domestic (Pet).
SHELTER: Any structure or object that provides protection from the sun and/or
elements (inclement weather). Said structure or object must be solid or
permanent enough to uphold against the elements (inclement weather).
SHERIFF: The duly elected sheriff of Canyon County, Idaho, and his or her
agents, deputies, and animal control officers. This definition shall include
both sworn and civilian personnel.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: (1) Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon
the streets, sidewalks and public grounds or places or private property not
owned or possessed by the owner of the animal;
   (2)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings, domestic animals or livestock;
   (3)   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being, domestic animal or livestock without provocation;
   (4)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting or any animal trained for fighting.
Notwithstanding the definition of a "vicious animal" above, no animal may be
declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the
time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a wilful trespass or
other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be declared vicious if the animal
was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the
animal from an unjustified attack or assault. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-07: ENFORCEMENT:
   (1)   Enforcement By Animal Control Officer:
      A.    The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the
animal control officer within the unincorporated areas of the county and within
participating municipalities. The sheriff shall bestow the authority of a
deputy sheriff upon the animal control officer.
      B.    It is unlawful for any person to hinder, molest or in any way
interfere with any animal control officer while the officer is lawfully engaged
in the performance of his/her duties.
   (2)   Adoption And Enforcement Of Animal Control Ordinance By Cities In The
County: The municipalities within Canyon County shall be responsible for the
adoption and enforcement of the county animal control ordinance or their own
ordinances. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-09: KENNEL LICENSING:
   (1)   Personal Kennel License: It is unlawful to keep, maintain or possess
upon the premises of any one household more than three (3) canines three (3)
months of age or older in an unincorporated area of the county unless the owner
or person in charge thereof shall have obtained a personal kennel license for a
maximum of five (5) canines.
   (2)   Kennel License: A kennel license shall only be permitted and issued in
accordance with the terms and provisions of the county zoning ordinance 1 ;
provided, however, that notice of any public hearing required on any
application for a kennel license shall be mailed to all abutting property
owners within the boundary line of an area determined by the intersection of
lines drawn six hundred feet (600') at right angles out from and parallel to
all sides of the tract whereupon such kennel is to be erected or maintained.
Where dedicated street rights of way are encountered, they shall be included in
establishing the six hundred foot (600') boundary line around the tract.
      A.    License Fee: A kennel license shall be issued when the applicant
pays the annual kennel license fee as established by the board provided the
requirements established in this section have been fulfilled.
      B.    Location: No kennel shall be established within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any dwelling house other than that of the kennel owner;
provided, however, that a kennel license may be issued to establish a kennel
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a dwelling house other than that of the
kennel owner upon consent of all property owners within three hundred feet
(300') of the kennel.
      C.    Condition; Noise: Said canine kennel shall be kept at all times in
a clean and sanitary condition and the canines shall be reasonably restrained
from annoying the neighborhood or the general public by loud, frequent, or
habitual barking, yelping or howling.
   (3)   Kennel License Fee: The kennel license fee is thirty dollars ($30.00)
per year. This fee may be amended by resolution of the board of county
commissioners. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7 of this code.
03-05-11: CANINES; COLLAR AND TAG:
Every canine shall at all times wear a substantial and durable collar to which
shall be securely attached ownership information for the canine. This collar
and tag requirement shall not apply if the canine has been implanted with a
microchip containing ownership information for the canine. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-
2011)
03-05-13: RABIES, DISEASE AND QUARANTINE:
   (1)   Afflicted Animals Prohibited: It is unlawful for a person other than a
veterinarian or the county animal shelter to own, keep or harbor any animal
afflicted with rabies.
   (2)   Duty To Detain: The sheriff or his/her designee or the owner shall
secure the disposition of any animal afflicted with rabies.
   (3)   Suspect Animals: It is the duty of every owner of an animal showing
symptoms of rabies, or for which the owner has no proof of current rabies
vaccination, or which has bitten any person causing an abrasion of the skin, to
surrender the animal for confinement and isolation at the county animal shelter
or to a licensed veterinarian for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days (but
not less than 10 days from the date of the bite); provided, for the animals
with proof of a current rabies vaccination, the sheriff or his/her designee has
the discretion to allow the canine to be quarantined in the owner's home under
such terms and conditions as the sheriff or his/her designee shall impose. If
such animal shall be determined free of rabies, it shall be released from
quarantine or returned to the owner upon payment of the regular fee for keeping
such animal impounded, if applicable. If such fee is not paid, the animal shall
be subject to disposal as provided in this section.
   (4)   Sterilization: If a canine over three (3) months of age is quarantined
pursuant to this section and has not been sterilized, the owner or claimant
must have the canine sterilized. The owner or claimant is responsible for the
cost of sterilization.
   (5)   Redemption: If the owner of any canine impounded under this article
shall fail to pay the required fees within twenty four (24) hours after actual
notice to the owner, or within five (5) working (business) days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after reasonable or diligent effort to notify
the owner, the canine may be disposed of through adoption or through
euthanasia.
   (6)   Contagious Diseased Animals: Any animal which has a contagious disease
shall not be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner of such animal
except under the supervision of the sheriff.
   (7)   Rabies Inoculation: It is unlawful to keep or harbor any canine or
feline over the age of three (3) months in the county unless such canine or
feline has been inoculated against rabies within the preceding three (3) years.
(Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-15: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   (1)   Canines:
      A.    Canine At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a
canine which he owns, keeps, or harbors to be at large or to negligently fail,
neglect or refuse to prevent a canine which he owns, keeps or harbors from
being at large upon the roads, streets or alleys of the county or any public
place of the county or upon any premises other than his own. Any person found
in violation of this provision shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be
punished as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113A, as amended.
      B.    Canine At Large, Third Offense In Five Years: Any person who pleads
guilty to, is found guilty of, or is in any manner convicted of more than two
(2) violations of subsection (1)A, "Canine At Large", of this section, within
five (5) years, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
provided in Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended.
      C.    Confinement Of Female Canines In Heat: It shall be unlawful for the
owner, keeper or possessor of a female canine in the estrus state (in heat) to
negligently fail, neglect or refuse to confine such animal indoors or in a type
of kennel preventing nuisance or undesired fertilization by male canines unless
restrained by the owner or possessor and under the immediate control of the
owner or possessor (e.g., in their accompaniment if off the property).
   (2)   Livestock:
      A.    Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow livestock
which he owns, keeps or harbors to be at large upon the roads, streets or
alleys of the county or upon any premises other than his own.
      B.    Herding Or Driving Animals: It shall be unlawful for anyone to herd
or drive any animal through the county without having said animal under control
by means of rope, strap or other device by which it may be led, unless such
animal is being driven in harness or hauled; it is hereby made and shall be the
duty of any animal control officer of the county to seize and impound any and
all horses, mules, donkeys, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, llamas, buffalo or
pigs found running at large within the county.
      C.    Exception: This subsection (2) shall not be construed as
prohibiting stockmen from driving herds through the county when necessary to
transfer them from one pasture to another or for the purpose of shipping, but
such stockmen so driving stock through the county shall be liable to property
owners for all damages done to their property by such stock while being driven
through the county, whether or not such damage is caused by the negligence of
the said stockman or his agents. Such stock shall be driven through the county
in as short a time as possible.
   (3)   Fowl And Poultry: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl,
guineas or poultry unless such fowl, guineas or poultry are at all times kept
upon his own premises, within a shed, pen or other enclosure sufficient to
restrain said fowl, guineas or poultry from trespassing upon the property of
others.
   (4)   Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for any animal(s) (except
felines, domestic or feral), owned or possessed by an individual to be at large
upon the roads, streets or alleys of the county or any public place of the
county or upon any premises other than his own. Waterfowl in county parks are
exempt from this section. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-17: IMPOUNDING:
   (1)   Canine:
      A.    Apprehension Of Canine Running At Large: It shall be the duty of
the animal control officer and peace officer of the unincorporated areas of the
county or peace officer of participating municipalities to apprehend any canine
found running at large or disturbing the peace contrary to the provisions of
this article, and to impound such canine in the county animal shelter or other
suitable place, provided that if any fierce, dangerous or vicious canine found
running at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such canine may be
slain by any peace officer or animal control officer.
      B.    Record To Be Made: The animal control officer or peace officer so
impounding or slaying any canine shall record a description of the canine in a
book kept for that purpose.
      C.    Recovery Of Impounded Canines: The owner of any canine impounded
may recover possession of same upon payment of all applicable fees or fines
which includes, but is not limited to, impound fees, rabies vaccinations, and
board fees. If the owner or representative of the owner of any canine impounded
shall fail to pay the required fees within twenty four (24) hours after actual
notice to the owner, or within five (5) working (business) days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after reasonable or diligent effort to notify
the owner or representative of the owner, the animal may be disposed of through
adoption or euthanasia.
      D.    Diseased Animals; Destruction: Any animal impounded and suffering
from serious injury or disease may be euthanized.
      E.    Traps: Animal control officers are authorized to place humane
animal traps on public or private property upon request and permission of the
owner. Such traps shall be checked daily by the animal control officers.
      F.    Freeing Of Impounded Animals Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to
break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid or assist in the
breaking open of any pen or enclosure with the intent of releasing any animal
when such animal has been detained by those individuals authorized to detain
animals under this section.
      G.    Releasing Canines From County Shelter Or Place Of Observation: It
shall be unlawful for any person, except those responsible for the enforcement
of this article, to release any canine without the consent of the owner to
release his/her own or any other canine from the county animal shelter or from
any other place where an animal, canine or poultry may be held for observation.
   (2)   Livestock:
      A.    Apprehension Of Animals Running At Large: If any animals shall be
found running at large contrary to the provisions of this article, the animal
control officer or any other peace officer of the county or participating
municipalities may take up and confine the same in a livestock yard or other
suitable place pursuant to Idaho Code section 25-2302, after first notifying
the Idaho state brand inspector of the situation and discussing his intentions
concerning the same.
      B.    Animals Disturbing The Peace: In the case of an animal disturbing
the peace, there shall be an attempt to contact the owner at his home and a
warning issued. If the owner is not present or does not heed the warning, the
animal may be impounded in accordance with this article. Such animal taken up
and confined shall not be released until the owner or person entitled to have
possession thereof shall pay all fees, including all expenses incurred in
boarding such animal so impounded.
      C.    Impounded Livestock Redemption: Any animal impounded because it was
found running at large may be redeemed by the owner prior to the sale or
destruction of such animal by paying all charges against the same, including
all fees under this article and expenses incurred in boarding such animal so
impounded.
   (3)   Fowl And Poultry:
      A.    Apprehension Of Fowl And Poultry At Large: If any fowl or poultry
shall be found running at large contrary to the provisions of this article, it
is hereby made the duty of the animal control officer or any other peace
officer of the county or participating municipalities to take up and confine
the same in a livestock yard or other suitable place.
      B.    Redemption Of Fowl And Poultry: Any fowl or poultry impounded
because it was found running at large may be redeemed by the owner prior to the
sale or destruction of such animal by paying all charges against the same,
including all fees under this article and expenses incurred in boarding such
animal so impounded.
   (4)   Other Animals Running At Large:
      A.    Apprehension Of Animals Running At Large: If any animals, including
domestic pets (except felines, domestic or feral, or canines or fowl and
poultry), or exotic animals as defined in section
03-05-05, "Definitions", of this article shall be found running at large
contrary to the provisions of this article, it is hereby made the duty of the
animal control officer or any other peace officer of the county or
participating municipalities to take up and confine the same in the county
animal shelter, livestock yard, or other suitable place.
      B.    Redemption Of Animals: Any animal impounded because it was found
running at large may be redeemed by the owner prior to the sale or destruction
of such animal, by paying all charges against the same, including all fees
under this article and expenses incurred in boarding such animal so impounded.
   (5)   Holding Period Prior To Disposition:
      A.    Five Working Day Holding Period: Animals impounded under this
article shall be held for five (5) working (business) days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, before they may be adopted or disposed of in a
humane manner.
      B.    Holding Period Modification: The county animal shelter or sheriff
may modify the holding period regulations of this subsection, upon a showing of
good cause. Any animal that appears to be infected with rabies or other
infectious or dangerous diseases or is seriously injured may be immediately
euthanized.
   (6)   Sterilization: Upon the third impound of the same unsterilized canine,
the canine shall be sterilized before it is returned to the owner. The owner
shall be responsible for the cost of sterilization. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-19: IMPOUND AND BOARDING FEES:
   (1)   Impound Fees For Canines Established:
 
Impound                        Licensed Canine 1 Unlicensed Canine
First impound                  $ 25.00           $ 50.00
Second impound                 50.00             75.00
Third impound                  75.00             125.00
Fourth and subsequent impounds 100.00            175.00
 
   Note:
         1.       Licensed canine impound fees apply to those canines with a
current and valid license issued under ordinance 04-009, as amended.
   (2)   Additional Impound Fees: In addition to the above fees, the following
fees shall be assessed for unsterilized canines, unless the owner agrees to
have the animal sterilized:
 
First impound  $100.00
Second impound 200.00
Third impound  Mandatory sterilization
 
   (3)   Certain Fees Waived For Sterilization: Upon the first impound of an
unsterilized canine, the additional impound fee noted in this section will be
waived if the owner elects to have their canine sterilized. The owner will be
responsible for the costs of sterilization. Upon the second impound of an
unsterilized canine, the impound fees associated with unsterilized canines will
be waived if the owner elects to sterilize the canine. The owner is responsible
for the costs of sterilization.
   (4)   Impound (Reclaiming) Fees For Felines: Any feline may be reclaimed by
the owner, subject to the fees described herein. The reclaiming fee shall be
fifteen dollars ($15.00) if the owner provides satisfactory proof that the
feline has been spayed or neutered. If the owner has the feline spayed or
neutered after impoundment, the reclamation fee shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). If the owner of the feline desires to have the animal returned to
him/her without spaying or neutering the feline, the reclamation fee shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (5)   Impound Fees For Other Animals Established:
 
First impound                  $ 25.00
Second impound                 50.00
Third impound                  75.00
Fourth and subsequent impounds 100.00
 
   (6)   Board Fees: In addition to the above impound fees, at the time of
redemption, a person redeeming an animal under this article shall pay the costs
incurred in boarding and keeping the animal during impoundment.
   (7)   Amendment Of Fee: The fees or fee schedules authorized by this article
may be amended by resolution of the board of county commissioners. (Ord. 11-
010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-21: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (1)   Animals In Public Places:
      A.    Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, keep or
carry any animal in, upon or within a public transportation facility, or any
other public building or facility.
      B.    Animals Within Public Parks, Golf Course, Cemetery: No canines,
horses, cattle or livestock of any kind shall be allowed within any public
park, golf course, or cemetery within the county or participating
municipalities, except when such an animal is kept confined in a vehicle or
trailer.
      C.    Exception: A blind or partially blind person, or any person who
requires a guide canine shall not be denied the use of any common carrier or
public transportation facility or admittance to any other public building or
place within the county by reason of his being accompanied by a seeing eye or
guide canine specially trained for such purpose. It is the intent of this
article to permit and authorize a blind person or partially blind person or a
person with impaired hearing or any severely disabled person who requires a
guide canine to have a seeing eye or guide canine with him in such place and
while using such facilities without being required to pay any additional
charges for the canine, but such blind person shall be liable for any damage or
disturbances caused by such canine.
   (2)   Animals Unattended In Vehicles: No person shall leave a canine or
other animal in any unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation and
sanitary conditions, or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme
temperatures which adversely affect the animal's health and safety.
   (3)   Disturbing The Peace: It is unlawful for any owner of a canine to fail
to exercise the reasonably necessary proper care and control of his/her canine
in order to prevent it from disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood
by barking, whining or making loud or unusual noises, or by running through or
across cultivated gardens or lawns not the property of the owner.
   (4)   Cruelty To Animals:
      A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to torture or beat, starve,
abuse, misuse, abandon or otherwise ill treat any animal in his/her care or
charge, whether belonging to himself/herself or any other person.
      B.    It is the duty of any animal control officer or peace officer to
take possession of any animal for which he has probable cause to believe falls
under Idaho Code, title 25, chapter 35, cruelty to animals, and deliver such
animal to the county animal shelter or veterinarian at the discretion of the
animal control officer.
   (5)   Attacks And Fights Prohibited:
      A.    Commanding An Animal To Attack Prohibited: Except where great
bodily harm or death is likely to immediately ensue, it is unlawful for any
person to command, encourage or aid by word or conduct, any animal to bite,
chase, attack or attempt to bite, chase or attack another person or animal.
      B.    Canine Fights Or Cockfights Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person to participate in any canine fight or cockfight within the
unincorporated areas of the county or within the limits of participating
municipalities.
   (6)   Public Property: It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out,
graze or herd any animal, including, but not limited to, a dog or cat, on any
unenclosed premises so any part of the animal extends onto or over a sidewalk,
alley, street, or other public property or beyond the owner's property line or
in a commonly held area accessible to the public.
   (7)   Unlawful Retention Of Stray Animals: If a person does not have the
knowledge and consent of the owner of an animal, then that person shall report
the possession of the animal to the sheriff no later than twenty four (24)
hours after first coming into possession of the animal. The person shall give
his name and address, a description of the animal, the circumstances under
which he came into possession of the animal and the current location of the
animal. He shall immediately surrender the animal to the sheriff upon demand.
   (8)   Restraint Devices: A rope, chain, electronic containment fence, or
other device may be used to restrain an animal, provided the following criteria
are met:
      A.    The device must be affixed to the animal by use of a nonabrasive,
comfortable, fitted collar or harness.
      B.    The device must be at least twelve feet (12') long unless such
length would violate subsection (6) of this section, in which case it shall be
no less than eight feet (8') long. The device must be fastened so the animal
can sit, walk and lie down comfortably, and must be unobstructed by objects
that may cause the device or animal to become entangled or strangled. Any chain
or tether shall have swivels on both ends. No chain or tether shall weigh more
than one-eighth (1/8) of the dog's or puppy's weight.
      C.    The animal must have easy access to adequate shade, shelter, food
and potable water.
      D.    The area where the animal is confined must be kept free of garbage
and other debris that might endanger the animal's health or safety. Feces must
be cleaned up regularly, but no less frequently than once a day.
      E.    The area where the animal is confined must be kept free of insect
infestation, such as ant hills, wasps' nests, flea, tick and maggot
infestations. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
03-05-23: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   (1)   Determination:
      A.    Determination Hearing: In the event that the animal control officer
or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that an animal is
vicious, the sheriff or his/her designee shall be empowered to convene a
hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question
should be declared vicious.
      B.    Investigation; Notice Of Hearing: The sheriff or his/her designee
shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify in
writing the owner of the animal that a hearing will be held, and at what time
he may have the opportunity to present evidence why the animal should not be
declared vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five
(5) nor more than ten (10) days after service of notice upon the owner of the
animal. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open to the public.
      C.    Notice Of Determination: After the hearing, the owner of the animal
shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made
that the animal is vicious, and the owner has not filed a timely appeal
pursuant to this section then the animal shall be destroyed. If the owner files
a timely appeal, the animal shall be maintained at the county animal shelter
pending the result of the appeal.
      D.    Contest By Owner; Notice: If the owner of the animal contests the
determination, he/she may, within five (5) days of such determination, bring a
petition in the magistrate court of the third judicial district praying that
the court conduct its own hearing on whether or not the animal should be
declared vicious. After service of notice upon the sheriff, the court shall
conduct a hearing de novo and make its own determination as to viciousness.
Upon the sheriff being served notice, the hearing shall be conducted within
fourteen (14) days. The issue shall be decided upon a preponderance of the
evidence. If the court rules the animal to be vicious and the owner fails to
file a timely appeal of the court's decision, then the animal shall be
destroyed.
      E.    Court Decision: The court may decide all issues for or against the
owner of the animal regardless of the fact that said owner fails to appear at
said hearing.
      F.    Decision Conclusive; Subsequent Actions: The determination of the
court shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. However, the animal
control officer or any law enforcement officer shall have the right to declare
an animal to be vicious for any subsequent actions of the animal.
      G.    Seizure, Impoundment; Costs: In the event that the animal control
officer or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the
animal in question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human
beings or other domestic animals, the animal control officer or law enforcement
officer may seize and impound the animal pending the aforesaid hearings. The
owner of the animal shall be responsible for the costs and expenses of
impoundment of such animal.
      H.    Appeal From Magistrate Court: The decision of the magistrate court
may be appealed to the district court by an aggrieved party within forty two
(42) days of the decision. The animal shall remain impounded pending the
appeal. If the district court finds, upon review of the record and after
hearing the arguments of the parties, that the animal is not vicious, such
animal may be released to the custody of the owner upon payment of the expense
of keeping such animal. The costs shall be paid in full prior to the release of
said animal.
   (2)   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to K-9 or
other animals owned by any police department or any law enforcement officer
which are used in the performance of law enforcement work. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-
2011)
03-05-25: UNIFORM SUMMONS; PROSECUTION; FINE SCHEDULE:
   (1)   Violations; Citation:
      A.    Violations: Unless specifically provided otherwise, violations of
the provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
set forth in Idaho Code 18-113, as amended, or in accordance with any more
specific section(s) of this article.
      B.    Citation: The Idaho uniform citation shall be used by the animal
control officer and peace officer in the enforcement of this article.
   (2)   Fine Schedule: The fine schedule for failure to show proof of a
current rabies vaccination shall be forty dollars ($40.00) plus court costs for
each offense and may be paid to the court or as provided by rule 14 of the
misdemeanor criminal rules. The fine schedule for failure to confine a canine
in heat shall be a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs for a
first offense. The fine schedule for a second such offense within five (5)
years shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fine schedule
for a third and any such subsequent offense within five (5) years shall be a
minimum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). These fines may also be paid to
the court or as provided by rule 14 of the misdemeanor criminal rules. The
court may also impose community service, in addition to these above fines. No
other penalty shall apply for these offenses. (Ord. 11-010, 9-29-2011)
ARTICLE 7
FIREWORKS
(Rep. by Ord. 01-008, 7-9-2001)
ARTICLE 9
PICKLES BUTTE LANDFILL SHOOTING PROHIBITION
SECTION:
03-09-01: Title, Structure, Purpose, Authority
03-09-03: Definitions
03-09-05: Designation As A No Shooting Area/Discharge Of Firearm Prohibited
03-09-07: Destruction Of Signs And/Or Markers Prohibited
03-09-09: Assumption Of Risk
03-09-11: Penalty
03-09-13: Severability Clause
03-09-15: Effective Date
03-09-01: TITLE, STRUCTURE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Short Title: This Article shall be known as the PICKLES BUTTE LANDFILL
SHOOTING PROHIBITION ORDINANCE.
   (2)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this Article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this Article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the Board.
   (3)   Purpose: The purpose of this Article is to provide for and further the
health, safety and welfare of the public by prohibiting the discharge of
firearms at and/or from the Pickles Butte Landfill which is owned by Canyon
County, Idaho.
   (4)   Authority: This Article is authorized by article 12, section 2, Idaho
Constitution, Idaho Code sections 31-601, 31-714, 31-801, and 31-828. (Ord. 97-
019, 6-12-1997)
03-09-03: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Article, words shall have the following meanings:
COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho.
FIREARM: The instrument from which a shot, projectile or other object may be
discharged by force of combustion, explosive, gas and/or mechanical means. This
term includes crossbows and bows and arrows.
LANDFILL: The entire County landfill. The landfill is more particularly
described as Parcel #1 and Parcel #2 as shown below:
Parcel #1
A parcel of land lying in Section 21, Township 2 North, Range 3 West, Boise
Meridian, Canyon County, Idaho being more particularly described in survey
#857569 filed March 27, 1997 and as follows.
Commencing at the southwest corner of Section 21, Township 2 North, Range 3
West, Boise Meridian, Canyon County, Idaho, the true point of beginning,
thence N 0 05' W 5298.96' to the northwest corner of section 21,
thence N 89 31' 10" E 1322.20' along the north boundary of section 21 to the NE
corner of the NWNW,
thence S 0 06' 17" E 1324.33 along the east boundary of said NWNW to the SE
corner of said NWNW,
thence 89 30' 06" E 1322.70' along the north boundary of the SENW to the NE
corner of said SENW,
thence 89 30' 47" E 660.69' to the NE corner of the W1/2SWNE,
thence 0 08' 49" E 3969.71' to the SE corner of the W1/2SWSE,
thence S 89 25' 35" W 3310.53' along the south boundary of section 21 to the SW
corner thereof, the true point of beginning.
Parcel #2
A parcel of land deeded to Canyon County on instrument #9301881 more
particularly described as follows.
The SE of the NE of the NE and the east half of the SE of the NE of Section 20,
Township 2 North, Range 3 West, Boise Meridian, Canyon County, Idaho.
and
The westerly 30 feet and the northerly 30 feet of the NE of the NE of the NE of
Section 20, Township 2 North, Range 3 West, Boise Meridian, Canyon County,
Idaho.
(Ord. 97-019, 6-12-1997)
03-09-05: DESIGNATION AS A NO SHOOTING AREA/DISCHARGE OF FIREARM PROHIBITED:
The landfill shall be designated as a "no shooting" area. The landfill may be
posted and/or marked as a "no shooting" area. No person shall discharge any
firearm from or at the landfill. This prohibition does not apply to a peace
officer or county officials and/or employees acting within the course and scope
of their duties. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the
rights accorded to individual citizens under Idaho Code section 18-3302J(3)(a-
e). (Ord. 15-006, 3-13-2015)
03-09-07: DESTRUCTION OF SIGNS AND/OR MARKERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall maliciously injure or destroy signs and/or markers referred to
in section
03-09-05: of this article. (Ord. 97-019, 6-12-1997)
03-09-09: ASSUMPTION OF RISK:
Any person visiting or using the landfill does so at that person's risk. (Ord.
97-019, 6-12-1997)
03-09-11: PENALTY:
A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable in accordance with Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended. (Ord. 97-
019, 6-12-1997)
03-09-13: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Should any provision of this article be declared by a court of a competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this article in whole or in part thereof other than the part so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 97-019, 6-12-1997)
03-09-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be and is hereby declared to be in full force and effect
upon its passage, approval and publication as provided by law in one issue of
the Idaho Press-Tribune. (Ord. 97-019, 6-12-1997)
ARTICLE 11
JUVENILE CURFEW
SECTION:
03-11-01: Short Title
03-11-03: Purpose
03-11-05: Authority
03-11-07: Juvenile Violation Of Curfew Declared Unlawful
03-11-09: Permitting Juveniles To Violate Curfew
03-11-11: Violations
03-11-01: SHORT TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY JUVENILE CURFEW ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 96-010, 5-15-1996)
03-11-03: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this Article are as follows:
   (1)   To provide for and further the health, safety and welfare of the
public;
   (2)   To protect juveniles' health and welfare which include their care,
guidance and control;
   (3)   That parents, guardians and/or other persons having legal custody are
responsible for providing for the physical custody, welfare and control of a
child and to determine where and with whom the child shall live, and to provide
the child with care, education and discipline;
   (4)   To reduce instances of juvenile nocturnal crime;
   (5)   A child who is unaccompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an
adult person designated by a person having custodial rights and who remains
upon public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant
lots or other locations, unsupervised by such adult, having unlawful authority
to be at such place during certain evening and early morning hours is at
greater risk for injury, becoming a victim of crime, being involved in criminal
activity, being a danger to persons or property or otherwise being subject to
danger. (Ord. 96-010, 5-15-1996)
03-11-05: AUTHORITY:
This Article is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by article 12, section
2, Idaho Constitution and sections 31-714, 31-801 and 31-828 Idaho Code. (Ord.
96-010, 5-15-1996)
03-11-07: JUVENILE VIOLATION OF CURFEW DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
   (1)   Children Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for any juvenile who is under
sixteen (16) years of age to remain upon any street, highway, road, alley,
park, playground or other public places, or buildings or places of amusement,
eating establishments, vacant lots and/or any other place, without being
accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated
by the adult having custodial rights of said child between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, provided
that the provisions of this Section shall not apply in the instances noted in
subsection (4) of this Section;
   (2)   Weekday Curfew: It is unlawful for any juvenile, being an individual
who is between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years of age, to remain upon any
street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other public places, or
buildings or places of amusement, eating establishments, vacant lots and/or any
other place, without being accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or
an adult person designated by the adult having custodial rights of said child
during the weekdays, specifically Sunday through Thursday, between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day,
provided that the provisions of this Section shall not apply in the instances
noted in subsection (4) of this Section;
   (3)   Weekend Curfew: It is unlawful for any juvenile, being an individual
who is between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years of age, to remain upon any
street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other public places, or
buildings or places of amusement, eating establishments, vacant lots and/or any
other place, without being accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or
an adult person designated by the adult having custodial rights of said child
during the weekends, specifically Friday and Saturday, between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following
day, provided that the provisions of this Section shall not apply in the
instances noted in subsection (4) of this Section;
   (4)   Exceptions: Subsections (1) through (3) of this Section shall not
apply in the following instances:
      A.    When the child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of
such juvenile;
      B.    When the child is returning directly home from a school activity,
school entertainment, school or recreational activity or school dance;
      C.    When the child is either going to or going from his/her place of
residence to lawful employment and/or is working at the child's place of
employment;
      D.    When the child is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the lawful exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion;
      E.    When the child is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for
normal travel with interstate travel through the County. (Ord. 96-010, 5-15-
1996)
03-11-09: PERMITTING JUVENILES TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of a child or any adult person designated by the person having
legal custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly
permit or allow said child to be upon any public streets, highways, roads,
alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places
of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or other locations in violation of the
provisions of subsections 03-11-07(1) through (3) of this Article without
having designated an adult person or said parent, guardian or other legal
custodian to be with and supervise said juvenile, except in the circumstances
set forth in subsection
03-11-07(4) of this Article. (Ord. 96-010, 5-15-1996)
03-11-11: VIOLATIONS:
   (1)   A violation of any of the provisions of this Article is a misdemeanor
and punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113, as
amended, with the following qualifications:
      A.    Upon the second conviction of a parent, guardian or legal custodian
for a violation of Section
03-11-09: of this Article, the parent, guardian or legal custodian shall be
fined no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in conjunction with any period
of incarceration, term of probation, or other sanction or requirement as
ordered by the court.
      B.    Upon conviction of a third violation of Section
03-11-09: of this Article by a parent, guardian or legal custodian, the
convicted person shall pay a fine of no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
in conjunction with any period of incarceration, term of probation, or other
sanction or requirement as ordered by the court.
      C.    Each conviction thereafter shall be considered a separate offense
punishable by no less than a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine and no
less than one day in the Canyon County jail in conjunction with any term of
probation, or other sanction or requirement ordered by the court.
      D.    Upon conviction, juveniles shall be punished in accordance with the
terms of the Juvenile Corrections Act, title 20, chapter 5 of the Idaho Code,
as amended, and the other applicable rules and regulations pertaining to
juvenile offenders in the State. (Ord. 96-010, 5-15-1996)
ARTICLE 13
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
03-13-01: Title; Structure; Purpose; Authority
03-13-03: Definitions
03-13-05: Failure To Supervise A Child Declared Unlawful
03-13-07: Exceptions
03-13-09: Violations
03-13-11: Severability Clause
03-13-13: Effective Date
03-13-01: TITLE; STRUCTURE; PURPOSE; AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Short Title: This Article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY PARENTAL
RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE.
   (2)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this Article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this Article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the Board of County Commissioners.
   (3)   Purpose: The purpose of this Article is as follows:
      A.    To provide for and further the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
      B.    To protect juveniles' health and welfare, which include their care,
guidance and control.
      C.    To reduce instances of juvenile crime.
      D.    To encourage parents, guardians or other persons, except foster
parents, to properly supervise and control children under the age of sixteen
(16) who are in their care or custody.
      E.    To hold parents, guardians or other persons, except a foster
parent, who are lawfully charged with the care or custody of a child under
sixteen (16) years of age for failing to supervise the child over whom they
have responsibility.
   (4)   Authority: This Article is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by
article 12, section 2, Idaho Constitution and Idaho Code 31-714, 31-801, 31-828
and 32-1301. (Ord. 97-027, 12-9-1997)
03-13-03: DEFINITIONS:
CHILD: For purposes of this Article, a "child" is defined as a person under
sixteen (16) years of age. (Ord. 97-027, 12-9-1997)
PARENT: Any person who is the parent, lawful guardian or other person, except
the foster parent lawfully charged with the care or custody of the child under
sixteen (16) years of age.
03-13-05: FAILURE TO SUPERVISE A CHILD DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for a person who is the parent, lawful guardian or other person,
except a foster parent, lawfully charged with the care or custody of a child
under sixteen (16) years of age to fail to supervise that child. The parent
commits the offense of failure to supervise a child if the child commits any of
the following acts:
   (1)   Commits any act bringing the child within the purview of the Juvenile
Corrections Act, Idaho Code chapter 5, title 20; or
   (2)   Commits a crime for which the child is to be tried as an adult; or
   (3)   Commits an act for which jurisdiction of the Juvenile Corrections Act
is subject to waiver pursuant to Idaho Code chapter 5, title 20; or
   (4)   Fails to attend school or is not comparably instructed as provided in
Idaho Code 33-202; or
   (5)   Violates the Canyon County curfew ordinance or the curfew laws of any
city within Canyon County. (Ord. 97-027, 12-9-1997)
03-13-07: EXCEPTIONS:
   (1)   A person shall not be subject to prosecution for violation of this
Article if the person:
      A.    Is the victim of the act bringing the child within the purview of
the provisions of Idaho Code chapter 5, title 20; or
      B.    Reported the act of the child as soon as reasonably possible to a
local law enforcement agency, juvenile court or the Department of Health and
Welfare.
   (2)   A person shall not be subject to prosecution for violation of this
Article if the person shows to the satisfaction of the court that the person
took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time the
person is alleged to have failed to supervise the child. (Ord. 97-027, 12-9-
1997)
03-13-09: VIOLATIONS:
   (1)   A violation of any of the provisions of this Article is a misdemeanor
and any person who is found guilty or pleads guilty to a violation of this
Article shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). In lieu of imposing a fine, the court, with the consent of the
person, may order the person to complete parenting classes or undertake other
treatment or counseling as approved by the court. Upon the person's completion
of the classes, treatment or counseling to the satisfaction of the court, the
court may discharge the person or if the person fails to complete the programs
to the satisfaction of the court, the court may impose the penalty provided in
this Section.
   (2)   Any person violating any order of the court entered under this Article
shall be subject to contempt proceedings in accordance with Idaho Code chapter
6, title 7, in addition to any other penalties authorized pursuant to this
Section.
   (3)   Any person who is found guilty or pleads guilty to a violation of this
Article may be ordered by the court to pay restitution or make whole any victim
who suffers an economic loss as a result of the juvenile's conduct, in
accordance with the standards and requirements of Idaho Code 19-5304 and 19-
5305, provided that any restitution ordered to be paid by a parent under this
Article shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (4)   Upon a first offense, a law enforcement officer may, in their
discretion, serve a copy of this Article upon the parent and explain to them
the consequences of their conduct as a warning of the penalties contained in
this Article. This service shall be documented by the officer.
   (5)   A conviction of a person under this Article shall not preclude any
other action or proceedings against the person which may be taken pursuant to
the provisions of Idaho Code chapter 5, title 20 or other provisions of law.
(Ord. 97-027, 12-9-1997)
03-13-11: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Should any provision of this Article be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, unlawful or invalid such decision shall
only affect the noted provision and shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of this Article. (Ord. 97-027, 12-9-1997)
03-13-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Article shall be and is hereby declared to be in full force and effect
upon its passage, approval and publication, as provided by law, in one issue of
the Idaho Press-Tribune. (Ord. 97-027, 12-9-1997)
ARTICLE 15
SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
SECTION:
03-15-01: Title
03-15-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
03-15-05: Over The Counter Distribution Of Certain Pseudoephedrine Products;
Definitions
03-15-07: Prohibited Acts
03-15-09: Accessibility Of Pseudoephedrine Products
03-15-11: Penalty
03-15-13: Severability
03-15-15: Effective Date
03-15-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the LIMITATIONS ON OVER THE COUNTER DISTRIBUTION
OF CERTAIN PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-016, 10-12-2005)
03-15-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: Methamphetamine is an illegal drug that is produced using
legal substances such as pseudoephedrine, which is contained in certain over
the counter medicines sold in retail outlets. Methamphetamine is produced and
distributed in our communities with negative social effects, including harm to
children, families, increasing crime and property damage. The production of
methamphetamine in illegal labs can cause significant health and safety risks
such as the danger of fire, explosion, and environmental hazards from
production byproducts. The legislature of the state of Idaho has not enacted
any laws to control pseudoephedrine products that have been prepared for
dispensing or over the counter distribution. The board of county commissioners
deems it to be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Canyon County to regulate the over the counter distribution of
certain pseudoephedrine products within the county.
   (3)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-801
and 31-828. (Ord. 05-016, 10-12-2005)
03-15-05: OVER THE COUNTER DISTRIBUTION OF CERTAIN PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS;
DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, certain terms are defined as set forth below:
CANYON COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho, a political subdivision of the state of
Idaho.
LOCALLY REGULATED PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS: (1) A drug or product containing as
its sole active ingredient pseudoephedrine, or any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers; or
   (2)   A combination drug or product containing as one of its active
ingredients pseudoephedrine, or any of their salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
   (3)   This term includes only compounds, mixtures, or preparations that are
in tablet form containing more than twenty milligrams (20 mg) of
pseudoephedrine, or any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical
isomers.
   (4)   This term does not include any compounds, mixtures, or preparations
that are in gel capsule, liquid capsule, or liquid form.
OVER THE COUNTER DISTRIBUTION: A retail sale of a drug or product but does not
include the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid
prescription.
RETAILER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity
conducting business within the unincorporated area of Canyon County who sells
or furnishes any over the counter drug product containing pseudoephedrine to
any person who is the ultimate user or consumer of the product. (Ord. 05-016,
10-12-2005)
03-15-07: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful within Canyon County for any retailer or employee
thereof to knowingly sell, transfer, or otherwise furnish in a single
transaction:
      A.    More than three (3) packages of any locally regulated
pseudoephedrine product prepared for over the counter distribution.
      B.    A locally regulated pseudoephedrine product prepared for over the
counter distribution to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (2)   The limits established in this section shall not apply to any quantity
of pseudoephedrine product dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription. (Ord.
05-016, 10-12-2005)
03-15-09: ACCESSIBILITY OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS:
A retailer that offers for sale locally regulated pseudoephedrine products
prepared for over the counter distribution shall ensure that all packages of
the drugs are displayed and offered for sale only through vendor assisted sales
where the customer has no access to the product except through the assistance
of an employee of the retailer, as follows:
   (1)   All locally regulated pseudoephedrine products shall be stocked in a
locked display case or behind a checkout or customer service counter where the
public is not permitted; and
   (2)   All sales of locally regulated pseudoephedrine products shall be
conducted through an employee of the retailer and cannot be conducted by a
self-service checkout system unless the self-service checkout system contains a
requirement that an employee of the retailer verify the age of the purchaser
and the quantity of the purchase before the transaction can be completed. (Ord.
05-016, 10-12-2005)
03-15-11: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
punished as provided in section
01-01-07: of this code. (Ord. 05-016, 10-12-2005)
03-15-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or section of this article shall be held to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision or section shall be
considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions or sections of
this article, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 05-016, 10-12-
2005)
03-15-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication, as provided by law, in one issue of the "Idaho Press-Tribune".
(Ord. 05-016, 10-12-2005)
ARTICLE 17
TRANSPORTATION OF NONCONTAINED LOADS
SECTION:
03-17-01: Prohibited
03-17-03: Exceptions
03-17-05: Penalties
03-17-01: PROHIBITED:
Effective January 15, 2009:
   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle with any load on any public
roadway in Canyon County outside the corporate limits of any municipality
unless such load is securely contained so as to prevent any of its contents
from blowing, dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping the vehicle, or
in any manner posing a hazard to other users of the public roadway.
   (2)   Any person operating a vehicle on any public roadway in unincorporated
Canyon County from which any materials have fallen or escaped, which would
constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon
such public roadway shall immediately cause the public roadway to be cleaned of
all such materials and shall pay any costs therefor.
   (3)   This section shall not apply to vehicles on a public roadway, or a
portion thereof, that is closed to travel by the general public. However, prior
to the opening or reopening of the public roadway all materials that would
constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon
such public roadway must be cleaned from the public roadway. (Ord. 08-027, 12-
31-2008)
03-17-03: EXCEPTIONS:
   (1)   Nothing in this section may be construed to prohibit a government
employee or contractor from dropping sand on a highway to enhance traction, or
sprinkling water or other substances to clean or maintain a highway.
   (2)   This article shall not apply to agricultural vehicles while being used
for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 08-027, 12-31-2008)
03-17-05: PENALTIES:
A person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each subsequent
violation of this article, the fine shall be increased by twenty five dollars
($25.00) but shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition
thereto, the court shall assess costs as provided by law or rule. (Ord. 10-002,
4-20-2010)
ARTICLE 19
LAW ENFORCEMENT TOWING
SECTION:
03-19-01: Authorization
03-19-03: Title And Purpose
03-19-05: Definitions
03-19-07: Driving Tow Truck To Scene Of Accident Prohibited Unless Called By
Dispatch
03-19-09: Response To Certain Private Calls For Towing Services Prohibited
03-19-11: Certain Remuneration Or Consideration Prohibited
03-19-13: Dispatch
03-19-15: Rotation Listees Responsibilities
03-19-17: Expiration Date; Location
03-19-19: Eligibility And Requirements For Placement On Tow Rotation
03-19-21: Application; Inspections; Issuance
03-19-23: Random Inspections; Violations; Suspensions; Revocations; Hearings
03-19-25: Tow Truck Specifications And Capabilities
03-19-27: Fees For Law Enforcement Towing
03-19-29: Requirements And Operating Procedures For Emergency Tow Companies
03-19-31: Use As Emergency Vehicle Prohibited
03-19-33: Penalties
03-19-01: AUTHORIZATION:
This is an article authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-2202(10) and
31-2202(13(a)(b)(c)). (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-03: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This article is known as the LAW ENFORCEMENT TOWING ORDINANCE. The purpose of
this article is to establish criteria for the selection and deletion of
emergency tow service from the tow rotation list and related regulations in
order to continue to provide safe, effective, reasonably priced, and
professional emergency tow service. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-05: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms will have the following meanings:
 
 
                                Any occurrence in Canyon County resulting in
                                a wrecked or disabled vehicle, which results
ACCIDENT:                       in an unintended injury or property damage
                                attributable directly or indirectly to the
                                motion of a motor vehicle or its load.
                                Monday through Friday, from nine o'clock (9:
BUSINESS DAY:                   00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.,
                                excluding holidays declared by the Canyon
                                County board of county commissioners.
CANYON COUNTY:                  That unincorporated area which is within the
                                boundaries of Canyon County, Idaho.
                                Finding or plea of guilt, whether or not the
                                sentence is imposed, suspended, deferred, or
CONVICTION:                     withheld; and whether or not the case or
                                charge is dismissed under Idaho Code section
                                19-2604 or any comparable statute or
                                procedure.
                                A vehicle abandoned or rendered unsafe to be
                                driven as the result of some occurrence other
                                than an accident including, but not limited
                                to: a) mechanical failures or breakdowns; b)
                                fire; c) vandalism; d) a vehicle in a safe
DISABLED VEHICLE:               driving condition, but the owner is not
                                present, able or permitted to drive; or e)
                                any other occurrence in which the public
                                interest or public safety reasonably
                                necessitates removal of the vehicle by law
                                enforcement.
                                The person or persons within Canyon County
DISPATCH:                       assigned to route law enforcement agency
                                calls for tow truck service by the use of a
                                tow truck rotation list.
INSPECTION OFFICER (a.k.a., TOW The employee or employees designated by the
COORDINATOR):                   Canyon County sheriff to handle law
                                enforcement towing administrative duties.
 
03-19-07: DRIVING TOW TRUCK TO SCENE OF ACCIDENT PROHIBITED UNLESS CALLED BY
DISPATCH:
No person may knowingly drive a tow truck to the scene of any accident or
incident in Canyon County, where law enforcement is on scene, unless the tow
truck has been called to the scene by dispatch or by a private party. (Ord. 15-
003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-09: RESPONSE TO CERTAIN PRIVATE CALLS FOR TOWING SERVICES PROHIBITED:
A tow truck shall not knowingly respond to a private request for towing service
within Canyon County when a reportable accident is involved without first
notifying dispatch. A tow truck may respond to a private request for towing
service to a disabled vehicle not involved in an accident, or to a private
request for other towing services not requiring the involvement of a law
enforcement agency; provided, however, if, upon arrival on the scene, a tow
company discovers an accident is involved, the tow company shall immediately
notify dispatch. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-11: CERTAIN REMUNERATION OR CONSIDERATION PROHIBITED:
Emergency tow companies are prohibited from accepting any remuneration or
consideration of any type from any repair shop, garage or other repair facility
given for the purpose of influencing such emergency tow company's decision as
to where a nonpreference tow should be taken for repair. It shall be a
rebuttable presumption that any such remuneration or consideration was given
for the purpose of influencing said decision. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-13: DISPATCH:
   (1)   If a law enforcement officer determines a tow truck is needed at the
scene of a law enforcement tow for a wrecked or disabled vehicle, dispatch
shall call either the towing service indicated to the law enforcement officer
by the express preference of the owner, or, if the owner does not expressly
request a particular towing service, the next available tow company on the tow
truck rotation list. Dispatch shall indicate to the emergency tow company the
location, color, year, make, body, and general condition of the vehicle to be
towed. Based on the information provided, the tow company shall provide all
necessary towing equipment.
   (2)   In order to be placed on the tow rotation the tow company must be able
to respond to a call from dispatch within forty five (45) minutes, or in a
reasonable time based upon road conditions and maintain a storage lot within
Canyon County accessible within forty five (45) minutes from any portion of the
service area. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-15: ROTATION LISTEES RESPONSIBILITIES:
   (1)   Responsibility: Tow truck companies authorized to perform law
enforcement towing are responsible for wrecked and disabled vehicles and the
contents therein, from the time of on scene pick up until the vehicle is
removed from tow company's premises or is otherwise released from tow company's
custody and control.
   (2)   Turning Down A Call: If a tow truck turns down a call or is unable to
respond, it will be passed on its position on the rotation list. A tow service
may not refer its calls to another tow truck service.
   (3)   Unavailability: If any tow company becomes unavailable for any reason,
the company may notify dispatch of the dates regarding their unavailability and
their rotation slots will be skipped during that time frame.
   (4)   Indemnification: Each tow company on the rotation shall defend and
indemnify the county of Canyon, for any claim against the same arising out of a
company's operation of a tow company.
   (5)   Notice: All notifications required by Idaho law related to the towing,
storage, or release of vehicles shall be the responsibility of the tow company.
(Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-17: EXPIRATION DATE; LOCATION:
   (1)   No person may provide law enforcement towing inside Canyon County
without first being placed on the tow rotation by law enforcement. Only one
position on each rotation may be issued to each emergency tow company.
      A.    Tow companies may not subcontract with other towing agencies for
the provision of law enforcement towing services.
      B.    Applications for positions on the law enforcement towing rotation
may be obtained at the Canyon County sheriff's office beginning on December 1
of each year, and all completed applications must be received no later than
December 31 of each year.
      C.    Incomplete applications will not be accepted. Tow service
inspections for the upcoming year shall be conducted by the inspection officer
during January of each year. All positions on the tow list shall expire on
January 31 of the following calendar year.
   (2)   Tow companies on the rotation shall maintain a permanent and
established place of business within Canyon County, and shall promptly notify
the inspection officer of any change of address. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-19: ELIGIBILITY AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PLACEMENT ON TOW ROTATION:
   (1)   Tow truck companies must be established Idaho businesses, filed with
Idaho secretary of state, or have a registered agent listed with the Idaho
secretary of state.
   (2)   Tow truck companies may not assign, contract, or utilize the services
of anyone to respond to a call or supervisor or safeguard items recovered under
this agreement who has been convicted of any offense:
      A.    That pertains to alteration or removal of a vehicle's
identification number, theft and/or injury to vehicles, unlawful possession of
burglary tools, petty theft, grand theft, robbery, arson, extortion, forgery,
false imprisonment, and burglary within the past ten (10) years.
      B.    Any offense, the elements of which include the infliction or threat
of bodily injury or death to a person or persons, including, but not limited
to, homicide, rape, assault, kidnapping, menacing or coercion within the past
ten (10) years.
      C.    Reckless driving or driving under the influence of any drug or
intoxicating liquor, regardless of whether the incident resulted in bodily
injury or death, hit and run, any drug use, possession or sale, and evading a
police officer within the preceding five (5) years.
      D.    Any crime, whether a felony or misdemeanor, that is a sex crime or
the elements of which would fall under Idaho's sex crime statutes, including,
but not limited to, sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation of a
minor, and child molestation. A sex crime includes, but is not limited to, any
offense for which an individual must register as a sex offender.
      E.    Any felony crime against property, including theft, burglary or
criminal trespass, providing that such crime will be disqualifying only if: 1)
the conviction occurred within the ten (10) years preceding the date of
determination, or 2) the applicant or tow company agent/owner has any previous
conviction of such a crime.
   (3)   Any person or tow service provider may seek a waiver of the
requirements outlined in subsection (2) of this section by submitting a request
for waiver within fourteen (14) days of notification along with any evidence or
information the appealing party feels relevant to mitigate or refute the
disqualifier.
      A.    The inspection officer will review the information and make a
determination whether to grant or deny the requested waiver.
      B.    A denial may be appealed within fourteen (14) days from the denial
by the inspection officer to the sheriff. A denial by the sheriff will be
considered final. Failure to exhaust your administrative remedies will result
in a denial of your waiver.
   (4)   Tow truck companies must submit the name, date of birth and social
security number of each driver for driver's status and criminal record checks.
   (5)   Tow truck companies must provide a process whereby owners may register
complaints or grievances including a method to reduce to writing any complaint
or grievance if requested by complaining party. Any complaint or grievance
reduced to writing must be forwarded to the inspection officer within five (5)
business days of its receipt.
   (6)   Services provided by tow truck companies must be available twenty four
(24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week by phone with a maximum of two (2)
phone numbers to be called for service.
   (7)   Tow truck companies on the rotation must maintain a secure and
accessible storage lot or building in which vehicles towed for Canyon County
are stored and secured from vandalism, damage, and/or theft in each area
served.
   (8)   The storage facility must:
      A.    Be large enough to accommodate high occupancy vehicles and personal
vehicles towed within Canyon County.
      B.    Be surrounded by a well maintained fence at least six feet (6') in
height with all means of ingress and egress secured or be a locked and secured
building.
      C.    Be at the same location as the business address or if not then the
tow truck company may not charge for additional distance traveled to and from a
secondary location, or for retrieving vehicles or property at a secondary
storage location.
      D.    Shall be open and staffed during business days, nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Friday (excluding lunch hour).
   (9)   Each tow truck on the rotation must have at least the following
equipment and all required equipment must be maintained in safe and good
working condition:
      A.    Vehicle lighting and equipment as specified by Idaho Code.
      B.    Amber, red or a combination of amber/red emergency lights visible
for three hundred sixty degrees (360°).
      C.    Additional equipment consisting of:
         1.    High visibility vests or coats complying with ANSI/ISEA 107,
2004 edition, class 2 or 3, which must be worn by all towing company employees
while working within the right of way of any federal aid highway;
         2.    At least five (5) traffic cones;
         3.    At least one, or an equivalent, fully charged fire extinguisher
having a minimum of five (5) pounds of ABC dry chemical;
         4.    Broom;
         5.    Shovel;
         6.    Lights for towed vehicle; and
         7.    Tow bar, cradle, towing dolly or equivalent for towing passenger
cars.
Tow truck companies must be able to provide and perform adequate traffic
control during a tow or recover operation lasting longer than one hour.
   (10)   Each tow truck must have the business name and phone number of the
tow truck company clearly and permanently painted or otherwise attached on both
sides of the truck.
   (11)   Each tow truck company must provide a list of their proposed hourly
rate, mileage rate, and storage fees. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-21: APPLICATION; INSPECTIONS; ISSUANCE:
   (1)   Contents Of Application: A person desiring to obtain a position on the
Canyon County law enforcement tow rotation shall lodge with the Canyon County
sheriff a written application upon a form provided for that purpose, which must
be signed by the applicant or his authorized agent. The following information
shall be required in the application:
      A.    Owner name, address to which all official correspondence may be
sent, telephone number and signature or the name, address and telephone number
and signature of the owner's agent within the state of Idaho.
      B.    Company name, address and telephone number.
      C.    Number and types of tow trucks to be operated.
      D.    A copy of the applicant's public liability insurance policy.
      E.    A description, including photographs, of the applicant's impound
yard and its location.
   (2)   Inspections: Upon the lodging of the application, the inspection
officer shall direct the applicant to appear for an inspection of the tow truck
(s) at a reasonable time and place to be determined by the inspection officer.
The inspection officer shall conduct an inspection of the tow truck(s) and the
business premises of the applicant, as necessary, to determine if each tow
truck and tow company complies with this article.
   (3)   Action On Application: The inspection officer may, at any time, in his
or her discretion, require additional information from an applicant to clarify
items on the application. Failure to cooperate with the inspection officer's
request for additional information may result in the denial of an application.
Upon completion of the processing of the application, the inspection officer
shall forward the application and the inspection officer's recommendation to
the Canyon County sheriff for action thereon.
   (4)   Approval; Denial; Suspension: The inspection officer shall, within
thirty (30) days of receipt of an application for a position on the law
enforcement tow rotation, either approve or deny said application. The
inspection officer shall place the applicant on the law enforcement tow
rotation if the inspection officer finds that the emergency tow company meets
the requirements of this article. The inspection officer shall refuse to place
a company on the rotation if the inspection officer finds that the emergency
tow company does not meet the requirements of this article. Notice of the
inspection officer's decision with the grounds for refusal will be provided
within thirty (30) days from the date of application. If at any time during the
rotation year, a tow company violates the requirements of this article, the
company may be suspended in accordance with this article.
   (5)   Term: A position on the rotation shall be valid for up to one year.
(Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-23: RANDOM INSPECTIONS; VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSIONS; REVOCATIONS; HEARINGS:
   (1)   Inspections: Any sheriff's office deputy or the inspection officer is
authorized to conduct random inspections of any tow truck company conducting
law enforcement tows.
   (2)   Violations And Temporary Suspensions: The following violations shall
result in a written warning by the inspection officer. Any repeat(s) of the
same violation within a three (3) month period shall result in an immediate
temporary suspension from the tow truck rotation list for a period not to
exceed three (3) weeks. More than three (3) of the following violations shall
result in suspension and/or removal from the rotation in accordance with
subsection (3) of this section:
      A.    Failure to notify dispatch that tow company's on scene arrival time
will exceed forty five (45) minutes.
      B.    Failure to have the required equipment for each operating tow truck
and to have such equipment in good operating condition.
      C.    Use of magnetic stripping/signage on tow trucks.
      D.    Charging in excess of the tow rates approved by the board of Canyon
County commissioners for law enforcement tows.
      E.    Subcontracting law enforcement tows through other tow companies
without prior approval from the inspection officer.
      F.    Conducting business in an unprofessional manner including, but not
limited to, failing to respond to calls for service, rude behavior toward
customers or law enforcement officials, charging unapproved fees, failure to
forward complaints onto the appropriate agency.
      G.    Failure to notify the Canyon County sheriff of criminal convictions
of employees or employing drivers who have been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor offense of theft or a theft related offense.
      H.    Failure to notify Canyon County of new hires or rehires prior to
rendering services under this agreement.
      I.    Failure to remain open and staffed during business hours.
      J.    Failure to arrive on scene within forty five (45) minutes, after
being dispatched without providing prior notice to dispatch of the delay.
   (3)   Suspensions And Revocations: If the inspection officer finds that any
of the following violations have been committed, the inspection officer shall
issue an immediate suspension for no less than twenty four (24) hours of the
tow company from the rotation, and make a recommendation to the Canyon County
sheriff, or his designee, for suspension from the rotation of said tow company:
      A.    Failure to respond to a dispatch request for a law enforcement tow
more than two (2) times in any calendar month.
      B.    Driving a tow truck to the scene of an accident without having been
requested to the scene by dispatch or as a preference tow.
      C.    The failure to report a reportable accident, or where private
property is damaged, to dispatch for which a law enforcement tow is required.
      D.    The acceptance of any remuneration, or consideration of any type,
by any tow company, employee or agent of a tow company, from any garage, repair
shop, or facility, for the purpose of influencing such tow company's decision
as to where a disabled or wrecked vehicle should be taken for repair.
      E.    Allowing the lapse or cancellation of the tow business insurance
required by this article.
   (4)   Notice Of Intent: Within five (5) days of the inspection officer's
recommendation, if the Canyon County sheriff, or his designee, finds good cause
that a violation of subsection (3) of this section has occurred, the Canyon
County sheriff shall issue a notice of intent to suspend a tow company from the
rotation. Said notice shall provide a general description of the alleged
violation(s) and the date(s) of the alleged violation(s). Depending on the
nature and extent of the violation(s), the Canyon County sheriff, in his sole
discretion, may permit the subject company to resume law enforcement towing
pending any hearing on the matter.
   (5)   Right To Hearing: A tow company on the rotation shall have the right
to a hearing prior to the revocation or suspension of more than three (3) weeks
of its law enforcement towing privileges, in accordance with the procedures set
forth in subsection (6) of this section. If the tow company does not timely
request a hearing, or does not follow the procedures for requesting a hearing,
said decision to suspend shall be final, and shall be effective fifteen (15)
days from the date of the notice of intent. Any suspension shall be for a
length of time as determined by the Canyon County sheriff, and any revocation
shall be for the remainder of the current rotation year.
   (6)   Hearing Procedures: A tow company may request an administrative
hearing before the Canyon County sheriff, or his designee, prior to the
adoption of any suspension for more than three (3) weeks, in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this section.
      A.    A tow company desiring such a hearing shall, within five (5) days
of the date of the notice of intent to suspend or revoke, file a written
request for hearing with the Canyon County sheriff, together with a statement
setting forth the factual basis and reasons for the tow company's appeal of the
decision. A copy of the request for hearing shall also be delivered to the
inspection officer. Additional materials in support of the appeal may be
submitted up to and including the day of the hearing without prior approval
from the hearing officer.
      B.    The Canyon County sheriff, or his designee, shall conduct an
informal administrative hearing within fifteen (15) days after a request for
hearing has been filed. The tow company and the Canyon County sheriff may be
represented by an attorney. The tow company will be afforded the opportunity to
present evidence and testimony.
      C.    The tow company shall have no right to cross examine or confront
witnesses, except in the discretion of the Canyon County sheriff, nor shall the
Idaho rules of evidence apply to such hearings. In the Canyon County sheriff's
discretion, the record of any such hearing may be held open for a period of
time, not to exceed seven (7) days, for the receipt of additional evidence.
      D.    The Canyon County sheriff, or his designee, shall issue a written
decision no more than ten (10) days from the date of the hearing. A copy of the
decision shall be mailed or made available to all interested parties at the
inspection officer's discretion. A record of said hearing, including an audio
recording and all exhibits and decision shall remain in the custody of the
Canyon County sheriff as a semipermanent public record, subject to retention
and destruction pursuant to Idaho law. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-25: TOW TRUCK SPECIFICATIONS AND CAPABILITIES:
   (1)   Compliance: Each emergency tow company shall comply with all safety
provisions, rules and regulations required to be observed by motor carriers by
Idaho law, and in addition thereto, shall comply with the requirements of this
article.
   (2)   Equipment: Each tow truck shall be equipped with only those winches
and booms that have been produced and constructed by a manufacturer of such
equipment that regularly produces winches and tow equipment of guaranteed
quality and be used with the size tow truck for the class for which the
equipment is designed. All related equipment shall be commensurate with the
total rating of booms or other towing devices. A winch or boom will not be
prohibited by this article if the owner submits to the Canyon County sheriff a
verified statement from a reputable testing laboratory regularly engaged in the
testing of such equipment or similar equipment certifying that the capacity of
the winch or boom is not less than that mandated for the class for which the
equipment will be used. All costs of such testing and certification shall be at
the expense of the emergency tow company.
   (3)   Classes Of Tow Trucks: Commercial tow trucks are divided into the
following classes based on the manufacturer's rating:
      A.    Class A tow truck equipment must have a minimum manufacturer's boom
or combined boom rating of four (4) tons and must be mounted on a truck chassis
with a minimum manufacturer's rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds' gross
vehicle weight. Class A trucks may only be used for specialty off road tows.
      B.    Class B tow truck equipment must have a minimum manufacturer's boom
or combined boom rating of eight (8) tons and must be mounted on a truck
chassis with a minimum manufacturer's rating of eighteen thousand (18,000)
pounds' gross vehicle weight.
      C.    Class C tow truck equipment must have a minimum manufacturer's boom
or combined boom rating of sixteen (16) tons and must be mounted on a chassis
that has a minimum manufacturer's rating of thirty two thousand (32,000)
pounds' gross vehicle weight.
      D.    Class D tow truck equipment includes manufactured rollbacks and car
carriers with manufacturer's gross vehicle ratings of ten thousand (10,000)
pounds and over. The rollbacks and car carriers must be mounted on a truck-
trailer chassis that, at a minimum, is equal to the minimum gross weight of the
rollback or car carrier. Class D also includes any piece of towing equipment
without a boom.
      E.    Class E includes two (2) or more tow trucks working together with a
combined manufacturer's rating of a minimum of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds
with access to supportive equipment, such as forklifts, banders, and air bags,
for the recovery of rollovers and wrecked, disabled, and abandoned vehicles
whose cargo requires special handling. Class E refers to tow truck companies
and not to tow truck equipment.
   (4)   Specifications:
      A.    An operator of any noncommercially manufactured or modified tow
truck equipment must have its equipment independently certified before
participating in the law enforcement rotation system. Once the equipment is
classified, further modifications to the equipment must be recertified.
      B.    Each tow truck and all of its equipment shall be maintained in a
safe and good working order at all times. Tow truck operators on the rotation,
must receive all state and nationally recognized operator's certification
training required by industry standards within the profession or required by
law.
      C.    Each tow truck shall be permanently painted and lettered with
company colors and company names, address, city and telephone number, on both
sides of the tow truck, before use for law enforcement towing services. Said
company colors shall be provided to the Canyon County sheriff. No magnetic
stripping and/or signs may be used.
      D.    Tow companies wishing to be placed upon the rotation, must provide
proof that their equipment meets all applicable safety and statutory standards.
The inspection officer, by approving an application for placement on the tow
rotation, will rely upon the tow company's representations. Placement on the
tow rotation is in no way a warranty or endorsement that the tow company's
equipment meets industry or statutory standards.
Canyon County, its employees and inspection officer, while acting within the
course and scope of their employment, shall not be liable for any claim as
specified under Idaho Code section 6-904B. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-27: FEES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT TOWING:
   (1)   Fees for services provided by tow companies pursuant to this article
shall be set by resolution of the board of Canyon County commissioners upon the
recommendation of the sheriff. Applications by tow companies to be placed on
the law enforcement towing rotation shall be considered knowledge and consent
by the applicant to abide by the provisions of this article. Failure to adhere
to the established fee rates is cause for immediate removal from the law
enforcement tow rotation list.
   (2)   The established fees apply to law enforcement towing only. The fees
shall set from the maximum amount a tow company is permitted to charge for
different categories of vehicles for mileage rates, hourly rates, and vehicle
storage, as described below. Tow companies shall not charge any additional fees
or costs in addition to the established categories, unless approved by the
inspection officer/tow coordinator on a case-by-case basis pursuant to the
process established in this article. Tow companies may charge less than the
established fees.
      A.   Mileage Rate. Mileage rates can only be charged for loaded miles,
which is the mileage from point of hook up to a tow vehicle to the tow
company's place of business, or vehicle drop off point, via reasonable and
customaiy routes.
      B.   Hourly Rate. The hourly rate is the maximum allowable rate charged
if all services, processes, and labor are provided. Charges for all services,
processes, and labor associated with a vehicle tow, other than mileage and
vehicle charges, shall be part of the hourly rate. This includes, but is not
limited to, fees and charges for callout/hook-up, winching, labor to perform
preparation of tow, cleanup of debris and fluid, drive-line removal, recovery,
use of dollies, snatch blocks and skates. Not every vehicle tow will require
every available process or service, therefore it is anticipated that routine
vehicle tows will not incur maximum hourly rates.
      Tow companies shall only charge one hourly rate fee regardless of the
number of representatives responding to the call; hourly rate charges for
multiple representatives must be approved as a fee adjustment. Tow companies
may implement the equivalent of one full hour at the hourly rate as a minimum
hourly rate charge. After the first hour of a tow service, the hourly rate
shall be applied on a thirty (30) minute prorated basis as follows:
 
5-30 minutes  50% of the hourly rate
31-60 minutes 100% of the hourly rate
 
      C.   Vehicle Storage Rate. The vehicle storage rate is the maximum rate a
tow company may charge for storage of any towed vehicle. Storage fees may be
assessed for each eligible calendar day a vehicle is stored. Vehicles stored
for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or less shall not be charged for
storage. Vehicle storage shall not be charged if, for any reason, the tow
company is not open during normal office hours for vehicle retrieval, unless
the vehicle has been in storage with available retrieval for more than seven
(7) days.
   (3)   There shall be no charge for the release of personal property from
towed vehicles during normal business hours, except as allowed by Idaho Code
section 49-1814. The maximum charge for releasing personal property or vehicles
after regular business hours is the equivalent of one full hour at the hourly
rate.
   (4)   Tow Company Fee Adjustments. All fees charged by tow companies are
subject to review by the inspection officer/tow coordinator. A tow company may
have occasional need to apply charges or fees that exceed the established fees,
and vehicle owners may have reason to contest fees charged to tow their
vehicles. The inspection officer/tow coordinator shall have the authority to
approve any additional/excess charges, deny any additional or excess charges,
or adjust the towing fee to reflect the proper amount to be charged for the tow
service based on the specific circumstances. Reasonable tow fee adjustments, as
determined by the inspection officer/tow coordinator, will not be denied. The
rationale supporting the fee adjustment decision will be provided in writing
upon request. The sheriff will establish a fee adjustment process for tow
companies and vehicle owners.
   (5)   Tow companies shall be entitled to request a closed hearing with the
inspection officer/tow coordinator to review any fee adjustment decision. The
closed hearing request must be submitted in writing within three (3) business
days of notice of the inspection officer/tow coordinator's decision. Appeal of
the decision to adjust fees is governed by subsection
03-19-23(6) of this article.
   (6)   A tow company on the law enforcement tow rotation shall not increase
its law enforcement rates or fees during the rotation year, except as provided
in this section. Tow companies agree to provide prompt refund of any paid fees
that are determined to be excessive by the inspection officer/tow coordinator.
   (7)   Rates and fees may be reviewed and changed by the board of Canyon
County commissioners at its discretion and upon consultation with the sheriff.
Any proposed changes to rates and fees must be submitted in writing to the
Canyon County sheriff by the last day of the inspection period. Approved
changes are effective on the first day of the new rotation date. A request for
rate and fee changes may be made during the rotation year where the party
seeking the modification articulates in writing a substantial change in costs
justifying the requested revision. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015; amd. Ord. 2024-002,
6-27-2024)
03-19-29: REQUIREMENTS AND OPERATING PROCEDURES FOR EMERGENCY TOW COMPANIES:
Tow companies authorized to perform law enforcement tows must:
   (1)   Maintain twenty four (24) hour towing service, available seven (7)
days per week, with the dispatch of such service to be from base stations or an
answering service.
   (2)   Not refuse to provide a law enforcement tow more than two (2) times in
any calendar month without proof of the extenuating circumstances that gave
rise to the refusal being timely provided and approved by the inspection
officer.
   (3)   Arrive at the accident within a reasonable time after having been
notified to do so by dispatch. Such response time shall not exceed forty five
(45) minutes unless weather or other unforeseen traffic conditions require
additional time to safely arrive. To the extent the tow company is unable to
respond within forty five (45) minutes, tow company must notify dispatch of its
estimated arrival time. If tow company is unable to respond within forty five
(45) minutes dispatch will then move to the next tow company on the rotation.
   (4)   Maintain its own separate locked, lighted and secured impound lot
bordered by a chainlink, steel, concrete fence or other approved materials not
less than six feet (6') in height; provided further that said lot shall be
insured for fire, theft, and vandalism of the vehicles stored therein and
further, shall be open for business during regular business hours on all
business days.
   (5)   The inspection officer or his designee shall conduct an inventory of
all items contained in or on an impounded vehicle to be towed, on a form
provided by the Canyon County sheriff, the completion of said inventory form to
be witnessed and initialed by a tow company driver on the scene. All items
inventoried, which are not taken by law enforcement, shall remain in the
custody and control of the tow company until released to the owner. If any item
(s) is of an estimated value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, and
cannot be secured in the vehicle or in a secured area within the tow lot, the
property shall be taken to the corresponding law enforcement office and a
property invoice left in the vehicle or given to the vehicle owner, if the
owner is available, at the time the vehicle is impounded.
   (6)   When authorized by the law enforcement agency, in every instance,
deliver the wrecked or disabled vehicle to either a location of the owner's
choice or the tow company's nearest impound lot. An itemized statement of
charges shall be provided to the vehicle owner upon request.
   (7)   Report all changes in tow trucks and equipment used in the tow
company's law enforcement towing service to the inspection officer immediately,
and make all additional vehicles and equipment available for inspection by the
inspection officer. A tow truck that has not been inspected and given an
inspection sticker by the inspection officer, or an employee whose eligibility
to perform law enforcement tows has not been confirmed by the inspection
officer, is not allowed to participate in the tow truck rotation list.
   (8)   Before leaving the site of an accident, completely remove all
resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass.
   (9)   Maintain two-way communications on a twenty four (24) hour basis with
the company's tow trucks.
   (10)   Meet the following insurance requirements:
      A.    At their sole expense, tow companies shall procure and maintain in
full force and effect, insurance written by an insurance company or companies
with Best's rating(s) of A VIII or better. All insurance companies must be
authorized to do business in the state of Idaho. By requiring insurance herein,
Canyon County does not represent that coverage and/or limits are necessarily
adequate to protect the tow company and such coverage and/or limits shall not
be deemed as a limitation on the tow company's liability under the indemnities
granted to Canyon County through placement on the rotation.
      B.    Certificates of insurance evidencing the coverages required herein
shall be provided to Canyon County prior to performing any towing services for
Canyon County. All certificates must be signed by an authorized representative
of the tow company's insurance carrier. Tow companies provide Canyon County
written notice of any policies being canceled. Renewal certificates must be
provided to Canyon County within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
the renewal.
      C.    Certificates shall be mailed to:
Inspection Officer
Canyon County Sheriff's Office
Canyon County Courthouse
1115 Albany Street
Caldwell, ID 83605
      D.    Certificates must evidence the following minimum coverages:
         1.    Workers' compensation insurance meeting the statutory
requirements of the state of Idaho.
         2.    Employers' liability insurance providing limits of liability in
the following amounts:
 
Bodily injury by accident $100,000.00 each accident
Bodily injury by disease  500,000.00 policy limit
Bodily injury by disease  100,000.00 each employee
 
         3.    Garage liability insurance providing limits of liability in the
following amounts:
 
Auto only - each accident            $1,000,000.00
Other than auto only - each accident 1,000,000.00
Other than auto only - aggregate     2,000,000.00
 
The garage liability policy shall be written on a standard ISO policy form, or
an equivalent form, providing coverage for liability arising from garage
operations including premises, operations, completed operations, personal
injury, advertising injury, and liability assumed under an insured contract
(including tort liability of another assumed in a contract). Auto coverage must
show symbols 27, 28, and 29 or a separate business automobile liability policy
also must be purchased.
Alternatively, tow companies may produce a certificate of insurance evidencing
commercial general liability insurance providing limits of liability in the
following amounts:
 
General aggregate                         $2,000,000.00
Product/completed operations aggregate    2,000,000.00
Personal and advertising injury liability 1,000,000.00
Per occurrence                            1,000,000.00
Fire legal liability                      50,000.00
 
The commercial general liability ("CGL") insurance policy shall be written on
an "occurrence" form and shall cover liability arising from premises,
operations, independent contractors, products, completed operations, personal
injury, advertising injury, and liability assumed under an insured contract
(including tort liability of another assumed in a contract).
         4.    Business automobile liability insurance (required only if
symbols 27, 28, and 29 are not shown) with a limit of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) is required per each accident. Business automobile
liability insurance shall be written on a standard ISO policy form, or an
equivalent form, providing coverage for liability arising out of owned, hired,
or nonowned vehicles in connection with this agreement.
         5.    Garage keeper's liability insurance providing legal liability
coverage, including comprehensive and collision, of not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per location for customers' autos or auto
equipment while the tow company is attending, servicing, repairing, parking or
storing the customer's auto or auto equipment.
         6.    On hook/cargo insurance providing coverage for customers' autos
while being towed or transported by the tow company with limits in the
following amounts:
 
Light or medium duty truck $ 50,000.00
Heavy duty truck           100,000.00
Extra heavy duty truck     250,000.00
 
      E.    Canyon County and its elected officials, agents, employees,
successors and assigns shall be named as additional insureds under all policies
except workers' compensation and employers' liability.
   (11)   Nothing in this article shall be construed as obligating the
emergency tow company to transport a disabled or wrecked vehicle when weather
or road conditions make it impractical, impossible or dangerous to the
operator. The operator shall have discretion to determine when conditions make
it impractical, impossible or dangerous to perform towing services. (Ord. 15-
003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-31: USE AS EMERGENCY VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit operation of a tow truck
as an authorized emergency vehicle. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
03-19-33: PENALTIES:
   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed to
have violated the agreement and may be removed from the rotation under the
guidelines set forth in section
03-19-23: of this article.
   (2)   Once a tow company has been removed from the rotation it is ineligible
to participate in the rotation and must reapply during the next application
period. (Ord. 15-003, 2-27-2015)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
ARTICLE 1
COUNTY PARKS
SECTION:
04-01-01: Authorization
04-01-03: Definitions
04-01-05: Park Administration
04-01-07: Park Rules And Regulations
04-01-09: Use Of Parks
04-01-11: Prohibited Acts
04-01-13: Motorized Vehicles In The Parks
04-01-15: Camping And Campsites
04-01-17: Fees And Services
04-01-19: Special Group Permits
04-01-21: Pets
04-01-23: Livestock
04-01-25: Fires
04-01-27: Posting Notices
04-01-29: Responsibility Disclaimer
04-01-31: Violation; Penalty
04-01-01: AUTHORIZATION:
This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714, 31-828 and 63-908.
(Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-03: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the terms set below have the following meanings:
CAMPING DAY: The time period between two o'clock (2:00) P.M. of one calendar
day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following calendar day.
CAMPING UNIT: All camping equipment and related equipment carried or towed by
one car, truck, van, camper or motorhome.
DIRECTOR OF PARKS, CULTURAL AND NATURAL RESOURCES: Chief administrator of the
Canyon County department of parks, cultural and natural resources.
PARK MANAGER: The individual responsible for administering and supervising a
specific county park area.
QUIET HOURS: The time period between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of one calendar
day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following calendar day.
SPECIAL GROUP: A group of fifty (50) or more people.
WATERWAYS COMMITTEE: A three (3) member advisory committee that may be
appointed by the county commissioners to serve without compensation at the
discretion of the county commissioners. The purpose of this committee is to
make recommendations, as necessary, to the county commissioners on park
matters. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991;
Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
04-01-05: PARK ADMINISTRATION:
   (1)   Appointment Of Park Managers: The director of Canyon County department
of parks, cultural and natural resources shall appoint the park manager(s) at
their discretion.
   (2)   Enforcement: The director of Canyon County department of parks,
cultural and natural resources may designate the park manager(s) and/or
employees of the department who may be deputized as deputy sheriffs for the
purpose of enforcing state laws and county ordinances within the boundaries of
the county parks as well as the enforcement and protection of waterways and
recreation areas against damage and for the preservation of peace therein.
   (3)   Delegation Of Authority: The director of Canyon County department of
parks, cultural and natural resources may authorize any employee of the
department to exercise any power granted to or perform any duty imposed upon
the director.
   (4)   Establishment Of Rules And Regulations: The director shall, with the
advice of the waterways committee when appropriate, establish rules and
regulations for the administration of the park(s) and/or the public safety,
subject to approval of the county commissioners by resolution.
(Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016; amd. Ord. 25-014, 9-30-2025)
04-01-07: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Recommendations: The park manager and director of Canyon County
department of parks, cultural and natural resources have the authority to
recommend to the waterways committee and/or county commissioners the
establishment of those park rules and regulations which apply to the public
safety in a specific park. Such rules and regulations, when established, shall
be posted for public view and shall be consistent with the established state
laws and this article. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
   (2)   Posting: The park rules and regulations shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the park. Copies of park rules and regulations shall be
available to the public from park employees. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-
11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-09: USE OF PARKS:
   (1)   Hours: The park manager shall establish and post the hours for day use
in areas open to the general public.
   (2)   Full Capacity: The park manager(s) shall have the authority to limit
or deny access to a park area whenever it has reached its designated capacity.
Only if special arrangements for the public welfare have been made will the
manager allow the designated capacity to be exceeded. The manager's decision is
subject to final approval of the director. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-
1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (1)   Destruction Of Public Property: The destruction, injury, defacement,
removal or disturbance in or on any public building, sign, equipment, monument,
statue, marker or any other structure, or of any tree, flower, vegetation,
rock, soil or any other public property of any kind is prohibited unless in the
process of authorized construction or otherwise authorized by the park manager
in charge of a specific park. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd.
Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
   (2)   Wildlife Protection: County waterways/parks and recreation areas are
sanctuaries for wildlife of every sort, and all molesting, injuring or killing
of any wild birds or animals is strictly prohibited except as provided by the
waterways committee and/or county commissioners, the Idaho fish and game
commission and/or the federal wildlife service. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
   (3)   Disturbing The Peace:
      A.    During quiet hours, park users shall not make noise that may
disturb other park users or neighboring residents.
      B.    Amplified sound, poorly muffled vehicles or loud conduct are
prohibited at any time within the park except in designated areas or by
authority of the park manager.
   (4)   Alcoholic Beverages And Drugs: State laws in regard to alcoholic
beverages, public drunkenness and illegal use of drugs will be enforced on park
premises.
   (5)   Littering; Glass Containers Prohibited: Park users are prohibited from
leaving glass or other hazardous debris on the surface of beaches, day use
areas or campgrounds. Litter receptacles are provided for such items. No glass
drinking containers are allowed on county park grounds. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-
1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
   (6)   Firearms: No person shall discharge firearms, pellet guns, BB guns,
paintball guns, crossbows, other types of bows and arrows, or slingshots within
any area of the county park system. All firearms brought into a county park
must be unloaded except when used for legal hunting purposes, or as otherwise
authorized by the waterways committee and/or county commissioners; provided,
however, that local, state and federal law enforcement officers, while on duty,
are permitted to use firearms as may be necessary.
   (7)   Drones And Radio-Controlled Aircraft: Except when authorized by the
director of Canyon County department of parks, cultural and natural resources,
no person shall launch or land, drones or other radio-controlled aircraft in
any Canyon County park. Low-altitude operation poses safety risks, potential
property damage, wildlife harassment, and interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment of the parks. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
   (8)   Concessions And Solicitations:
      A.   No person, firm, or corporation shall operate any concession,
business, or enterprise in a county park or recreation area without a county
issued permit.
         1.   Permits are granted, with or without a hearing, in the sole
discretion of the Canyon County board of commissioners.
         2.   The duration of the permit shall not exceed four (4) months, and
before receiving a permit, the individual, firm, or corporation must sign a
nonexclusive independent contractor agreement with the county. (Ord. 15-005, 3-
13-2015; amd. Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
      B.   No person or persons or organized group will be permitted to beg,
solicit for any purpose, gamble or operate a gambling device of any nature or
to abandon any property within a park area, or to discriminate in any manner
against any person or persons because of race, color, sex or national origin.
(Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991; Ord. 16-
020, 12-12-2016; Ord. 25-014, 9-30-2025)
04-01-13: MOTORIZED VEHICLES IN THE PARKS:
   (1)   Designated Roadways: All motorized vehicles must stay on authorized,
established park roadways (except for trails and areas which are clearly
identified by park signs for off road vehicle use).
   (2)   Applicable Regulations: The drivers of all vehicles operated within
the county parks shall comply with the speed and traffic resolutions of the
county park system and all other local, state and federal regulations governing
traffic on public roads.
   (3)   Speed Limits: Speed limits may be established by resolution of the
board of county commissioners after recommendation from the director. The speed
limits shall be effective upon being posted in the affected area.
   (4)   Parking:
      A.    Parking Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle on, or own any vehicle found to be parked on or in any county park in
violation of posted or otherwise designated parking restrictions. It shall also
be unlawful for any person to park in any county park any vehicle, or to own
any vehicle found to be parked on, any area blocking an emergency exit, fire
lane, or access point to a public parking area and/or public parking space.
      B.    Violation:
         1.    Infraction: Violations of subsection (4)A of this section are
considered infractions and shall be processed by the sheriff or the sheriff's
deputies in accordance with the Idaho infraction rules and the current Idaho
infraction penalty schedule, as amended. Such infractions are punishable by
fixed penalty, which includes court costs for each offense in accordance with
the Idaho infraction rules and the current Idaho infraction penalty schedule,
as amended. The trial of an infraction shall be governed by the Idaho
infraction rules.
         2.    Failure To Pay: The failure to pay the parking infraction fixed
penalty within ten (10) days of its assessment by the court or clerk of the
court shall be considered a separate infraction offense for which a citation
may be issued and which carries a fixed penalty in accordance with the current
Idaho infraction penalty schedule, as amended, including court costs. (Ord. 83-
006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991; Ord. 91-006, 10-3-
1991, eff. 10-7-1991; Ord. 95-005, 7-10-1995, eff. 7-14-1995; Ord. 16-020, 12-
12-2016)
04-01-15: CAMPING AND CAMPSITES:
To provide a camping experience to the greatest number of people and to
facilitate the administration of the camping areas, the following limitations
are established:
   (1)   Designated Areas: Camping will be permitted only in designated areas.
Only one camping unit with a maximum of eight (8) people will be permitted in
each designated camping area. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd.
Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
   (2)   Duration Of Use: No person, party or organization shall be permitted
to camp in any county park for more than fifteen (15) days in any thirty (30)
day period. Shorter periods may be designated for any individual park by the
director of Canyon County department of parks, cultural and natural resources,
and such designation shall be posted prominently within that park. (Ord. 16-
020, 12-12-2016)
   (3)   Cleanliness: Campers shall keep their campgrounds and other use areas
clean. Garbage and other solid waste shall be placed in the garbage cans
provided.
   (4)   Liquid Waste: All liquid waste shall be held in self- contained units
or collected in watertight receptacles in compliance with state adopted
standards and dumped in sanitary facilities provided for the disposal of such
wastes.
   (5)   Unattended Campgrounds: Campers may not leave their camps unattended
for longer than one camping day, except by written permission of the park
manager or his assistants.
   (6)   Quiet Hours: During quiet hours, no generators or other motorized
equipment emitting loud sound and exhaust shall be permitted to be in
operation; provided, however, that vehicles entering and exiting the campground
are permitted.
   (7)   Additional Rigs And Vehicles: All boats, trailers, rigs and motorized
vehicles of all types must fit entirely within the campsite parking spur
provided with the assigned campsite. All second vehicles, including trailers,
boats, rigs or other motorized equipment which do not fit entirely within the
campsite parking spur must be parked outside the campground in an area
designated by the park manager. If no outside parking is available, a second
campsite must be requested.
   (8)   Camping Equipment And Personal Belongings: All camping equipment and
personal belongings of a camper must be situated and maintained within the
assigned campsite.
   (9)   Off Season: During the off season (October 1 through April 1),
campsites may be restricted to a small, manageable area. Utilities and other
park services may be restricted by weather during this time. (Ord. 83-006, 6-
30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-17: FEES AND SERVICES:
   (1)   Fees: The director, with the advice of the waterways committee when
appropriate, shall be empowered to establish camping fees and/or user fees for
the designated campgrounds and facilities in the county parks, subject to
acceptance of the county commissioners by resolution. Payment of camping and/or
user fees include the right to use the designated campground or facilities on
the day of payment. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
   (2)   Group Use: Twenty five (25) or more people wishing to reserve one
large site with access to restroom facilities may be eligible for group rates
in some parks. Groups may not exceed established park capacity. Arrangements
shall be made with the park manager. Where group members desire individual
campsites and parking spurs, regular camping fees will apply. (Ord. 83-006, 6-
30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-19: SPECIAL GROUP PERMITS:
In the public interest, for the protection of health, welfare and general well
being of park users, groups of fifty (50) persons or more must have a special
permit.
   (1)   Issuance Of Permit: Permits will be issued by the director after
arrangements have been made for proper sanitation, park population, density and
limitations, safety of persons, property and regulation of traffic. (Ord. 83-
006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
   (2)   Advance Notice Required:
      A.    One Hundred To Two Hundred Fifty: Permits for groups of one hundred
(100) to two hundred fifty (250) people may be approved by the director with
thirty (30) days' advance notice.
      B.    Two Hundred Fifty To Four Hundred: Permits for groups of two
hundred fifty (250) to four hundred (400) may be approved by the director with
forty five (45) days' advance notice.
      C.    Over Four Hundred: Groups of over four hundred (400) may be
approved by the director with sixty (60) days' advance notice. (Ord. 16-020,
12-12-2016)
04-01-21: PETS:
   (1)   Leash Required: Pets are allowed within a county park or recreation
area when confined in a vehicle or controlled on a six foot (6') leash.
   (2)   Disturbances Prohibited: No person shall allow their pet to create a
disturbance which might be bothersome to other park users.
   (3)   Use Of Beach Prohibited: No person shall permit their pets to enter or
remain on any county park beach at any time.
   (4)   Designated Areas: Areas for pets or areas excluding pets may be
designated by the park manager and such designations shall be prominently
posted on the boundaries of those areas. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-
1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-23: LIVESTOCK:
Livestock are not permitted within county parks; provided, that exceptions may
be made by the county commissioners by leasing or otherwise permitting the use
of undeveloped lands for grazing purposes. Other areas, trails and roadways may
be authorized for use by saddle or other recreation livestock when the plan of
use is approved by the commissioners. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
04-01-25: FIRES:
   (1)   Use Restricted: The use of fires shall be restricted to fire circles,
grills or other places otherwise designated by the park manager in charge.
   (2)   Extinguishment; Under Control: All fires must be kept under control at
all times and must be extinguished before checking out of the park or whenever
the site is left unattended. A violation of this provision may also constitute
a violation of Idaho Code section 31-851.
   (3)   Extreme Fire Danger: Areas may be closed to open fires during extreme
fire danger. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983; amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-
1991)
04-01-27: POSTING NOTICES:
All public notices, public announcements, advertisements or other printed
matter shall only be displayed or distributed within a county park at a special
area designated by the park manager. (Ord. 83-006, 6-30-1983, eff. 7-11-1983;
amd. Ord. 91-004, 6-24-1991)
04-01-29: RESPONSIBILITY DISCLAIMER:
The county department of parks, cultural and natural resources is not
responsible for damages to, or theft of, personal property within park
boundaries. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
04-01-31: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   (1)   Misdemeanor/Infraction: Unless otherwise provided, any person,
persons, partnership, corporation, association, society, fraternal, social or
other organized groups failing to comply with the prohibited acts of this
article is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months in
the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Provided however, that
any person, persons, partnership, corporation, association, society, fraternal,
social or other organized groups failing to pay any park user fee adopted by
the county commissioners pursuant to this article is guilty of an infraction as
defined in Idaho Code section 18-111 and subject to a civil penalty fine in the
amount of forty eight dollars ($48.00). In addition thereto, the court shall
assess costs as provided by law or rule.
   (2)   Civil Remedies: Any criminal violation or penalty imposed as a result
of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article
shall in no way limit the department of parks, cultural and natural resources
from filing a civil claim against any violator to collect damages incurred to
park areas or facilities. (Ord. 16-020, 12-12-2016)
   (3)   Authority To Remove Violator: The park employees shall have the
authority to remove from any park area any violator of rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to this article or of rules and regulations contained in
this article. No fees paid by a violator shall be returned to the violator upon
his or her removal from the park. (Ord. 02-005, 7-25-2002, eff. 8-1-2002)
ARTICLE 3
CANYON COUNTY WATERWAYS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
04-03-01: Purpose
04-03-03: Activities Prohibited On Or From Boat Launching Docks
04-03-05: Swimming And Waterskiing Prohibited In Boat Launching Areas
04-03-07: Gott's Point At Lake Lowell
04-03-09: Sunbathing Docks
04-03-11: Fishing Docks
04-03-13: Beach Areas
04-03-15: Boat Defined
04-03-17: Exceptions In Emergencies
04-03-19: Penalty
04-03-01: PURPOSE:
This article and implementing regulations are designed to regulate and control
the activities of persons involved in recreational pursuits on Lake Lowell and
all other public waterways in the unincorporated areas of Canyon County, Idaho,
to promote the health, safety, comfort, and convenience, peace and good order
of the county and the inhabitants thereof; to make certain acts unlawful; and
to provide a penalty for violation of those acts. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
04-03-03: ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED ON OR FROM BOAT LAUNCHING DOCKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish, swim, dive or ski from or to
sunbathe, sit or otherwise loiter on any boat launching docks located on Lake
Lowell or any public waterways in Canyon County, Idaho, and/or any docks
extending from shore for the purpose of boat usage in Canyon County, Idaho.
(Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
04-03-05: SWIMMING AND WATERSKIING PROHIBITED IN BOAT LAUNCHING AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or waterski within boat launching
areas located in Canyon County, Idaho. Such areas shall include all water
between the "Slow, No Wake" regulatory buoys and the shoreline, excluding any
marked areas where swimming or waterskiing is permitted. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-
1991)
04-03-07: GOTT'S POINT AT LAKE LOWELL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a boat through or within the
fishing area located at Gott's Point on Lake Lowell at a speed greater than a
"No Wake" speed. The Gott's Point fishing area shall include all water between
the "Slow, No Wake" regulatory buoys and the shoreline. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-
1991)
04-03-09: SUNBATHING DOCKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to approach or tie up to a marked
sunbathing dock with a boat in Canyon County, Idaho. It shall also be unlawful
to fish from a marked sunbathing dock with the exception of participants on
educational field trips scheduled through the Canyon County parks department.
(Ord. 15-008, 4-3-2015)
04-03-11: FISHING DOCKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to approach or tie up to a marked fishing
dock with a boat in Canyon County, Idaho. It shall also be unlawful to sunbathe
on or swim from a marked fishing dock. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
04-03-13: BEACH AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park a vehicle in or on any
beach area located in Canyon County, Idaho. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
04-03-15: BOAT DEFINED:
The term "boat" as used in this article shall be defined to mean any watercraft
or vessel which is powered by a motor or engine. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
04-03-17: EXCEPTIONS IN EMERGENCIES:
These regulations shall not apply in the case of an emergency or to law
enforcement or waterways personnel acting in accordance with their official
duties. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
04-03-19: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 91-003, 6-24-1991)
ARTICLE 5
PARKING AND CAMPING REGULATIONS ON COUNTY
OWNED OR LEASED PROPERTY
SECTION:
04-05-01: Parking
04-05-03: Camping And Overnight Parking
04-05-05: Violation
04-05-07: Removal Of Vehicles
04-05-01: PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on, or own any vehicle
found to be parked on or in any area in any Canyon County owned or leased
property in violation of posted parking restrictions. It shall also be unlawful
for any person to park any vehicle in a location that blocks an emergency exit,
fire lane, or access point to a public parking area and/or public parking
space.
(Ord. 23-010, 12-7-2023)
04-05-03: CAMPING AND OVERNIGHT PARKING:
Camping at any time, and overnight parking from eleven o’clock (11:00) p.m. to
seven o’clock (7:00) a.m., is prohibited on any Canyon County owned or leased
property except as permitted by the board, or as clearly marked at the
location. On-duty Canyon County employees may park overnight.
(Ord. 23-010, 12-7-2023)
04-05-05: VIOLATION:
Violation of this section is an infraction as defined in Idaho Code § 18-111
and subject to a fine in such amount as prescribed in Rule 9, Idaho Infraction
Rules, and as such may be amended.
(Ord. 23-010, 12-7-2023)
04-05-07: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
Any vehicle violating the provisions of this section may be towed away or
otherwise removed. The owner and/or operator shall be responsible for the
expense charged by the company for the towing and/or storage.
(Ord. 23-010, 12-7-2023)
CHAPTER 5
BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
05-01-01: Short Title
05-01-03: Authority And Purpose
05-01-05: Applicability
05-01-07: Definitions
05-01-09: License Required
05-01-11: Application
05-01-13: Qualifications
05-01-15: Investigations/Inspections; Access To Property
05-01-17: License Fees
05-01-19: Term Of License
05-01-21: Renewal Of License
05-01-23: Licensee To Report Changes
05-01-25: Hours Of Sale
05-01-27: Unincorporated Areas Of County
05-01-29: Action By State Liquor Dispensary
05-01-31: Liquor Catering Permit
05-01-33: Denial Of Application, Suspension And/Or Revocation Of License
05-01-35: Information Concerning Violations
05-01-37: Notice, Review Hearing And Approval Procedures
05-01-39: Misdemeanor Violation
05-01-01: SHORT TITLE:
This Article is entitled THE CANYON COUNTY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-03: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   (1)   This Article is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by article 12,
section 2, Idaho Constitution, and sections 31-714, 31-801, 31-828, and 23-
1015, Idaho Code.
   (2)   The purpose of this Article is to provide for, and further, the
health, safety, and welfare of the public by providing for a procedure for
issuance, transfer, renewal or revocation of licenses and/or permits for the
sale of beer, wine and liquor and for the orderly, moral and responsible
conduct of the business of selling and distributing beer, wine and liquor which
will promote and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public within
the boundaries of the County. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-05: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Article shall govern the issuance, renewal, transfer,
and/or revocation of licenses and/or permits and other matters pertaining to
licenses for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail, wine by the drink, and
retail wine license, the sale of beer, including bottled and canned beer, none
of which is to be consumed on the premises where sold, and including the
selling of beer for consumption on the premises, draught and bottled or canned
beer, or draught only and wine and liquor catering permits, as defined in this
Article. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-07: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of the Article, the words set out in this Section are defined as
follows:
APPLICANT: Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation, or any group or combination, acting as a unit, and the plural as
well as the singular number unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is
disclosed by the context.
BAR/TAVERN/LOUNGE: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for
consumption on the premises, not including restaurants as defined herein.
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt, and/or ingredients in drinkable water.
BEER RETAILER OFF-PREMISES LICENSE: A license issued by the Board of County
Commissioners authorizing a person to sell only bottled or canned beer, none of
which is consumed on the premises where sold.
BEER RETAILER ON-PREMISES LICENSE: A license issued by the Board of County
Commissioners authorizing a person to sell, for the consumption on the premises
only bottled and/or canned beer.
DRAUGHT BEER RETAILER LICENSE: A license issued by the Board of County
Commissioners authorizing a person to sell draught beer and bottled or canned
beer, or draught beer only.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor, beer, and/or wine is
prohibited under the laws of the State of Idaho.
LICENSE: A license by the Board of County Commissioners to a qualified person,
under which it shall be lawful for the licensee to engage in activities
concerning the sale and/or distribution of liquor, beer, and/or wine as the
case may be, as provided in this Article.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this
Article.
LIQUOR: An alcoholic beverage made by distillation rather than by fermentation.
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK AT RETAIL: A license issued by the Board of County
Commissioners authorizing a person to sell at retail liquor by the drink for
consumption on premises.
LIQUOR CATERING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Board of County Commissioners
authorizing a person to serve and sell (at retail) liquor by the drink at a
party or convention which is off the site of the licensed premises.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, copartnership, association or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
PREMISES: A building in which the sale of beer at retail, sale of liquor by the
drink at retail, and/or wine by the drink at retail for consumption on the
premises as is authorized under the provisions of this Article.
RESTAURANT: A premises where the principal business conducted on the premises
is the selling of food prepared on the premises for consumption on or off the
premises.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the Board of County Commissioners
authorizing a person to sell wine at retail for consumption off the licensed
premises.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the distribution of liquor, beer, or wine to
the customer for consumption by the customer upon licensed premises, or for
sale for consumption not on the premises.
WINE: An alcoholic beverage contained not more than fourteen percent (14%)
alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of
fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar.
WINE-BY-THE-DRINK LICENSE: A license issued by the Board of County
Commissioners authorizing a person to sell wine by the individual glass or
opened bottle at retail for consumption on the premises only. (Ord. 95-007, 11-
13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-09: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person without first having obtained a license
from the Board of County Commissioners under the provisions of this Article to:
   (1)   Serve and sell liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the
licensed premises.
   (2)   Serve and sell liquor at retail by the drink at a party or convention
which is off the site of the licenses premises.
   (3)   Sell bottled and/or canned beer, none of which is consumed on the
premises where sold.
   (4)   Sell bottled and/or canned beer for consumption on the premises.
   (5)   Sell draught beer and bottled or canned beer, or draught beer only.
   (6)   Sell wine at retail for consumption off the premises.
   (7)   Sell wine by the individual glass or opened bottle at retail for
consumption on the premises only.
   (8)   Otherwise distribute, possess for resale, or sell liquor, wine and/or
beer. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-1995, eff. 1-1-1996)
05-01-11: APPLICATION:
   (1)   Written Application: Prior to the issuance of a license as required in
section
05-01-09: of this article, the applicant shall file with the County Clerk an
application in writing, which application shall be on the official application
form approved by the Board of County Commissioners, signed by the applicant,
and containing such required information and statements relative to the
applicant and the premises or property, if applicable, where either liquor,
beer, and/or wine is sold.
   (2)   State License Required: Applications shall be accompanied by the
corresponding license issued by the Director of the Department of Law
Enforcement of the State for the premises and for the time which the
application is made, which license shall be returned to the applicant after
examination by the County Clerk.
   (3)   Required Information: All applications for a license shall require the
applicant to set forth the following information:
      A.    Description And Location Of Premises: A detailed description of the
premises for which a license is sought and its location.
      B.    Sworn Statement: A sworn statement by the applicant that they have
affirmatively obtained and maintained all necessary permits concerning the
business, building and property. Furthermore, that the applicant has verified
that the building and property complies with all laws, codes and ordinances
concerning building, public health, safety, and planning and zoning.
      C.    Financial Interest List: The names and addresses of all persons who
will have any financial interest in any business to be carried on, in or upon
the licensed premises, whether such interest results from open loans,
mortgages, conditional sales contracts, silent partnerships, trusts, or any
other basis other than upon trade account incurred in the ordinary course of
business and the amounts and nature of such interests including the
shareholders with names and addresses provided.
      D.    Lease: If the premises to be licensed are not owned by the
applicant, then it shall be incumbent upon the applicant to furnish a certified
copy of the lease by which applicant will occupy and possess the premises and
that the lessor has consented to the sale of beer, wine or liquor on the
premises.
      E.    Corporation/Partnership Information: The name and address of the
applicant shall include, if the applicant is a partnership, whether a general
or limited partnership and if the applicant is a corporation, the officers,
directors and principal stockholders of the corporation.
      F.    False Statement: If the applicant knowingly makes any false
statement in any part of an application, or any subsequent report, the
applicant(s) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-1995,
eff. 1-1-1996)
05-01-13: QUALIFICATIONS:
No new license or renewal or transfer of a license shall be issued to any
applicant who:
   (1)   Is not a bona fide owner or leaseholder of such business, and is not a
citizen of the United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the State
for a period of thirty (30) days prior to the date of application; provided,
that if the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens,
and at least one thereof, or the actual active manager therefor, shall have
been such resident, and if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation
shall be qualified to do business within the State, and the manager of such
business premises shall be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the
State of Idaho for a period of thirty (30) days prior to the date of
application.
   (2)   Proposes a premises for the sale of liquor, beer or wine that does not
conform to the laws and regulations of the State and to the ordinances of the
County which are applicable thereto and which relate to public health, safety,
and planning and zoning.
   (3)   Has, or any partner has, or actual manager or officer of whom has:
      A.    Been convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation,
received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment or completed any
sentence of confinement for any felony within five (5) years prior date of
making application for any license hereunder.
      B.    Been convicted of the violation of any law of the State, or of the
United States regulations, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic
beverages or intoxicating liquor, or within two (2) years forfeited or suffered
the forfeiture of a bond for their appearance to answer charges to any such
violation.
      C.    Subsequent to the effective date hereof, has been convicted of
driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other
intoxicating substances as defined in the jurisdiction in which the judgment
was entered within five (5) years prior to the date of the making of the
application for license and/or has not paid a fine, completed a sentence and/or
probation or parole for said conviction. Provided, however, an applicant shall
not be disqualified from being issued a license pursuant to this subsection (3)
if the applicant, owner, partner or officer does not have day to day, on site
management or employment at the site of the license.
      D.    Has engaged in the operation, or has interest therein, of any house
or place for the purpose of prostitution, or has engaged in the operation of
any house or premises within the limits of the County which has been declared
and found to have been a moral nuisance as defined by County ordinance or State
law.
      E.    Subsequent to the effective date hereof, been convicted in any
jurisdiction or received a withheld judgment for any crime concerning the
possession or distribution of any controlled substances.
   (4)   Has had a similar license revoked by any jurisdiction granting the
license and/or had their license revoked by the State of Idaho or the County.
   (5)   Who is under the age of nineteen (19) years.
   (6)   Proposes to license a premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages as
provided in this section where the distance from the proposed premises from
schools, churches, places of worship, residential neighborhoods, and colleges
does not comply with title 23, Idaho Code.
   (7)   Has a bar/tavern/lounge, dance hall, business or other premises where
parking lot lighting levels have not been designed, installed and maintained at
a level of at least one foot-candle which is defined as a unit measurement of
illuminance on a surface at ground level equal to one lumen per square foot and
with a 2.0 to 3.0 uniformity ratio (which is defined as a ratio of average
foot-candles to minimum foot-candles). Existing parking lot lighting may be
maintained at not less than present design levels, but shall be in compliance
with this subsection not later than April 30, 1996.
   (8)   Proposes a premises that is not in compliance with chapter 6, article
1 of this Code.
   (9)   Submits an application which contains a false material statement
knowingly made.
   (10)   Allows, permits to occur, or does not control conduct on the licensed
premises which is a moral nuisance as defined by the laws of the State and/or
the ordinances of the County.
   (11)   Allows or permits the licensed premises or surrounding property
pertaining to the licensed premises to be frequented by or fails to exclude
from the licensed premises or surrounding property pertaining to the licensed
premises intoxicated and/or disorderly persons, or persons convicted of crimes
of violence, and/or controlled substances, and/or lewd and lascivious conduct.
   (12)   Manages or operates the licensed premises and/or surrounding property
pertaining to the licensed property in such a way as to be a nuisance by reason
of the conduct of employees, patrons, or clientele of the licensed premises,
where said employees, patrons, or clientele engage in lewd, violent, or
disorderly behavior.
   (13)   By way of example "surrounding property pertaining to the licensed
premises" shall include, but not be limited to, the parking lot or area,
alleyways, or sidewalks adjacent to or near the licensed premises that are
frequented or used by the employees, patrons, or clientele of the licensed
premises or owned or controlled by the owner, operator, person or entity making
use of the licensed premises. (Ord. 19-007, 2-25-2019; amd. Ord. 20-008, 5-22-
2020)
05-01-15: INVESTIGATIONS/INSPECTIONS; ACCESS TO PROPERTY:
   (1)   Investigation; Inspection Of Premises: Upon receiving an application
for a new license, an application for license renewal, or an application for
license transfer, the Office of the Board of County Commissioners, County
Building Official, County Sheriff and Fire Marshal may investigate the
statements and representations contained in the application, may inspect the
premises where the applicant proposes to do business, and may make such other
further investigations as may be deemed proper to ascertain whether the
applicant conforms to all of the requirements of this article. All reports and
findings pertaining to said investigation shall be submitted to the Board of
County Commissioners, who shall then decide whether or not to grant or deny the
request for a license.
   (2)   Right Of Inspection/Investigation: The County Code Enforcement
Officer, the Fire Marshal, County Building Official, County Sheriff and any
other law enforcement officer or designee of said officials shall have the
right to conduct inspection of the premises of any licensee at reasonable times
for the purpose of investigating whether or not the licensee is in compliance
with this article. The above described officials shall have the right to
investigate the background and statements made in the application. Said
application shall constitute a release of information by each applicant which
permits County officials to investigate those records pertaining or relevant to
application information and requirements of this article. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-
1995, eff. 1-1-1996)
05-01-17: LICENSE FEES:
An applicant shall be charged by the County Clerk the following applicant and
license fees to be payable at the time the license is issued. These fees
pertain to the license year or any remaining portion thereof and shall not be
prorated. All license fees shall be paid to the General Fund of the County:
   (1)   Liquor By The Drink At Retail License: In accordance with Idaho Code
section 23-916, as amended, the fees assessed by the County shall be twenty
five percent (25%) of the fees listed by the State of Idaho in Idaho Code
section 23-904, as amended. The license fee for the owner, operator or lessee
of a golf course is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (2)   Liquor Catering Permit: The sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day.
   (3)   Beer Retailer, On Premises Consumption License: The sum of seventy
five dollars ($75.00).
   (4)   Beer Retailer, Off Premises License: The sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00).
   (5)   Draught Beer Retailer License: The sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   (6)   Wine By The Drink License: The sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (7)   Wine Retailer License: The sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (8)   Transfer Fee: The sum of five dollars ($5.00) for beer or wine
licenses and ten dollars ($10.00) for liquor licenses.
   (9)   Refund: In the event the Board of County Commissioners should reject
any application or transfer and a timely appeal of the decision of the
Commissioners is not filed, following the time period for which an appeal may
be filed, the Board of County Commissioners shall refund the amount of the
license fee which was submitted with the application to the applicant. (Ord.
95-007, 11-13-1995, eff. 1-1-1996)
05-01-19: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall run from June 1
to May 31 (the license year). All such licenses shall expire at eleven fifty
nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on May 31. (Ord. 03-012, 12-4-2003, eff. 12-10-2003)
05-01-21: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
An application for license renewal shall be submitted to the County Clerk on a
renewal application form provided by the Office of the Board of County
Commissioners. The renewal application shall include any changes, modifications
or alterations to the nature or operational characteristics of the business.
Failure to provide a complete and accurate application will result in rejection
of the application. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-1995, eff. 1-1-1996)
05-01-23: LICENSEE TO REPORT CHANGES:
If during the period of any license issued under this Article, any changes
occur in licensee's circumstances relating to the licensee's qualifications or
any other requirements to hold a license, the licensee shall forthwith file a
verified written report of such changes with the County Clerk. Failure to
report any of the aforementioned changes may result in suspension or revocation
of the licensee's license. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-25: HOURS OF SALE:
   (1)   Liquor: No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon
any licensed premises, and all liquor not sealed in bottles must be located in
a separate room or cabinet during the following hours:
      A.    Sunday, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day from one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day; provided,
however, that on any Sunday not otherwise being a prescribed holiday, it shall
be lawful for a licensee having a banquet area or a meeting room facilities
separate and apart from the usual dispensing area (bar room), and separate and
apart from normal public dining room (unless such dining room is closed to the
public), to therein dispense liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to bona fide participants of banquets,
receptions or conventions for consumption only within the confines of such
banquet area or meeting room facility.
      B.    On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M.
      C.    On any day of general or primary election until after the time when
the polls are closed.
   (2)   Any patron present on the licensed premises after the sale of liquor
has stopped as provided in the immediately above subsections (1)A through C,
shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to consume any
beverages already served.
   (3)   Any person who consumes or intentionally permits the consumption of
any liquor upon a licensed premises after the times provided for in the above
subsections (1)A through (1)C shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (4)   Beer/Wine: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person in
any place licensed to sell beer and/or wine, or where beer and/or wine is sold
to be consumed on the premises, to sell or permit to be consumed on the
premises, beer and/or wine as the same is defined by law, between the following
hours:
      A.    Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. Sunday and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Monday.
      B.    On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M.
   (5)   Any patron present on the licensed premises after the sale of beer has
stopped as provided in subsection (4) of this Section shall have a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to consume any beverage already
served.
   (6)   Any person who consumes or intentionally permits consumption of beer
and/or wine upon a licensed premise after the time provided for in subsection
(4) of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95,
eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-27: UNINCORPORATED AREAS OF COUNTY:
Except as provided by State law in title 23, chapter 9 of the Idaho Code, no
license for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail shall be issued for
locations in the unincorporated areas of the County. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95,
eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-29: ACTION BY STATE LIQUOR DISPENSARY:
Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit the State Liquor Dispensary
from acting pursuant to the Idaho Liquor Act contained at title 23 of the Idaho
Code. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-31: LIQUOR CATERING PERMIT:
   (1)   Eligibility; Term; Application: Any person holding a County liquor
license may serve and sell liquor at retail by the drink at a party or
convention, but said license shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days upon
obtaining a liquor catering permit. Applications for such permit shall be made
to the County Clerk upon the form prescribed by the Director of Law Enforcement
for the State, which shall contain the following information:
      A.    The name and address of the applicant and the number of the
applicant's State liquor license and the applicant's County liquor license.
      B.    The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not
to exceed three (3) consecutive days.
      C.    The names of the organizations, groups or persons sponsoring the
event.
      D.    The address at which the liquor is to be served in, and if a public
building, the rooms in which the liquor is to be served.
   (2)   Verification; Fee: The application shall be verified by the applicant
and filed with the County Clerk. A filing fee in the amount of twenty dollars
($20.00) for each day the permit is to be effective shall be paid to the County
Clerk which shall not be refunded in any event. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-
1-96)
05-01-33: DENIAL OF APPLICATION, SUSPENSION, AND/OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   (1)   The Board of County Commissioners shall:
      A.    Deny an application of any applicant who does not meet the
qualifications of Section
05-01-13: of this Article, unless the applicant has a license that is subject
to a term of suspension and the term of the suspension has not been completed,
in which case a license may be issued subject to the suspension and the
applicant complying with the qualifications of Section
05-01-13: within the same period of suspension.
      B.    Revoke the license of any licensee who does not meet the
qualifications to hold a license as set forth in subsections 05-01-13(1), (2),
(4) or (9) and/or denies access for inspection or investigation conducted
pursuant to subsection
05-01-15(2) of this Article.
   (2)   The Commissioners, at their discretion, may:
      A.    Revoke the license of any licensee who violates or is unable to
meet any of the requirements or regulations contained in this Article with the
exception of the mandatory revocation stated above in this Section.
      B.    Suspend the license at any time, during the period for which a
license is issued, wherein the licensee violates or is unable to meet any of
the qualifications, requirements or regulations contained in this Article. In
the event the licensee is able to come into compliance with this Article, then
the suspension shall be terminated. No suspension can be for a period greater
than one hundred eighty (180) days. In the event the licensee does not come
into compliance within the period of the suspension, the license shall be
immediately revoked by the terms of the suspension.
      C.    If the Commissioners determine to suspend a license, the affected
licensee may petition the Commissioners once per license year prior to the
effective date of the suspension requesting that a monetary payment be allowed
in lieu of the license suspension. If the Commissioners determine such payment
to be consistent with the purpose of the laws for the State and the ordinances
of the County and in the public interest, the Commissioners shall establish a
monetary payment in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
The licensee may reject the payment amount determined by the Commissioners and
instead be subject to the suspension. Upon payment of the amount established,
the Clerk shall cancel the suspension period. The Commissioners shall cause any
payment to be paid to the general fund of the County. This monetary payment
applies only to the current license year. If a suspension is ordered in any
subsequent license year, the licensee must file another application pursuant to
this subsection to be considered for a monetary payment in lieu of the
suspension.
      D.    The decision to revoke or suspend a license pursuant to the
immediately above subsections A through C is solely within the discretion of
the Board of County Commissioners. Nothing in these subsections require that
the Board of County Commissioners impose any lesser sanction prior to revoking
a license issued pursuant to this Article. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-35: INFORMATION CONCERNING VIOLATIONS:
Whenever information is submitted to, or shall come to the attention of any
official, department head, elected official, law enforcement officer, or
employee of the County, that a licensee has committed a violation of this
Article rendering their license subject to suspension and/or revocation, the
official, department head, elected official, law enforcement officer, or County
employee shall report such information to the Board of County Commissioners, in
writing. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
05-01-37: NOTICE, REVIEW HEARING AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Denial Of Application; Notice: In the event the Board of County
Commissioners shall deny an application, the Board must send notice of their
decision to the applicant within ten (10) days of receipt of the application.
Said notice shall comply with the requirements set forth in subsection (5)
below. Notice of approval of an application must also be sent within ten (10)
days of receipt of the application.
   (2)   Suspension, Revocation Or Refusal To Renew: In the event that it
appears to the Board of County Commissioners that there are grounds for
suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew a license or permit, then the Board
shall propose to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license or permit. The
Board shall send notice of the proposed action and effective date to the
pertinent party in accordance with subsection (5) below.
   (3)   Review Hearing; Request For Review: An applicant, licensee or
permittee may request a review hearing with the Board of County Commissioners
on the Board's denial of an application or proposed suspension, revocation or
refusal to renew a license or permit. A written request for a review hearing
must be filed with the Board of County Commissioners within ten (10) days of
the date notice of the Board's decision or proposed action was mailed to the
affected party. No pleadings shall be required and all such review hearings
shall be informal.
   (4)   Appeals: Final decisions of the Board of County Commissioners may be
appealed pursuant to title 23, chapter 10 and title 67, chapter 52 of the Idaho
Code.
   (5)   Notice: Notices sent by the Board under this Article shall contain the
following:
      A.    The statute, ordinances and/or standards used to evaluate the
matter.
      B.    Specify the reasons for the decision or proposed action.
      C.    The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the
license, permit, transfer or renewal.
      D.    The applicant may file a written request with the Board of County
Commissioners for a review hearing on the Board's denial or proposed action.
Said request must be filed within ten (10) days from the date notice was mailed
from the Board to the pertinent party. No pleading shall be necessary and any
hearing before the Board will be informal.
      E.    Final decisions of the Board of County Commissioners may be
appealed pursuant to title 23, chapter 10, and/or title 67, chapter 52 of the
Idaho Code.
      F.    After any review hearing, the Board shall send written notice of
their decision to the applicant, licensee, or permittee within twenty (20) days
after the conclusion of the hearing. Said notice shall contain the information
mentioned in subsections A, B, C and E above. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-
96)
05-01-39: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Sale or distribution of beer, wine, liquor, or other alcoholic beverages in
violation of the terms of this Article shall be a misdemeanor. All misdemeanor
violations of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with Idaho Code
section 18-113, as amended. (Ord. 95-007, 11-13-95, eff. 1-1-96)
ARTICLE 3
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION:
05-03-01: Short Title; Purpose
05-03-03: Definitions
05-03-05: License Required
05-03-07: Application For License
05-03-09: Nonexclusive License
05-03-11: Terms Of License
05-03-13: License Fee And Inspection Of Records
05-03-15: Operational Standards
05-03-17: Conditions On Easements And Public Rights Of Way Occupancy And Use
05-03-19: Licensee Liability; Indemnification
05-03-21: Limitations Of License
05-03-23: Local Office Complaints
05-03-25: Compliance With Applicable Laws And Ordinances
05-03-27: Prohibited Acts Or Conditions
05-03-29: Penalties
05-03-31: Procedure On Violations
05-03-01: SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE:
   (1)   Short Title: This article shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY CABLE
TELEVISION LICENSING ORDINANCE.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of this article shall be to regulate the
installation and operation of a community antenna television system within the
unincorporated portions of Canyon County, Idaho. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-1991)
05-03-03: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Where not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory. All words and phrases
not otherwise defined herein shall have their ordinary and customary meaning.
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS: The Canyon County board of county commissioners.
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM (hereinafter referred to as CATV, CATV
SYSTEM or SYSTEM): A system of antennas, coaxial cables, waveguides or other
conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the
purpose of providing television, FM radio or other services by cable through
its facilities as herein contemplated.
COUNTY: The county of Canyon, Idaho.
EASEMENT: A grant of right to use a strip of land for specific purposes,
including public utility easements granted for facilities providing service to
and used by the public.
LICENSE AREA: The area within Canyon County outside the corporate limits of any
municipal corporation within Canyon County.
LICENSEE: A grantee of rights under these licensing regulations.
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: Any alley, dedication, or street, as those terms are
defined pursuant to the Canyon County subdivision ordinance 1 , as amended.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of
the licensee herein. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7, article 17 of this code.
05-03-05: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of operating a CATV system without
having obtained a license for such purpose from the board of county
commissioners. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-1991)
05-03-07: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license to engage in the business of operating a CATV system
shall be made by the person or their duly designated agent by filing an
application with the clerk of the board of county commissioners. Such
application shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the applicant, and should the applicant be a
corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors of said
corporation.
   (2)   If the applicant be a corporation, the applicant shall file with the
clerk of the board of county commissioners its annual report of its operations
during the preceding fiscal year. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-09: NONEXCLUSIVE LICENSE:
The right to use and occupy the easements and public ways for the purposes
herein set forth shall not be exclusive, and the board of county commissioners
reserves the right to grant similar rights, privileges and licenses to any
other person. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-11: TERMS OF LICENSE:
The license and rights herein granted shall be in force and effect for a term
of three (3) years from the effective date of the license. The license shall be
automatically renewed by the continued payment of the license fee below, unless
written notice is given by the board of county commissioners within ninety (90)
days of the expiration of the term of license. In such event, the licensee
shall have the opportunity to appear before the board of county commissioners
and present its reasons for renewal of the license. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-13: LICENSE FEE AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
   (1)   The licensee shall pay to the county an amount equal to five percent
(5%) of the gross income from subscribers residing within the license area
during the previous calendar year. Such payment for the previous calendar year
shall be made to the Canyon County auditor on or after January 1, but no later
than March 1 of each year.
   (2)   A licensee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the
board of county commissioners or Canyon County auditor to inspect, examine and
transcribe any and all records kept and maintained by the licensee regarding
gross income from subscribers within the license area in order to verify the
license fee tendered. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-15: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
The licensee shall maintain and operate the system and render efficient service
in accordance with such rules and regulations as are, or may hereinafter be,
promulgated by the federal communications commission. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-17: CONDITIONS ON EASEMENTS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY OCCUPANCY AND USE:
   (1)   Use: All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the licensee within the licensed area shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of public rights of ways and
easements and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights of ways
or easements and not to interfere with existing public utility installations.
In all areas of the licensed area where the cables, wires or other like
facilities of both electrical and telephone utilities are placed underground,
licensee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to
the maximum extent existing technology reasonably permits.
   (2)   Restoration: In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway, other surfacing or landscaping of said rights of way or easements,
licensee shall, at its own expense, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk,
driveway, other surfacing or landscaping of any public rights of way or
easements.
   (3)   Tree Trimming: Licensee shall have authority to trim any trees upon
and overhanging the public rights of way and easements so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with wire and cables of the
licensee.
   (4)   Notice: Before entering upon any property for any of the reasons
stated in this section, the licensee shall first give written notice to the
property owners at least forty eight (48) hours in advance. (Ord. 91-007, 10-
10-91)
05-03-19: LICENSEE LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION:
The licensee shall at all times protect and hold harmless the county from all
claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damages of every kind and
description resulting from the construction, installation, operation or
maintenance by the licensee of its CATV system within the licensed area. The
licensee shall, concurrently with the filing of an application for license,
file with the clerk of the board of county commissioners and at all times
thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of said license or
renewal thereof, at licensee's sole expense, a general comprehensive liability
insurance policy and a certificate of insurance for that policy showing the
county as an additional insured on that policy in protection of the county, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company authorized to
do business in the state of Idaho and in a form satisfactory to the prosecuting
attorney, protecting the county, its officers and employees against liability
for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage occasioned by
the operations of licensee under said license in a minimum amount:
   (1)   Two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damages
to any one person.
   (2)   Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage in any
one occurrence.
   (3)   Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury to any
one person.
   (4)   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury in any one
occurrence. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-21: LIMITATIONS OF LICENSE:
This license shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original
licensee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or
disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, without the consent of the board of county
commissioners expressed by resolution. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-23: LOCAL OFFICE COMPLAINTS:
The licensee shall maintain a local business office or agent which the
inhabitants of the licensed area may telephone during regular business hours
without incurring added message or toll charges for any complaint regarding the
installation of the CATV system, the quality of service, equipment malfunction
or similar matters. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-25: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
Licensee shall at all times during the term of this license be subject to all
lawful exercise of applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and statutes by the
federal, local or state government or any political subdivision within the
county. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-27: PROHIBITED ACTS OR CONDITIONS:
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to construct, install or maintain within any easement or public right of
way within the license area any equipment or facilities for distribution of any
television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a license
authorizing such use has first been obtained and unless such license is in full
force and effect. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any licensee, its
agents, servants or subcontractors to violate any provision of this article.
Should a violation of this article be committed by an agent, servant or
subcontractor of the licensee, prosecution of such violations may be commenced,
pursuant to section
05-03-31: of this article, against the licensee or against the agent, servant
or subcontractor, or against both. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
05-03-29: PENALTIES:
Each violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation
continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided in
section
01-01-07: of this code. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91; 1996 Code)
05-03-31: PROCEDURE ON VIOLATIONS:
   (1)   Upon knowledge by the board of county commissioners of any violation
or belief that a violation is about to occur, the board of county commissioners
may request that the Canyon County persecuting attorney commence action,
criminal or civil, to correct the violation and to punish the same.
   (2)   In the event any action is taken or any construction commenced in
violation of the provisions of this article, the proper authorities of the
county, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent such unlawful action or construction, to restrain,
correct or abate such violation or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises. (Ord. 91-007, 10-10-91)
ARTICLE 5
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS/OPERATORS
SECTION:
05-05-01: Title
05-05-03: Authority And Purpose
05-05-05: Definitions
05-05-07: License Required; Fee
05-05-09: Fixed Place Of Business Required
05-05-11: Duty To Record Transactions
05-05-13: Daily Reports
05-05-15: Duties Upon Notification Property Reported Stolen
05-05-17: Property As Evidence
05-05-19: Retention Of Property; Inspection
05-05-21: Pawnbrokers, Sale Of Pledged Property
05-05-23: Prohibited Acts; Penalty
05-05-25: Civil Enforcement
05-05-01: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS/OPERATORS
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-03: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   (1)   Authority: This Article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714,
31-801 and 31-828 and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution.
   (2)   Purpose: This Article is intended to regulate pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers and secondhand operators and to aid the Sheriff and law
enforcement in the identification and the recovery of stolen property. (Ord.
95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-05: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this Section
apply throughout this Article as set out below:
COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho.
MELTED METALS: Metals derived from metal junk or precious metals that have been
reduced to a melted state from other than ore or ingots which are produced from
ore that has not previously been processed.
METAL JUNK: Any metal that has previously been milled, shaped, stamped, or
forged and that is no longer useful in its original form, except precious
metals.
NONMETAL JUNK: Any nonmetal, commonly discarded item that is worn out, or has
outlasted its usefulness as intended in its original form except nonmetal junk
does not include an item made in a former period which has enhanced value
because of its age.
PAWNBROKER: Every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of
loaning money on the security of pledges, of personal property, or deposits, or
conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal
property.
PRECIOUS METALS: Gold, silver, and platinum.
PERSON: Includes any natural person, individual, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Every person engaged in whole or in part in the business of
purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring
for value, secondhand personal property, including metal junk, melted metals,
precious metals. Secondhand dealer also includes persons or entities conducting
business at flea markets or swap meets, more than three (3) times per year.
Secondhand dealer does not include a person who deals in new property and takes
trade-ins. Secondhand dealer does not include a person who sells or consignment
sells secondhand property through or under a space occupying arrangement with a
person who possesses a current and unrevoked County secondhand dealer's
license.
SECONDHAND OPERATOR: A secondhand dealer's license is not required for those
secondhand dealers described in the above definition of secondhand dealer who
act as a secondhand dealer and who operate their secondhand property business
through or under a space occupying arrangement with a person who possesses a
current and unrevoked County secondhand dealer's license. Those persons
operating under another person's secondhand dealer's license as described above
shall be known as secondhand operators. Secondhand operators must comply with
all the requirements of this Article imposed on secondhand dealers or
pawnbrokers, except for Sections
05-05-07,
05-05-09,
05-05-19 and
05-05-21 of this Article. A secondhand operator shall make a clear and exact
copy of those records required by Section
05-05-11. Those record copies shall at the end of each business day be turned
over by the secondhand operator to the secondhand dealer under whose license
the secondhand operator is conducting his business. The secondhand dealer shall
make such record copies obtained from the secondhand operators available to the
Sheriff in the manner described by Section
05-05-13. The secondhand dealer may have his secondhand dealer's license
revoked for the failure of the secondhand dealer and/or secondhand operator to
comply with the provisions contained in this definition.
SECONDHAND PROPERTY: Any item of personal property offered for sale which is
not new, including metals in any form, except postage stamps, coins that are
legal tender, bullion in the form of fabricated hallmarked bars, used books,
and clothing of a resale value of seventy five dollars ($75.00) or less.
Secondhand property shall include furs of any value.
SHERIFF: Canyon County Sheriff and includes Canyon County Deputy Sheriffs.
TRANSACTION: A pledge, or the purchase of, or consignment of, or the trade of
any item of personal property by a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand
operator from a member of the general public. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-07: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   (1)   Annual License; Fee:
      A.    License Required: No person shall do business in the County as a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer without first obtaining a license annually from
the County and paying the below license processing fee.
      B.    License Fee; License Tax: The annual license processing fee for
each pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
This fee is necessary to defray the costs for the investigation of the
applicant and the processing of the application. This annual license processing
fee for a pawnbroker's license is in addition to the license tax imposed on
pawnbrokers by Idaho Code section 63-2303 as amended.
      C.    Term Of License: The license shall expire at the end of one year
from the date of the issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended.
      D.    Investigation: The Sheriff shall cause an investigation to be made
of the applicant.
      E.    Grounds For Denial: Conviction of a felony involving moral
turpitude within the five (5) years prior to the application may be grounds for
denial of a license.
      F.    Prior License/Permit Denied, Revoked Or Suspended: No license shall
be issued if the applicant has had a County pawnbroker/secondhand dealer's
business license or other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or
suspended by the County or State or any other State or local agency within
three (3) years prior to the date of the application.
      G.    Application: All applications for pawnbroker and secondhand dealer
licenses shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners.
All applications shall be presented to the Board of County Commissioners for
approval.
      H.    Age Of Applicant: No license shall be issued to any person who is
not eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   (2)   Denial Of License: Whenever the Board of County Commissioners denies
an application, the Board shall specify in writing:
      A.    The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      B.    The reasons for denial; and
      C.    The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license.
   (3)   Appeal: A person whose application is denied may appeal the denial
decision to the Board of County Commissioners by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the Board of County Commissioners' signed denial decision.
Failure to timely appeal the denial decision will be a waiver of the right to
appeal that denial decision. A timely filed appeal shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedural rules established by the Administrative
Procedure Act of Idaho.
   (4)   Revocation: Failure to meet or maintain any of the requirements of
this Article is cause for revocation of an issued license which revocation
shall occur in accordance with the procedural rules established by the
Administrative Procedure Act of Idaho. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-09: FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS REQUIRED:
No person may operate as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer unless the person
maintains a fixed place of business within Canyon County or the State. (Ord.
95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-11: DUTY TO RECORD TRANSACTIONS:
   (1)   Maintenance Of Permanent Record: It shall be the duty of every
pawnbroker and secondhand dealer doing business in the County to maintain in
his place of business a book or other permanent record in which shall be
legibly written in the English language, at the time of each transaction, a
record thereof containing:
      A.    The signature of the person with whom the transaction is made;
      B.    The date of transaction;
      C.    The name of the person or employee or the identification number of
the person or employee conducting the transaction;
      D.    The name, date of birth, sex, height, weight, race, address and
telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;
      E.    A complete description of the property pledged, bought, or
consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number by name, any
initials, or engravings, size, pattern, and color of stone or stones, and in
the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, type of action, and whether
it is a pistol, rifle, or shotgun;
      F.    The price paid or the amount loaned;
      G.    The type and identifying number of identification used by the
person with whom the transaction was made, which shall consist of a valid
driver's license or identification card issued by any state, or two (2) pieces
of identification issued by a governmental agency, one of which shall be the
description of the person identified. At all times, one piece of current
government issued picture identification will be required;
      H.    The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the
transaction, the store identification as designated by the County Sheriff, or
the name and address of the business and the name of the person or employee
conducting the transaction, and the location of the property; and
      I.    The street and house number of the place from which the property
bought or received in pledge was last removed.
   (2)   Inspection Of Record: Such record of all goods received shall be open
to the inspection of the Sheriff during business hours. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-13: DAILY REPORTS:
   (1)   Transmittal To Sheriff: Upon request, every pawnbroker and secondhand
dealer doing business in the State shall furnish to the Sheriff, a full, true
and correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted on the
preceding date. These transactions shall be recorded on such forms as may be
provided in such format as may be required by the Sheriff within a specified
time not less than twenty four (24) hours. This information may be transmitted
to the Sheriff by mailing; electronically, by facsimile transmission; or by
modem or similar device; or by delivery of computer disks subject to the
requirements of, and approval by, the Sheriff.
   (2)   Suspect Property: If a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer has good cause
to believe that any property in his or her possession has been previously lost
or stolen, the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall promptly report that fact
to the Sheriff, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date
when and the name of the person from whom it was received. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-
95)
05-05-15: DUTIES UPON NOTIFICATION PROPERTY REPORTED STOLEN:
   (1)   Notification; Identifying Tag: Following notification from the Sheriff
that an item of property has been reported as stolen, the pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer shall hold that property intact and safe from alteration,
damage or commingling. The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall place an
identifying tag or other suitable identification upon the property so held.
   (2)   Release: Property held shall not be released for one hundred twenty
(120) days from the date of Sheriff notification unless released by written
consent of the Sheriff or by written order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (3)   Verbal Hold: In cases where the Sheriff has placed a verbal hold on an
item, he must then give written notice to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer
within ten (10) business days of making the verbal hold. If such written notice
is not received within that period of time by the pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer, then the hold order will cease.
   (4)   Expiration Notice: The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall give a
twenty (20) day written notice to the Sheriff about the stolen property before
the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day holding period. If notice is
not given within twenty (20) days by the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to the
Sheriff, then the hold on the property shall continue for an additional one
hundred twenty (120) days. The Sheriff may renew the holding period for
additional one hundred twenty (120) day periods as necessary.
   (5)   Renewal Notice: After the receipt of notification from a pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer, if an additional holding period is required, the Sheriff
shall give the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer written notice, prior to the
expiration of the existing hold order.
   (6)   Effect Of Provisions: The provisions set forth in this Section
supersede any other provisions of this Article.
   (7)   Removal Of Hold: The Sheriff shall not place on hold any item of
personal property unless the Sheriff reasonably suspects that the item of
personal property is a lost or stolen item. Any hold that is placed on an item
will be removed as soon as practicable after the item on hold is determined by
the Sheriff not to be stolen or lost. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-17: PROPERTY AS EVIDENCE:
   (1)   Production For Court/Sheriff: Whenever property that is in the
possession of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer is subject to a hold and the
property is required by the Sheriff in a criminal investigation, the pawnbroker
or secondhand dealer upon reasonable notice, shall produce the property at
reasonable times and places for the Sheriff or a court of competent
jurisdiction or may deliver the property to the Sheriff upon the request of the
Sheriff placing the hold on the property.
   (2)   Sheriff's Receipt: Whenever any property is taken from a pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer which is alleged to be stolen property, the Sheriff shall
give the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer a receipt for the property which shall
contain a description of the property, the reason for seizure and the names of
the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer and the Sheriff.
   (3)   Property In Custody Of Sheriff: Property, alleged to be stolen or
embezzled, coming into the custody of the Sheriff shall be held by the Sheriff
subject to the order of the magistrate as provided by Idaho Code sections 19-
3801 through 19-3807, as amended. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-19: RETENTION OF PROPERTY; INSPECTION:
   (1)   Pawnbroker: Property bought or received by any pawnbroker shall not be
removed from that place of business except when redeemed by, or returned to,
the owner within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the property. The
property shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business of the
pawnbroker be open to inspection by the Sheriff.
   (2)   Secondhand Dealer: Property bought or received on consignment by any
secondhand dealer shall not be removed from the place of business, except
consigned property returned to the owner, within thirty (30) days after the
receipt of the property. Property shall at all times during the ordinary hours
of business of the secondhand dealer be open to inspection by the Sheriff.
   (3)   Secondhand Operator: Property bought or received on consignment by any
secondhand operator shall be held within the County, except consigned property
returned to the owner, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the property.
The property shall be available within the County for inspection at reasonable
times by the Sheriff. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-21: PAWNBROKERS, SALE OF PLEDGED PROPERTY:
   (1)   Sale Of Pledged Property: A pawnbroker shall not sell any property
received in pledge until both the term of the loan and a grace period of thirty
(30) days has expired.
   (2)   Written Documents Required For Transactions: Every transaction entered
into by a pawnbroker shall be evidenced by a written document, a copy of which
shall be furnished to the pledgor. The document shall set forth the term of the
loan, the date on which the loan is due and payable, and shall inform the
pledgor of the pledgor's right to redeem the pledge within thirty (30) days
after the expiration of the loan term. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-23: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTY:
   (1)   Misdemeanor: It is a misdemeanor for:
      A.    Any person to knowingly make, cause or allow to be made any false
entry or misstatement of any material matter in any book, record or writing
required to be kept under this Article;
      B.    Any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand operator to receive
any property from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any person
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs; or
      C.    Any person to violate knowingly any other provision of this
Article.
   (2)   Criminal Penalty: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fail to
comply with any of the provisions of this Article which shall be punishable as
provided for in Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended, in the Magistrate
Division of the District Court of the Third Judicial District of the State of
Idaho, in and for the County of Canyon. Each day an offense continues shall be
considered a separately punishable offense. All court proceedings shall be
processed and adjudicated in accordance with the Idaho Misdemeanor Criminal
Rules. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
05-05-25: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement may be by referral from the Board of County Commissioners to the
Prosecuting Attorney for the prosecution of civil enforcement proceedings in
the appropriate court. (Ord. 95-004, 7-3-95)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
06-01-01: Title
06-01-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
06-01-05: Saving Clause
06-01-07: Definitions
06-01-09: Building Permit Required; Exceptions
06-01-11: Adoption Of Codes
06-01-13: Amendments To The Nationally Recognized Codes
06-01-15: Enforcement
06-01-17: Penalty
06-01-19: Severability
06-01-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known and cited as CANYON COUNTY BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 15-004, 3-13-2015)
06-01-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the Board of County Commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to provide, by adopting
different codes' references from the International Code Council, nationally
recognized codes, governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings, and structures for Canyon County, Idaho; by providing the standards
for supplied facilities, and other physical things and conditions which adopted
provisions and standards will promote structures that are safe, sanitary, and
fit for occupancy and use and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees thereof.
   (3)   Authority: This article is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred
by Idaho Constitution, article 12, section 2; and Idaho Code 39-4116. (Ord. 18-
001, 1-2-2018)
06-01-05: SAVING CLAUSE:
Any actions, civil, criminal, or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this article, may be pursued as if Canyon County Building
Code Ordinance 07-016 had not been repealed. (Ord. 15-004, 3-13-2015)
06-01-07: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this article shall be given their ordinary,
commonly understood and accepted meanings unless otherwise noted. The following
terms shall have the following meanings in the interpretation and construction
of this article:
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: A structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products on
Agriculturally zoned land which Agriculturally zoned land shall consist of at
least a single parcel of land of more than five (5) acres in size, exclusive of
any public right-of-way. This structure shall not be a place of human
habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed,
treated, packaged or sold, nor shall it be a place used by the public.
Notwithstanding this definition, the Director or Director's designee has the
discretion to determine that an agricultural building, proposed to be located
on Agriculturally zoned land of less acreage than provided herein, qualifies
for inclusion in this definition.
CCFHAR: The Canyon County flood hazard areas regulations which are found in
chapter 7, article 10A, "Flood Hazard Overlay Zone", of this Code, as amended.
CONTRACTOR:
   (1)   Any person who in any capacity undertakes, offers to undertake,
purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to, or does
himself or by or through others, perform construction; or
   (2)   A construction manager who performs construction management services.
COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho.
DIRECTOR: Director of County's Development Services Department. (Ord. 18-004,
1-29-2018)
06-01-09: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   (1)   Building Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, move, remove, convert or demolish
any building or structure unless a separate permit for each building or
structure has first been obtained from the County Development Services
Department.
   (2)   Mobile/Manufactured And Modular Home Exception: Setup and installation
of mobile, manufactured and modular homes shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation manual or if manual is not available then the most
current Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standard published by the State of
Idaho, Division of Building Safety, manufactured housing section.
   (3)   Miscellaneous Exceptions: It is not the purpose of this article to
require that permits be obtained or fees paid for repairs and maintenance which
do not violate the intent of the nationally recognized codes (the International
Building Code, International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, International Energy Conservation Code, International Mechanical
Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Existing Building Code), as
adopted by this article, when such repair or maintenance is accomplished on a
single-family residence or accessory building thereto. Items designated as
follows, in or appurtenant to single-family residences and which do not
encroach over subsurface disposal systems or into required yards, are exempt
from permits and fees established by this article. The exempt items are:
Cabinetwork;
Concrete slabs;
Driveways, sidewalks and masonry repair;
Floor or ceiling covering;
Gutters or downspouts;
Nonbearing partitions and walls;
Painting;
Shelving;
Items as determined by the Director or the Director's designee such as,
ornamental windmills, flagpoles or other similar fixtures.
   (4)   Agricultural Building Exception: This article does not apply to an
"agricultural building" as defined in section
06-01-07: of this article. Even though any person wishing to construct an
agricultural building is not required to obtain a building permit, any person
wishing to construct an agricultural building must apply for and obtain a
zoning compliance/permit before any construction begins on the property,
pursuant to Idaho Code section 39-4116(5). The purpose of the zoning
compliance/permit is to assure that the location of the proposed agricultural
building will not obstruct any fire district turnaround required for an
inhabited building as mandated by the County zoning ordinance, as amended, and
the location of an agricultural building is in compliance with the following
list of requirements, including, but not limited to: road setbacks, section
line and quarter section line setbacks, and utility easements, imposed by the
County zoning ordinance, as amended, and the flood hazard areas regulations
required by the CCFHAR.
   (5)   Contractor Registration: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 54-5204 no
building permit will be issued without a current Idaho contractor registration
number unless exempt pursuant to Idaho Code sections 54-5205 and 54-5209.
   (6)   Required Approvals: Where applicable, a Health Department and/or the
local Fire Protection District(s) approval shall be furnished in writing as a
condition precedent to receiving a building permit. (Ord. 18-004, 1-29-2018)
06-01-11: ADOPTION OF CODES:
The following editions of the International Code Council codes, except as
herein amended by the State of Idaho Building Code Board pursuant to Idaho Code
sections 39-4109 and 39-4116, or herein provided in this article are hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein, and shall
apply in the unincorporated areas of the County and supersede any earlier Code
adoption ordinance. This article includes rules and regulations governing all
building activity, including erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, height and
area of buildings or structures. It shall be unlawful to engage in any building
activity without complying with the rules and regulations contained in this
article and the codes adopted herein.
The following nationally recognized codes and other State regulations are
adopted as amended:
   (1)   International Building Code, 2018 edition, to also include:
Appendix C, "Group U Agricultural Buildings";
Appendix E, "Supplementary Accessibility Requirements";
Appendix J, "Grading".
   (2)   International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018
edition, to also include:
Appendix G, "Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs";
Appendix H, "Patio Covers";
Appendix J, "Existing Buildings and Structures";
Appendix M, "Home Day Care - R3 Occupancy";
Appendix R, “Tiny Homes”.
   (3)   International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition.
   (4)   International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition.
   (5)   International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition.
   (6)   International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition.
   (7)   The most current Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standard
published by the State of Idaho, Division of Building Safety, manufactured
housing section. (Ord. 18-001, 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 12-002, 1-7-2021)
06-01-13: AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED CODES:
The nationally recognized codes as adopted above, are hereby changed, altered,
deleted and amended as follows:
   (1)   International Building Code, 2018 edition: The following sections are
hereby amended:
      A.    Section R101.1 insert: Canyon County.
      B.    Section 105 Permits: "105.2 Work Exempt From Permit" will amend and
add to list under "Building":
         14.    Ornamental windmills, flagpoles or other similar fixtures as
determined by the director or the director's designee.
         15.    Agricultural building as defined in chapter 6, article 1 of the
Canyon County code of ordinances.
      C.    Section 105 Permits: "105.3 Application For Permit" will be amended
to read as follows:
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file and complete a zoning
compliance permit as required by Canyon County code of ordinances, subsection
07-12-01(1), as amended.
      D.    Section 109 Fees: "109.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees" shall be amended
to provide that building permit, zoning compliance/permit, inspection, plan
review, certificate of occupancy, and appeal fees shall be approved and adopted
by resolution of the board of county commissioners.
      E.    Section 113 Board Of Appeals: The addition of a new section 113.3.1
Appeal Board Membership: The board of county commissioners will appoint a three
(3) person board of appeals, to stand as needed, with membership to be selected
from but not limited to the following list of professionals in the various
fields of expertise in the building industry:
         The city of Caldwell, Idaho building official or their designee;
         The city of Nampa, Idaho building official or their designee;
         The Caldwell, Idaho rural fire district fire chief or their designee;
         The Nampa, Idaho rural fire district fire chief or their designee;
         The Middleton, Idaho rural fire district chief or their designee;
         The president of the Snake River Valley Building Contractors
Association or their designee;
         A licensed Idaho architect;
         A licensed Idaho structural engineer.
      F.    Section 114 Violations: "114.4 Violations Penalties" shall be
amended to reference section
06-01-17: of the Canyon County code of ordinances.
      G.    Section "502.1 Address Identification" shall be amended to read as
follows:
The addressing of each commercial, industrial and public building must be
approved by the county and the governing fire district. The requirements of
Canyon County code of ordinances, chapter 6, article 5 (uniform street name and
addressing ordinance) must be met, except that the approved address numbers for
commercial, industrial and public buildings shall be a minimum of ten (10)
inches in height. Named private lanes shall be on a sign of a design approved
by the board of county commissioners and installed at the entrance at a
publicly maintained road on a breakaway type pole.
      H.    Section 1612.3 insert: Canyon County.
      I.    Section 1612.3 insert: 1993.
   (2)   International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012
edition: The following section(s) are hereby amended:
      A.    Section R101.1 insert: Canyon County.
      B.    Section R105 Permits: "R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit" will add to
list under Building:
         • 11. Cabinet work or shelving.
         • 12. Gutters and down spouts.
      C.    Section R105 Permits: "R105.3 Application For Permit" will be
amended to read as follows:
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file and complete a zoning
compliance permit as required by Canyon County code of ordinances, section
07-12-01(1), as amended.
      D.    Section R108 Fees: "108.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees" shall be amended
to provide that building permit, zoning compliance/permit, inspection, plan
review, certificate of occupancy and appeal fees shall be approved and adopted
by resolution of the board of county commissioners.
      E.    Section R112 Board Of Appeals: The addition of a new section
R112.3.1 Appeal Board Membership: The board of county commissioners will
appoint a three (3) person board of appeals, to stand as needed, with
membership to be selected from but not limited to the following list of
professionals in the various fields of expertise in the building industry:
         • The city of Caldwell, Idaho building official or their designee;
         • The city of Nampa, Idaho building official or their designee;
         • The Caldwell, Idaho rural fire district fire chief or their
designee;
         • The Nampa, Idaho rural fire district fire chief or their designee;
         • The Middleton, Idaho rural fire district chief or their designee;
         • The president of the Snake River Valley Building Contractors
Association or their designee;
         • A licensed Idaho architect;
         • A licensed Idaho structural engineer.
      F.    Section R113 "R113.4 Violation Penalties" shall be amended to
reference section
06-01-17: of the Canyon County code of ordinances.
      G.    Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria: Section R301.2, "Climatic
And Geographic Design Criteria", table R301.2(1) shall be changed to read as
follows:
   TABLE R301.2(1)1,2
   CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
Ground Wind Design        Seismic  Subject To Damage From      Winter Ice Barrier           Air      Mean
Snow   Speedd Topographic Design               Frost           Design Underlayment Flood    Freezing Annual
Load   (mph)  EffectsK    Category Weatheringa Line   Termitec Tempe  Requiredh    Hazardsg Indexi   Tempj
                          f                    Depthb
                                                      Slight
25 psf 90     No          B        Severe      24"    to       10°F  Yes          CCFHAR   980      51°F
                                                      moderate
 
1.    For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 mile per hour = 1.609
km/h.
2.    Language explaining the letters a. through k., inclusively, found in the
above table, is included with the table in the international residential code
and is incorporated by reference as if fully rewritten herein.
      H.   Section "R319.1 Site Address" shall be amended to read as:
         •   1. Named private lanes shall be on a sign of a design approved by
the board of county commissioners and installed at the entrance at a publicly
maintained road on a breakaway type pole.
         •   2. Approved address numbers a minimum of six (6) inches in height
and in a contrasting color shall be placed on all new buildings in such a
position as to be clearly visible and legible from the street or road fronting
the property.
         •   3. When a building is set back from the public way on a private
lane and/or the address is not visible from the street or road fronting the
property, in addition to the building address number required by this section,
there must also be placed on a post adjacent to the private lane an address
number that shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height and in a
contrasting color to the post.
         •   4. During any construction properties will be posted in such a
position as to be clearly visible and legible from the street or road fronting
the property.
   (3)   International Energy Conservation Code,  2018  edition: The following
section(s) are hereby amended:
      A.   Section C101.1 insert: Canyon County.
      B.   Section R101.1 insert: Canyon County.
   (4)   International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition: The following section(s)
are hereby amended:
      A.   Section 101.1 insert: Canyon County.
      B.   Section 106 Permits: "106.5.2 Fee Schedule" shall be amended to
provide that building permit, zoning compliance/permit, inspection, plan
review; and building permit related fees shall be approved and adopted by
resolution of the board of county commissioners.
      C.   Section 108 Violations: "108.4 Violation Penalties" shall be amended
to reference section
06-01-17: of the Canyon County code of ordinances.
      D.   Section 109 Means Of Appeal: "109.2 Membership Of Board" shall be
amended to read as:
         The board of county commissioners will appoint a three (3) person
board of appeals to stand as needed.
      E.   Section 109.2.2 Alternate Members; section 109.2.3 Chairman; section
109.2.4 Disqualification Of Members; section 109.2.5 Secretary; section 109.2.6
Compensation Of Members; are deleted.
      F.   Section 903 Factory Built Fireplaces: The addition of a new section
903.5  "Provisions For Mitigating Indoor Air Pollutants Emitted By Unvented Gas
Fireplaces".
         Unvented gas fireplaces shall not be permitted without the
installation of a supplemental whole-house ventilation strategy, which will
serve to provide a non-passive outside air source to the living space during
the time of fireplace operation. Such a strategy may be provided through the
installation of an approved air-to-air heat exchanger, or an engineered
ventilation system designed to mitigate those combustion byproducts emitted by
the unvented gas burning appliance.
   (5)    International Fuel Gas Code,  2018  edition: The following section(s)
are hereby amended:
      A.   Section 101.1 insert: Canyon County.
      B.   Section 106 Permits: "106.5.2 Fee Schedule" shall be amended to
provide that building permit, zoning compliance/permit, inspection, plan
review; appeal and building permit related fees shall be approved and adopted
by resolution of the board of county commissioners.
      C.   Section 108 Violations: "108.4 Violation Penalties" shall be amended
to reference section
06-01-17: of the Canyon County code of ordinances.
      D.   Section 109 Means Of Appeal: "109.2 Membership Of Board" shall be
amended to read as: The board of county commissioners will appoint a three (3)
person board of appeals to stand as needed.
      E.   Section 109.2.2 Alternate Members; section 109.2.3 Chairman; section
109.2.4 Disqualification Of Members; section 109.2.5 Secretary; section 109.2.6
Compensation Of Members; are deleted.
   (6)   International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition: The following
section(s) are hereby amended:
      A.   Section 101.1 insert: Canyon County.
      B.   Delete the following exception under Section 101.2 Scope: Exception:
Detached one- and two-family dwellings and single-family dwellings (townhouses)
not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means
of egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories above
grade plane in height, shall comply with this code or the International
Residential Code. (Ord. 18-001, 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 21-002, 1-7-2021)
06-01-15: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the preceding
sections, or any part or provision, of this chapter. Upon conviction violations
shall be punishable according to section
01-01-07 of the County's Ordinance, General Penalty. Criminal enforcement shall
not foreclose use of other remedies in this chapter. It shall be the duty of
the building official and his designated agent(s) to enforce the provisions of
this article in all places within unincorporated County.(Ord. 15-004, 3-13-
2015; amd. Ord. 21-030, 10-14-2021)
06-01-17: PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this article which shall be punishable as provided for in Idaho
Code 18-113, as amended, in the Magistrate Division of the District Court of
the 3rd Judicial District of the State of Idaho, in and for the County of
Canyon. Each day an offense continues shall be considered a separately
punishable offense. All court proceedings shall be processed and adjudicated in
accordance with the Idaho Misdemeanor Criminal Rules. (Ord. 15-004, 3-13-2015)
06-01-19: SEVERABILITY:
Should any action or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
article as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 15-004, 3-13-2015)
ARTICLE 3
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
06-03-01: Purpose
06-03-03: Definitions
06-03-05: Historic Preservation Commission
06-03-01: PURPOSE:
This authority and "Historic Preservation Ordinance" are adopted pursuant to
the authority granted by title 67, chapter 46 of the Idaho Code, as amended or
subsequently modified. The purpose of this article is to promote the
educational, economic and general welfare of the public of Canyon County
through the identification, evaluation, designation, and protection of those
buildings, sites, areas, structures, and objects which reflect significant
elements of the county's, the state's, and the nation's historic,
architectural, archaeological and cultural heritage. (Ord. 91-001, 1-3-91)
06-03-03: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the County of Canyon.
COUNTY: County of Canyon, Idaho.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state, its
communities or the nation.
06-03-05: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   (1)   Creation; Membership: There is hereby created a historic preservation
commission which shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10)
members which shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Qualification Of Commission Members: All members of the commission
shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in history or
historic preservation. The board of county commissioners shall endeavor to
appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or experience in
the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, urban
planning, archaeology, engineering, law or other historic preservation related
disciplines.
   (3)   Terms Of Office; Vacancies: Initial appointments to the commission
shall be made as follows: One (1) one-year term, two (2) two-year terms; two
(2) three-year terms. All subsequent appointments shall be made for three-year
terms. Commission members may be reappointed to serve additional terms.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, and the
appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (4)   Reimbursement For Expenses: The members of the commission may be
reimbursed by the county for expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
   (5)   Organization, Officers, Rules, Meetings:
      A.    The commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are
necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this article. Rules
of procedures and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be available for
public inspection.
      B.    The commission shall elect officers from among the commission
members. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the commission. The vice
chairman shall, in the absence of the chairman, perform the duties of the
chairman.
      C.    All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, and
follow the requirements of Idaho's open meetings laws 1 . The commission shall
keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions,
proceedings, and actions.
      D.    The commission may recommend to the board of county commissioners
within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the contracting with
other parities for the services of technical experts or other persons as it
deems necessary to carry on the functions of the commission.
   (6)   Powers, Duties And Responsibilities: The commission shall be advisory
to the board of commissioners, the department of parks and recreation, and
other Canyon County departments, boards and commission, requesting their input.
The commission shall be authorized to:
      A.    Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
      B.    Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest or
donation.
      C.    Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
county.
      D.    Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of
historic properties subject to rights or public access and other covenants and
in a manner that will preserve the property.
      E.    Contract, with the approval of the board of county commissioners,
with the state or federal government, or any agency of either, or with any
other organization.
      F.    Cooperate with the federal, state, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
      G.    Make recommendation in the planning processes undertaken by the
county, the state, or the federal government and the agencies of these
entities.
      H.    Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purpose of historic preservation in the county.
      I.    Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic preservation and historic properties in the county.
      J.    Commission members, employees, or agents of the commission may
enter private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of its
official duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
      K.    Review nominations of properties to the national register of
historic places for properties within the county's jurisdiction. (Ord. 91-001,
1-3-1991; amd. Ord. 91-002, 4-5-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 74-201 et seq.
ARTICLE 5
ADDRESSING
SECTION:
06-05-01: Title
06-05-03: Definitions
06-05-05: General Provisions
06-05-07: Applicability
06-05-09: Director
06-05-11: Required Approvals
06-05-13: Street Names
06-05-15: Street Signs
06-05-17: Addresses
06-05-19: Display Of Road Address Numbers
06-05-21: Enforcement
06-05-23: Variances And Appeals
06-05-01: TITLE:
These regulations shall be known and cited as the CANYON COUNTY ADDRESSING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-03: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms mean:
DIRECTOR: The Canyon County development services director or his/her designee.
DISTRICT: Canyon County highway district numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4.
DRIVEWAY: A means of providing vehicular access from either a street or private
roadway to a residential dwelling.
OFFICIAL STREET NAME LIST: The list containing the official street names within
the unincorporated area of Canyon County composed of all street names approved
and maintained by the county. The list should also contain the official street
names for incorporated areas within Canyon County.
PRIVATE ROAD: A privately owned and maintained access road providing vehicular
and pedestrian access to more than two (2) permanent residences.
STREET/ROAD: A right of way providing vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties and includes the terms street, drive, court, circle,
private street, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or any other such terms.
STREET/ROAD DESIGNATION: One of the following labels attached to the name of a
street: avenue, boulevard, court, drive, lane, place, road, street or way.
(Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-05: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (1)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-714
and 31-828 and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to promote the public health,
safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of the
county and the inhabitants thereof and to provide for:
      A.    The coordination of street names and a numbering grid system;
      B.    Coordination of addresses for the quick efficient delivery of
emergency services;
      C.    The administration and enforcement of this article by defining the
powers and duties of the director.
   (3)   Fee(s): A fee is required to process a request for change of a public
or private road name, an appeal of any decision by the director for a variance.
Such fee(s) are established by board resolution.
   (4)   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      A.    Erect or install a street name sign that has not been approved
according to this Code;
      B.    Remove, alter, change or deface a street name sign erected or
installed as provided herein;
      C.    Place, post or assign addresses not approved or assigned by the
Director;
      D.    Refuse to post addresses that have been approved or assigned. (Ord.
11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-07: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all lands within the unincorporated area of Canyon
County subject to the following exceptions:
   (1)   The unincorporated area addressed by the City of Nampa described as
follows:
      A.    All land that lies within the current City of Nampa impact area as
approved by the Board. (Ord. 17-014, 9-8-2017)
06-05-09: DIRECTOR:
   (1)   Appointment: The Board appoints the Director of Canyon County
Development Services to carry out the provisions as herein specified.
   (2)   Duties:
      A.    The Director shall compile and maintain an official street name
list.
      B.    All street names shall be approved by the Director within the
unincorporated area of the County designated for addressing by the County.
      C.    All address numbers shall be assigned by the Director within the
unincorporated area designated for County addressing. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-11: REQUIRED APPROVALS:
Approval shall be obtained from the Director, according to provisions and
requirements of this chapter for:
   (1)   The right to use a street or private road name, its accompanying
street designation and right to install a sign for a street.
   (2)   An address number for a residence, business, industry, structure or
property including site addresses.
   (3)   Proposed street and private road names for:
      A.    New subdivisions.
      B.    Proposed new private roads.
      C.    New streets or realignment of old streets by districts or ITD.
(Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-13: STREET NAMES:
The naming or renaming of streets or private roads in the County shall be
subject to the following standards:
   (1)   There shall be no duplication of street names by sound or spelling
within Canyon County including within the incorporated areas.
   (2)   Differentiation of street names shall not be by the addition of a
street designation such as road, street, avenue, lane, etc.
      A.    No street designations shall be used other than the one that is
approved by the County.
   (3)   Where the proposed street is on the alignment and continuation of the
existing street, or where the street is on the same alignment but not linked to
an existing street, the name of the existing street shall be applied; provided,
there are not natural barriers such as lake, river, interstate, highway, etc.,
in which case the name may be changed. This standard shall apply to public and
private roads.
      A.    A proposed street or private road shall be considered in general
alignment with an existing street or private road, if the centerline of the
proposed street or private road is no farther than one hundred feet (100') from
centerline of an existing street or private road.
      B.    Where a proposed street or private road connects or aligns with two
(2) differently named streets, the director shall decide the name to be used,
giving consideration to the length, road classifications, and number of
residents affected.
      C.    A proposed street or private road which aligns with an existing
street or private road should carry the correct street designation even though
the existing street designation may be incorrect.
   (4)   If a street makes a very obvious change in direction, a new street
name may be assigned.
   (5)   Both portions of an "L" shaped street shall carry the same name if
either leg is one hundred feet (100') or less in length; all others shall carry
two (2) names.
   (6)   A cul-de-sac that has an overall length of more than one hundred feet
(100') (as measured from the centerline of the principal street to the point of
radius) shall carry a new name, and must be named in accordance with the
provisions herein.
      A.    A cul-de-sac that has an overall length of one hundred feet (100')
or less shall carry the same name and the same designation as the street from
which it emerges.
   (7)   Street names for a proposed subdivision shall be shown on the
preliminary plat and approved prior to the filing of the final plat in
accordance with the provisions of this article and:
      A.    No plats shall be approved until all provisions of this article
have been complied with;
      B.    Applicants shall erect street name signs at their own expense, in
accordance with the county standards.
   (8)   All new road/street designations shall adhere to the following:
      A.    Avenue: A north-south street generally running in a straight line.
      B.    Boulevard: A major roadway that may meander or run in any
direction. The use of these terms must be approved by the director.
      C.    Circle or loop: Short streets which return to themselves or begin
and end in the same street.
      D.    Court: An east-west cul-de-sac.
      E.    Lane: A private road.
      F.    Place: A north-south cul-de-sac.
      G.    Drive: A street generally meandering in an east-west direction.
      H.    Road: A designated street which extends through urban and rural
areas.
      I.    Street: May run generally in an east-west direction.
      J.    Way: A street generally meandering in a north-south direction.
   (9)   No streets and/or private roads should begin with the prefix north,
south, east or west and shall not be used as a differentiation between new
street names.
   (10)   In determining street names along Base Line Road: When a north-south
running street exists along Base Line Road, that portion of roadway south of
Base Line Road shall carry the suffix "South" after its proper designation when
there is a continuation of that roadway north of Base Line Road. This may
include renaming existing roadways that do not meet this standard.
   (11)   Changing an existing street or private road name requires a public
hearing by the board and an affirmative action by the board before any name
change shall take effect. All property owners having frontage on the affected
street or private road shall be notified by mail of the public hearing at least
thirty (30) days before the hearing.
   (12)   Where there is an existing unnamed street providing access to more
than two (2) permanent residences and it is determined by the director that
such creates erroneous, ambiguous and/or confusing circumstances or when
additional residences are added to such a street the director may assign a new
road name and addresses. This provision shall apply to public and private
roadways.
   (13)   Words that are difficult to spell or pronounce are generally
prohibited. The director may reject a street name if the street name is found
to be vulgar, rude or offensive. A street name shall not contain punctuation.
If the parties who have the legal right to utilize the road cannot agree on a
name, development services department will take suggestions from all parties
and make the final decision and approval. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011; amd. Ord.
21-019, 8-3-2021)
06-05-15: STREET SIGNS:
   (1)   All street signs including signs for renamed streets shall be located
and designed in accordance to county standards and conform to the "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
      A.    Private road signs shall also conform to highway district standards
and the MUTCD in location and design including that private road signs shall
have a reflective blue background.
   (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant, developer or entities
using the street to install the required signs in each of the required
locations.
      A.    Private road signs are to be maintained in good condition by the
property owners, homeowners' associations or entities who utilize the private
road.
      B.    Public street signs will be maintained at the expense of Canyon
County highway district numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-17: ADDRESSES:
   (1)   Addresses will consist of a street number and road name. All street
numbers shall conform to the county grid system. The general standards used in
the street address grid system are as follows:
      A.    There shall be one thousand (1,000) numbers per mile;
      B.    North and south numbers shall begin with zero at the Base Line Road
near Melba;
      C.    West numbers begin at the Boise meridian in Ada County and number
west from that meridian. The first mile in Canyon County, McDermott Road, will
be the four thousand (4,000) mile.
   (2)   The owner and/or occupants of every dwelling and business shall place
or install or allow to be placed or installed in a position visible from the
street, address numbers as hereinafter directed. The general requirements for
addressing are as follows:
      A.    Only one number shall be assigned to each business use or dwelling
unit;
      B.    All addresses shall be assigned based on the location of the
structure in relation to the street it fronts;
      C.    All addresses located on the north and east sides of the streets
shall be even numbers; all addresses located on the south and west sides of the
streets shall be odd numbers. These requirements may be varied in the case of
winding streets or circles. When a street has been determined to be running in
predominately one direction, the numbering may continue as determined by the
director.
   (3)   Corner properties shall be addressed off of the street which the
primary structure fronts.
   (4)   Apartments, campuses, strip malls, and other such developments may
only have one address number assigned depending on the design and layout of the
development; with additional building or suite numbers assigned within the
development.
   (5)   Manufactured housing or mobile homes shall be assigned individual
street addresses according to the requirements herein, whether they are located
on individual lots or in developed parks.
   (6)   An existing street address may be renumbered by the director when it
is confusing or hinders emergency personnel in locating the given address.
Address numbers, including renumbered addresses, shall be maintained at the
expense of the owner(s).
   (7)   As used in this section, "front" shall mean to have primary access,
for a building or other principal use, from an abutting public or private
street. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011; amd. Ord. 21-019, 8-3-2021)
06-05-19: DISPLAY OF ROAD ADDRESS NUMBERS:
   (1)   Approved residential address numbers a minimum of six inches (6") in
height and in a contrasting color shall be placed on all new buildings in such
a position as to be clearly visible and legible from the street or road
fronting the property.
   (2)   Commercial, industrial, and public building addresses must be approved
by the county. Approved address numbers for commercial, industrial and public
buildings shall be a minimum of ten inches (10") in height and shall be placed
on all buildings in such a position as to be clearly visible and legible from
the street or road fronting the property and the placement of address numbers
shall be approved by the local fire department.
   (3)   When a building is set back from the public way on a private lane and/
or the address is not visible from the street or road fronting the property, in
addition to the building address number required by this section, there must
also be placed on a post adjacent to the private lane an address number that
shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height and shall be reflective.
   (4)   During any construction properties will be posted in such a position
as to be clearly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the
property. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011)
06-05-21: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the preceding
sections, or any part or provision, of this chapter. Upon conviction,
violations shall be punishable according to section
01-01-07 of the County's Ordinance, General Penalty. Criminal enforcement shall
not foreclose use of other remedies in this chapter. (Ord. 11-008, 5-23-2011;
amd. Ord. 21-030, 10-14-2021)
06-05-23: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   (1)   Appeals: Any person(s), firm, or corporation may appeal a decision of
the director. Such an appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of
the director's decision being appealed.
      A.    A notice of appeal shall be submitted to development services in
writing together with the filing fee.
      B.    The applicant must state the reasons why the director's decision
should be overturned and the burden of proof is on the applicant to show that
approval will not cause an adverse effect to the health, safety and welfare of
the community. In granting an appeal the board may impose any necessary
conditions.
      C.    Appeals shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the
procedures outlined in chapter 7, article 5 of this code.
   (2)   Variances: The standards and requirements of these regulations may be
modified or varied by the board if public interest is still served and when the
enforcement of the rules will result in extraordinary hardship for those
affected.
      A.    An applicant for such a variance must state the extraordinary
hardship caused by the regulations and prove said approval will not cause an
adverse effect to the public health, safety and welfare of the community. In
granting any variance or modification, the board may impose any conditions
necessary, in order to secure substantial compliance with the general
principles of this chapter.
      B.    Variance application shall be submitted and processed in accordance
with the procedures outlined in chapter 7, article 8 of this code. (Ord. 11-
008, 5-23-2011)
ARTICLE 7
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 05-002, 1-19-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7, article 10A of this Code.
ARTICLE 9
UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
06-09-01: Definitions
06-09-03: Building Permit
06-09-05: Penalty
06-09-01: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS: The board of county commissioners of Canyon
County, Idaho.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy.
BUILDING PERMIT: A building permit that is issued and authenticated by the
signature of the planning and zoning administrator.
MOBILE HOME: Any unit used for living, sleeping or business purposes that is
fabricated off-site, mounted on wheels and axles or which otherwise is capable
of being moved from one place to another without the use of regular house-
moving equipment.
PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The officer or other designated authority
charged by the board of county commissioners with the administration and
enforcement of all of Canyon County land use ordinances or his duly authorized
representative.
SERVICE: Providing, attaching or hooking up to any building, mobile home or
other structure, any line or pipe, which line or pipe is intended to provide
any of the following services: telephone, gas, electricity, water or sewage
disposal.
SITE: A plot of ground set aside for the use of placing a building, mobile home
or structure upon that plot of ground.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
UTILITY: Any public or private corporation or company which supplies the public
or a group of individuals with the following commodities, services or both:
telephone, gas, electricity, water or sewage disposal. (Ord. 79-006, 6-26-79)
06-09-03: BUILDING PERMIT:
   (1)   Required: It shall be unlawful for a utility to provide any service to
any building, building site, mobile home, mobile home site, structure or
structure site outside of the limits of any incorporated city in Canyon County
until such utility has been furnished with a copy of a duly issued building
permit for that building, building site, mobile home, mobile home site,
structure or structure site.
   (2)   Issuance Of Copies: When a building permit is duly issued pursuant to
the Canyon County zoning regulations 1  or the Canyon County building
regulations 2 , the issuer shall furnish to the successful applicant copies in
an amount sufficient for the applicant to furnish all utilities with a copy.
(Ord. 79-006, 6-26-79)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 7 of this Code.
2 2. See Article 1 of this Chapter.
06-09-05: PENALTY:
Each violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment
not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 79-
006, 6-26-79)
ARTICLE 11
FALLOUT PROTECTION FACILITIES
SECTION:
06-11-01: Purpose
06-11-03: Required Facilities
06-11-03: Exemptions
06-11-01: PURPOSE:
It shall be the declared policy of the board of county commissioners of the
County of Canyon that fallout shelter be incorporated in all public buildings
of the County of Canyon to the fullest extent practicable, in order to provide
protection against radiation for the greatest number of people in the event of
nuclear attack. (Ord. 70-001, 12-29-69, eff. 12-29-69)
06-11-03: REQUIRED FACILITIES:
Every officer, board, department, commission or commissions of the County of
Canyon, charged with the duty of preparing specifications or awarding or
entering into contacts for the design, erection or construction of buildings or
other structures, including major additions to existing structures, for the
County of Canyon, State of Idaho, shall incorporate or cause to be incorporated
into such buildings, or other structures, fallout protection for at least its
normal anticipated population which shall meet or exceed the minimum space and
fallout protection criteria recommended by the office of civil defense, United
States department of defense, unless exempted from such shelter requirements in
accordance with section
06-11-05: of this article. (Ord. 70-001, 12-29-69, eff. 12-29-69)
06-11-05: EXEMPTIONS:
The board of county commissioners may exempt any officer, board, department
commission, or commissions from the requirements of section
06-11-03: above and may exempt any building, structure or additions thereto
from said requirements by means of a letter signed by the chairman of the board
of county commissioners, wherein they find that such incorporation of fallout
shelter will create an additional net cost in the construction of such
structure in excess of one percent (1%) of the estimated cost thereof without a
shelter so incorporated, or that other factors as they may determine in their
discretion make unnecessary or impracticable a fallout shelter in such building
or structures. (Ord. 70-001, 12-29-69, eff. 12-29-69)
CHAPTER 7
ZONING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
07-01-01: Title
07-01-03: Authority
07-01-05: Applicability
07-01-07: Amending Effect
07-01-09: Interpretation
07-01-11: Combining Applications
07-01-13: Business Licenses
07-01-15: Neighborhood Meetings
07-01-17: Purpose And Authority Of Chapter
07-01-19: Provisions For Official Zoning Maps
07-01-21: Disincorporation
07-01-23: Errors In Legal Descriptions
07-01-25: References
07-01-01: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-
006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-03: AUTHORITY:
This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65
and title 50, chapter 13; and sections 31-801 and 31-828; and article 12,
section 2 of the Idaho constitution. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-05: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to the development and use of all land within the
unincorporated area of Canyon County, Idaho.
   (1)   No person shall construct, alter, move, or change the use of a
structure or commence any development or use, unless otherwise preempted by
federal, state, or local law, unless:
      A.    The proposed use, structure, or division of property complies with
this chapter.
      B.    Any approval required by this chapter is first obtained and any
applicable conditions of approval are met.
   (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need for obtaining any
other required permits, including, but not limited to, permits required by the
Canyon County building code or any permit, approval, or entitlement required by
other ordinances contained in this code, other political subdivisions of the
state of Idaho, the state of Idaho, or the federal government.
   (3)   The prosecution of violations that occurred under previous land use/
subdivision flood hazard areas regulations, and that remain a violation under
this chapter, shall continue until resolved. This includes any pending
enforcement action whether it be administrative, civil or criminal.
   (4)   All applications shall be processed according to the regulations and
requirements in effect on the date the director accepted the application. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-07: AMENDING EFFECT:
The enactment of this chapter amends Canyon County zoning ordinance 12-006,
subsections 07-10-21(1)A4(C), (1)A5, (1)B3(C) and (1)B4 of this chapter. (Ord.
12-008, 4-19-2012)
07-01-09: INTERPRETATION:
   (1)   Language:
      A.    Terminology: When used in this chapter, all words used in the
present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall
include the plural number and the plural the singular, unless the natural
construction of the sentence indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. The masculine includes the
feminine. All words shall be given their plain and ordinary meaning, unless the
natural construction of the sentence dictates otherwise.
      B.    Number Of Days: Computation of time shall be as provided by Idaho
rule of civil procedure 6(a).
      C.    Minimum Requirements: When interpreting and applying the
regulations of this chapter, all regulations shall be considered to be minimum
requirements, unless stated otherwise. Proposed uses shall comply with all
applicable regulations and standards unless specifically exempted elsewhere in
this chapter.
      D.    Section Headings: Section headings or captions are for reference
purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter.
      E.    References: All references to state or federal laws, rules and/or
regulations, or county laws and/or regulations and/or maps shall refer to such
laws and/or regulations as they may be amended over time.
   (2)   Measurements:
      A.    Linear distance shall be measured in a horizontal line; it shall
not be measured along an inclined surface or line. For uses that have a
separation standard, the distance shall be measured from the nearest point of
the proposed use to the nearest property line of the specified use. The
measurement is to be conducted in a radial fashion by the specified number of
feet (e.g., 300 feet, 1,000 feet).
      B.    Structure height shall be measured as the vertical distance from
the average contact ground level at the front wall of a building to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. (Ord. 15-009, 4-23-
2015)
   (3)   Zoning District Boundaries: The following rules shall be used to
resolve uncertainties:
      A.    Where a zoning district boundary approximately follows a property
line, such property line shall be construed as the zoning district boundary
except when the property line is changed subsequent to zoning approval.
      B.    Where a zoning district boundary approximately follows a road or
railroad line, such road, railroad line, or the extension of such line, shall
be construed as the district boundary. Where a road is officially vacated and
that road has not been given a zoning designation, the land that was formerly
in the vacated road shall have the same designation as the abutting property on
either side of the centerline of the vacated road.
      C.    Where a zoning district boundary approximately follows a
watercourse, the centerline of the watercourse shall be construed to be such
boundary. In the event of a change in the watercourse, the centerline shall be
construed as moving with the actual watercourse.
   (4)   Conflicting Regulations: If conflicts occur between different
regulations of this chapter, or between this chapter and other regulations of
this code, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
      A.    In case of conflict between the zoning ordinance text and the
official zoning district-boundary maps of this chapter, the maps shall prevail.
      B.    Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
structures or premises or upon the height of structures, or requires larger
space than is imposed or required by ordinances, rules or regulations, or by
easements, covenants, or agreements, the regulations of this chapter shall also
govern. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-11: COMBINING APPLICATIONS:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6522, the board or commission may combine
related applications for the convenience of applicants. If combined
applications are authorized, DSD shall establish forms and procedures to
combine related applications for the convenience of applicants. Fees for
combined permits shall be established through a board resolution as provided in
article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-13: BUSINESS LICENSES:
Notwithstanding an applicant's fulfillment of all requirements established in
this chapter, all existing and future businesses, located within the
unincorporated areas of Canyon County, including home occupations, shall obtain
and maintain all business licenses required by any federal, state or local
laws. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-15: NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS:
   (1)   Applicants shall conduct a neighborhood meeting for any proposed
variance, conditional use, zoning ordinance map amendment, expansion, or
extension of nonconforming uses requiring a public hearing.
   (2)   It shall be the sole duty of the applicant to provide written notice
to all property owners or purchasers of record owning property within six
hundred feet (600') of the exterior boundary of the property subject to the
application. Notice of a neighborhood meeting shall be in addition to, and not
combined with, notices already required by this chapter, and shall include the
date, time, location and purpose of the meeting.
   (3)   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting shall be to review the
proposed project and discuss neighborhood concerns, if any.
      A.   The meeting shall not be on a holiday, a holiday weekend, or the day
before a holiday or holiday weekend.
      B.   The meeting shall be held at one of the following locations:
         1.   On the property subject to the application;
         2.   At a nearby available public meeting place including, but not
limited to, a fire station, library, school, or community center; or
         3.   At a location with suitable meeting facilities if such facilities
are within a one mile radius of the nearest public meeting place.
   (4)   The neighborhood meeting shall be conducted prior to acceptance of the
application. The neighborhood meeting shall not be conducted earlier than six
(6) months prior to the acceptance of the application, and shall be held no
sooner than ten (10) calendar days from the mailing of the notice of the
neighborhood meeting.
   (5)   Each application for a public hearing shall include a form acceptable
to the director, which requires the applicant to provide the starting and
ending times of the neighborhood meeting and an attendance list, with names and
addresses of those who attended the neighborhood meeting. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-
2010)
07-01-17: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY OF CHAPTER:
   (1)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish specific zones
within Canyon County and define the allowed, permitted and similar/accessory
uses within each of the established zones.
   (2)   Authority: This chapter is also authorized by article 12, section 2 of
the Idaho constitution; Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter
65 and sections 31-801 and 31-828. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-19: PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAPS:
   (1)   The boundaries of zones shall be established and clearly indicated
upon the zoning map or maps adopted as part of this chapter.
   (2)   All amendments of the official zoning map or maps shall follow the
procedures set forth in article 6 of this chapter.
   (3)   Areas are to be classified according to the established zoning
requirements and such zoning shall give due consideration to the adopted
comprehensive plan and its stated goals and objectives. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-
2010)
07-01-21: DISINCORPORATION:
Where property becomes a part of the unincorporated area of Canyon County by
the disincorporation of any city, or portion thereof, such property shall be
zoned by the board following the notice and hearing regulations of article 5 of
this chapter. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-23: ERRORS IN LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS:
Where a property has been zoned incorrectly due to an error in a legal
description, the following shall apply:
   (1)   If the error is directly caused by the county, the error shall be
corrected and duly processed by the county as soon as the error is discovered.
   (2)   If the error is caused by the applicant and/or landowner, the
applicant and/or landowner shall apply for a zoning ordinance map amendment.
(Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-01-25: REFERENCES:
References in this chapter to other ordinances of Canyon County and statutes of
the state of Idaho are provided solely for the coordination of this chapter
with such other ordinances and statutes. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
07-02-01: Purpose
07-02-03: Definitions Enumerated
07-02-01: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as set forth below.
(Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-02-03: DEFINITIONS ENUMERATED:
ABANDON/ABANDONMENT: An intent to leave, quit, renounce, resign, surrender,
relinquish, vacate or discard.
ACCESS: Ingress/egress to a parcel or lot.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (BUILDING): A structure which is subordinate, and
incidental, to the principal structure or use pertinent to the same parcel.
ACCESSORY USE: A use not separately listed in the regulations pertaining to the
zone, which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property
or premises.
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD: All documents and records timely filed with DSD; for
example: applications, exhibits, petitions, requests, and other matters in
support or opposition; all documents or records admitted into evidence or
administratively noticed, and all orders or decisions issued by the commission,
hearing examiner, Board or Administrative Hearing Officer; all official
recordings or written transcripts of hearings conducted. The administrative
record does not include any privileged or legally protected communications.
AFFECTED PERSON: One having an interest in real property which may be adversely
affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing the development.
AGRICULTURALLY RELATED ACTIVITIES: Uses that include incidental farm equipment
sales and service, incidental farm supply sales, roadside stands, sod and/or
turf farms, U-pick fruit or vegetables, corn mazes, and similar uses that do
not involve processing (except those incidental operations necessary to prepare
for market or to convert into marketable form).
AGRICULTURE: Tilling of soil, pasturage, sod/turf farms, horticulture,
aquaculture, viticulture, floriculture, raising crops directly from the soil,
raising livestock, poultry, poultry products, dairy animals and dairy products,
beekeeping or beekeeping products, fur animals, trees grown in row crop
fashion, fruits of all kinds and their products, floral and ornamental and
greenhouse products, including all uses and facilities customarily accessory
and incidental thereto, including, but not limited to, the storage and
warehousing of fertilizers or agricultural produce or raw products.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water where aircraft can take off and land,
including, but not limited to, the necessary appurtenant structures or
facilities located thereon. For example, control tower, hangars, passenger
terminals, and accommodations for cargo.
AIRSTRIP: An area serving as a takeoff or landing strip for any type of craft,
vessel, or apparatus used for aviation, flight, flying, aerial navigation,
aeronautics, air transportation, ballooning, skydiving, soaring, or gliding.
ALIQUOT: The length of one side of a quarter-quarter section (1/16). The one-
sixteenth (1/16) section contains forty (40) acres, more or less.
ALLOWED USE: Any use set forth as a use not requiring a conditional use permit.
ANIMAL/BIRD UNIT: The following numbers of animals are a unit of measurement to
determine the number of animals allowed per acre of land devoted to the
animals' care: two (2) cows, two (2) horses, ten (10) sheep, five (5) swine,
ten (10) goats, six (6) llamas, twelve (12) alpacas, seventy five (75)
chickens, seventy five (75) game birds, fifteen (15) turkeys, fifteen (15)
geese, fifteen (15) peacocks/guinea hens, four (4) ostrich, eight (8) emu, and
twelve (12) rhea.
For animals not listed individually, the Director shall use the most similar
animal in regards to size and amount of waste produced to determine the animal
unit ratio.
In determining the number of animals permitted, only the parent animal will be
counted until a horse is six (6) months in age, and cattle shall be considered
calves from birthweight to approximately four hundred (400) pounds. Sheep
(lambs) and goats (kids) when greater than three (3) months of age and swine
fifty five (55) pounds or greater will be counted when determining animal
units.
In determining the number of domestic birds permitted, only birds one month or
older in age shall be counted.
In determining the number of animal units for calf raising or other operation
where young animals are raised predominantly without the parent, each animal
will be counted as one-half (1/2) its animal unit equation specified herein,
until the animal reaches the age/weight herein. Combinations of animals are
allowed, provided that the ratio of animal units per acre is maintained.
ANIMAL CARE PROJECT: The keeping of animals in conjunction with 4-H, FFA, or a
similar recognized organization that provides participants with direction and
guidance in the raising of animals and an opportunity to exhibit the animals at
the end of the project.
ANIMAL CREMATION SERVICE: A service dedicated to the disposition of dead animal
remains by means of cremation that may also provide necessary goods and
services for the memorialization of the animal if requested.
ANIMAL FACILITIES (LARGE): A facility that exceeds more than four (4) animal
units per acre of land devoted to the animals' care. Large animal facilities
include:
Bird Farm: A facility or confined area for the keeping of birds.
Calf Raising Operation: The raising of young animals, predominantly without the
parent, in preparation to return them to a dairy or feedlot.
Dairy Farm: A facility for bovine, sheep, goats or other animals that are
milked; the operation is licensed by the State of Idaho Department of
Agriculture to sell milk.
Feedlot: A facility or confined area for cattle, horses, sheep, goats, and/or
swine.
ANIMAL FACILITIES (SMALL): A facility of more than one up to four (4) animal
units per acre of land devoted to the animals' care.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the
medical care or treatment of cats, dogs or other animals.
APPEAL: A request for a review of a decision to a superior authority.
APPLICANT: Any person initiating a proposal for development of land.
APPLICATION: Shall include, but not be limited to, zoning amendments,
conditional use permits, variances, preliminary development plans or plats,
final development plans or plats, appeals, and certificates of zoning
compliance.
APPROACH: Any portion of the public right-of-way that is used for ingress/
egress from or to a public road.
AQUACULTURE: The cultivation of the natural produce of water such as plants or
fish.
AREA OF CITY IMPACT: As defined by Idaho Code section 67-6526 and requires that
cities and counties adopt a map identifying an Area of City Impact within the
unincorporated area of the County. The Area of City Impact shall be defined
considering the trade area of the city, geographic factors and areas that can
be reasonably expected to be annexed to the city in the future. The enabling
legislation provides three (3) options of planning and regulating development
within the Area of City Impact including exclusive use of the city plan and
ordinances, exclusive uses of the County plan and ordinances, or application of
any mutually agreed upon plan and ordinances.
ARENA (COMMERCIAL): A facility, whether private or public, indoor or outdoor,
the primary purpose of which is to exhibit animals or hold events such as
rodeos, horse events or cattle auctions or exhibits, and for which a fee is
charged to participants and an admission charge is paid by the public.
ASSISTED CARE FACILITY: A commercial operation where adults help the aged and/
or infirm care for themselves; a building housing any facility, however named,
whether operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide skilled
nursing care and related medical services for two (2) or more individuals
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or requiring care because of
old age.
AUCTION ESTABLISHMENT: An established regular place of business involving the
use of land, buildings or structures where a public sale is conducted to sell
goods or property to the highest bidder, whether or not an auctioneer is
employed.
BARRIER: Includes, but is not limited to, berms, fences, landscaping, trees,
shrubs and hedges and the separation of land uses by a road, open space,
watercourse or other boundary whether naturally occurring or built.
BATCH PLANT: A central proportioning and mixing plant for the production of an
aggregate product such as asphalt or concrete.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A private home, or portion thereof, where rooms and meals
are provided to guests for compensation and where each guest's stay is of
limited and sporadic duration.
BIRD FARM: A facility for the keeping of birds, primarily held for commercial
agricultural purposes, including, but not limited to, exotic species such as
ostrich and emu.
BLOCK: A piece of land or group of lots within a platted subdivision.
BOARD: The Board of County Commissioners.
BREWERY: A facility where alcoholic malt beverages are produced.
BUFFER: See definition of barrier.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy as defined in Canyon County Building Code.
BURDEN OF PERSUASION: The requirement that the party seeking relief from the
presiding party must provide evidence to that party showing that the party has
met this chapter's requirements.
BUSINESS: The purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction involving the
handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or
livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, offices,
recreation or amusement enterprises or the maintenance and use of offices or
professions and trades rendering service.
CAFO: See definition of confined animal feeding operation (CAFO).
CALF RAISING OPERATION: The raising of calves from birthweight to approximately
four hundred (400) pounds in preparation to return them to a dairy, feedlot, or
other facility for the purpose of raising replacement heifers or for fattening
cattle in preparation for slaughter.
CANYON COUNTY DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT: The office designated to
administer this chapter; sometimes called the Development Services Department
Office, but also known as DSD.
CARETAKER: A person properly designated to watch over property for security or
maintenance.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE: A document certifying that a proposed use,
building or structure complies with this chapter.
CHURCH: An establishment by design and construction which is primarily intended
for the conducting of organized religious services, meetings, and associated
activities.
CLERK: The Clerk of the Board, or that official's designee.
CLINIC: A place where patients are studied and treated by a medical care
provider or animal veterinarian.
CLUB OR LODGE: An auxiliary, fraternal, or veterans' organization as defined by
Idaho Code section 23-902.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: See definition of lot clustering.
COMMENCE: The date of commencement shall be the date in accordance with the
following:
   (1)   Specific use(s): An approved zoning compliance is issued.
   (2)   Use(s) that require a facility/structure: The date when the first
placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site begins, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the excavation as approved by an issued building
permit and zoning compliance. Permanent construction does not include:
      A.   Land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling;
      B.   Erection of signs;
      C.   Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundation or the
erection of temporary forms;
      D.   The installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
   (3)   Land divisions that require a subdivision plat: The acceptance by DSD
of a complete application, together with the application fee, for a preliminary
plat or a short plat.
   (4)   Land divisions that do not require a subdivision plat in accordance
with this chapter: A recorded record of survey that reflects the approved land
divisions and easements submitted to DSD.
COMMERCIAL RACETRACK: A facility, whether private or public, indoor or outdoor,
the primary purpose of which is to hold race events run with animals, humans or
human operated machines or equipment, and for which a fee is charged to
participants and/or an admission charge is paid by the public.
COMMISSION: The Canyon County Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMPATIBILITY: Land uses are compatible if: a) they do not directly or
indirectly interfere or conflict with or negatively impact one another and b)
they do not exclude or diminish one another's use of public and private
services. A compatibility determination requires a site specific analysis of
potential interactions between uses and potential impacts of existing and
proposed uses on one another. Ensuring compatibility may require mitigation
from or conditions upon a proposed use to minimize interference and conflicts
with existing uses.
COMPOST: The aerobically decomposed remnants of organic materials with plant
and/or animal origins.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan for the County officially adopted by
the County as such.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL: An affirmative action by the Director, or the presiding
party indicating that approval is given, subject to compliance with certain
specified conditions.
CONDITIONAL REZONE: The rezoning of land with conditions imposed so that if the
conditions are not complied with, the rezone may be withdrawn and the land
reverts back to its former zoning classification.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use or occupancy of a structure, or use of land, permitted
only upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the limitations
and conditions specified therein. See Idaho Code section 67-6512.
CONDOMINIUM: Housing in which the living units are owned individually and the
common areas are jointly owned by all the unit owners.
CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO):
   (1)   Confined animal feeding operation, also referred to as "concentrated
animal feeding operation", means a lot or facility where the following
conditions are met:
      A.   Animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of ninety (90) consecutive days or more in any twelve
(12) month period;
      B.   Crops, vegetation, forage growth or postharvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility;
and
      C.   A facility designed to confine or actually does confine the minimum
animal numbers as contained in chapter 8 of this Code, confined animal feeding
operations.
   (2)   Two (2) or more concentrated animal feeding operations under common
ownership are considered, for the purposes of this definition, to be a single
animal feeding operation if they adjoin each other or if they use a common area
or system for the disposal of wastes.
CONTRACTOR SHOP: May include, but not be limited to, a building where a
contractor conducts his business, including offices and parking of equipment
and employee parking.
CORN MAZE: An intricate network of passages in a cornfield.
COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho.
COUNTY ENGINEER: The engineer or contract engineer of the County.
CREMATORIUM: As applied to funeral homes or mortuaries: a dedicated area within
a licensed funeral home or mortuary building, or an accessory building of a
licensed funeral home or mortuary, wherein human remains are cremated in a
cremation retort.
DSD: The Canyon County Development Services Department.
DAIRY/DAIRY FARM: A use of land where one or more bovine, sheep, or goats are
milked and the operation is licensed by the State of Idaho Department of
Agriculture to sell milk for human consumption.
DAYCARE: Care and supervision of children not related by blood or marriage to
the caregiver, for compensation during part of a twenty four (24) hour day in a
place other than the home of the children being cared for. Daycare can be
provided in the following facilities:
Daycare Center: A home, place, or facility for daycare of thirteen (13) or more
children.
Family Daycare Home: A home, place, or facility for daycare of one to six (6)
children.
Group Daycare Facility: A home, place, or facility providing daycare for seven
(7) to twelve (12) children.
DEDICATED OR DEDICATION: Land that is devoted to a public use, by the
acknowledgment and recording of a plat or deed, and the acceptance by action of
a public body accepting and confirming the dedication.
DESIGNED PURPOSE: The use for which the improvements were originally intended,
designed and approved pursuant to any applicable ordinances.
DEVELOPER: Any person or entity improving land for the purpose of subdivision,
development, sale, or trade.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A commitment reduced to writing as a means of evidence,
and as a means of giving formal expression to some act or contract, by which an
owner or developer makes a written commitment concerning the use or development
of property. This "development agreement" is also known as a "written
commitment".
DIRECTOR: The Director of DSD or his/her designee.
DISTILLERY: A place where alcoholic liquors are made.
DRIVEWAY: Vehicular access to one or two (2) inhabited buildings.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, used for human habitation. A dwelling
does not include a tent, recreational trailer, RV (self-propelled), motel,
hotel, lodging or boarding house, club, sorority, or fraternity.
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling designed for or used as a residence for not more than
one family with a kitchen and a bathroom permanently installed.
EASEMENT: The right of a person, entity, government agency, or public utility
company, by grant or other legal conveyance, to possess and use another's real
property on a limited basis and for a specific purpose.
ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the State of Idaho to engage in the
practice of professional engineering.
ENGINEERING PLANS: Plans, profiles, cross sections and other required details
for the construction of improvements, prepared by an engineer in accordance
with the final plat and in compliance with existing standards of design and
construction.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT STATEMENT: A statement prepared by a qualified
professional duly licensed by the State of Idaho in that area of expertise the
professional is answering the questions noted in section
07-17-33: of this chapter. This is not a Federal impact statement.
ETHANOL PLANT: A facility where ethanol fuel is manufactured.
EXCEPTED PARCEL: Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of a
subdivision which is not part of the approved and recorded subdivision plat.
EXOTIC ANIMALS: Animals that are not native to the State of Idaho according to
the Idaho Department of Fish and Game.
FCOs: Findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order or recommendation.
FAMILY: A person living alone or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
adoption, or marriage.
FARM ANIMALS: Animals kept or raised for recreation or compensation. These
animals may include, but shall not be limited to, equine, bovine, sheep, goat,
swine, and fowl.
FEE: The fees as established by the fee schedule adopted by the Board.
FEEDLOT: A facility or confined area that is used for finishing or fattening
animals where less than fifty percent (50%) of the feed for such fowl or
animals is produced by the owner on his immediate owned or leased property. A
feedlot may also be a confined animal feeding operation.
FENCE: A barrier built for either confinement of an area or to keep others out
of a confined area. A fence may be either affixed to the ground or be placed
thereon and may include, but not be limited to, rock, stone wall, retaining
wall, shrubs, panels, netted wire, or barbed wire.
FENCE (SIGHT OBSCURING): The construction of a solid barrier that blocks the
visibility through the fence, and is erected to screen areas from public
streets and abutting properties.
   (1)   Allowed Materials: Fences and walls shall be made of high quality,
durable materials that require low maintenance. Acceptable materials for a
fence include chainlink with slats, wood, brick, masonry block, stone, vinyl,
composite/recycled materials (hardy board) or other manufactured material or
combination of materials commonly used for fencing.
   (2)   Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not be made of or
contain:
      A. Scrap materials such as scrap lumber and scrap metal.
      B. Materials not typically used or designated/manufactured for fencing
such as metal roofing panels, corrugated or sheet metal, tarps or plywood.
FERTILIZER: Compounds given to plants to promote growth either through
application to the soil or direct application to the plants. Fertilizers can be
composed of organic (e.g., leaves or manure) or inorganic matter (such as urea
or phosphates). They can be naturally occurring compounds (such as peat or
mineral deposits) or manufactured through natural processes (such as
composting) or chemical processes.
FINAL APPROVAL: Unconditional approval of the final plat as evidenced by
appropriate certifications on the plat; such approval constitutes authorization
to record a plat.
FINAL DECISION: The written decision at the conclusion of a case.
FIRE DISTRICT: A fire protection district exercising jurisdiction over property
or premises as authorized by Idaho Code title 31, chapter 14.
FIREWORKS SALE: The sale of fireworks pursuant to Idaho Code title 39, chapter
26.
FLEA MARKET: A site used for ongoing sales that includes rented space for the
public to show and sell selected items.
FOOD PROCESSING FACILITY: A facility where food, in its raw product form, is
prepared for market.
FUNERAL HOME OR MORTUARY: An establishment where the activities necessary for
the care and custody of the dead, including: refrigeration, embalming;
cremation; other necessary care; viewings; wakes; funerals; and other rites and
ceremonies consistent with the proper final disposition of the dead, are
conducted.
GRADE PLANE: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level
slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established
by the lowest points within the area between the building and lot line or,
where the lot line is more than six feet (6') from the building, between the
building and a point six feet (6') from the building.
GRAVEL PIT: An area that is being used for the purpose of removing the gravel
from the land for commercial or private uses.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors including
the area under the exterior walls of a building or portion thereof.
GROUP HOME: A place or facility providing care and supervision for compensation
for nine (9) or more persons during all or part of a twenty four (24) hour day.
Examples may include, but not be limited to, halfway houses and homes for the
disadvantaged.
HARD SURFACE: Any surface which is capable of providing an all- weather driving
surface for reasonable emergency traffic, including Fire Department travel and
may be, but is not limited to, gravel, concrete, asphalt, stone, or brick.
HAZARD: A probable source of danger.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: This is defined or determined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
HEARING EXAMINER: A person hired by Canyon County to act in the capacity of a
hearing examiner as defined in Idaho Code section 67-6520.
HIGHWAY DISTRICT: A highway district exercising jurisdiction over property or
premises as authorized by Idaho Code title 40, chapter 13.
HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT: Any development or that portion of a development located
in terrain having a maximum slope exceeding fifteen percent (15%), except where
evidence is provided that no construction or development shall take place on
slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%).
HOME BUSINESS: Any gainful business engaged in by a maximum of two (2)
occupants of a dwelling unit and a maximum of three (3) adult employees. A home
business may include, but not be limited to, professional services such as
clerical, engineering, tax preparation, graphic design or web services;
assembly of parts into salable items, teaching of music and other instruction
or other like occupancies.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling
unit and may include, but not be limited to, handicrafts, dressmaking, office
of a clergyman, teaching of music, dancing and other instruction, family
daycare, and other like occupancies.
ILLUMINATED ADDRESS NUMBERS: The number portion of the physical address of a
home or business having artificial illumination upon them so that they are
visible at night from the access road.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: Includes natural, adopted and step father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, sister, granddaughter, grandson, grandfather, and
grandmother.
IMPOUND YARD OR LOT: Any portion, piece, division or parcel of land, excluding
fully enclosed buildings, that is used for the storage or holding of distrained
vehicles or personal property, or for the care and keeping of vehicles or
personal property whether taken into the custody of the law or for other
reasons.
IMPROVEMENT: Shall include, but not be limited to, structure, roadway paving,
curb, gutter, sidewalk, pedestrian pathway, bike path, water line, sewer line,
drainage work, bus turnout, streetlight, and/or landscaping.
INDOOR RECREATION: Public or private recreation facilities, tennis or other
racquet courts, swimming pools, bowling alleys, skating rinks, or similar uses
which are enclosed in buildings and are operated on a commercial or membership
basis primarily for the use of persons who do not reside on the same lot as
that on which the recreational use is located. The term "indoor recreation"
shall include any accessory uses, such as snack bars, pro shops, and locker
rooms, which are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the
principal recreational use. The term "indoor recreation" shall not include
theaters, cultural facilities, massage parlors, or any use which is otherwise
listed specifically in the table of permitted and conditional uses.
INHABIT: To dwell, live, reside, work or stay.
INTERMITTENT USE (AIRSTRIP): The use of a property for an airstrip for no more
than three (3) operations in a six (6) month period. An "operation" means not
more than one touchdown and one takeoff.
IRRIGATION FACILITIES: The means and mechanisms necessary for the supply,
delivery, and drainage of irrigation water, including, but not limited to,
canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates, wells, pumps and allied equipment.
JUNKYARD: See public nuisances, section
02-01-05: of this Code.
KENNEL: Any portion of land, or any building, structure, enclosure or premises
on the same or adjacent parcels, in which canines are housed, groomed, bred,
boarded, trained, or sold, in which a total of six (6) or more dogs, three (3)
months of age or over are kept or maintained in conformance with section
03-05-09: of this Code.
LIVESTOCK: Domesticated animals (other than household pets or exotic animals)
raised for food, fiber or transport.
LOT: See definition of parcel.
LOT CLUSTERING: A development design technique that concentrates residences in
specific areas on site to allow the remaining land to be used for agriculture,
recreation, common space, and/or conservation of environmentally sensitive
areas.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by an impervious surface.
LOT LINE: The boundary property line in a platted subdivision.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at right
angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed or rehabilitated according to HUD/
FHA Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or
is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three
hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent
foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein,
except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the
requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect
to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards
established under 42 USC 5401 et seq.
MINERAL EXTRACTION: The various activities associated with the extraction of
mineral resources, including, but not limited to, gravel, from the ground.
MINISTORAGE FACILITY: A building or buildings containing various size storage
compartments, and wherein each compartment is offered for rent or lease to the
general public for the private storage of materials.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable, factory built home, whether single or
multisectional, designed to be used as a year round residential dwelling and
built prior to the enactment of the State of Idaho, Department of Labor and
Industrial Services requiring a State approved insignia or the enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
which became effective June 15, 1976. Mobile homes must meet the requirements
of the Idaho Division of Building Safety according to Idaho Code title 44,
chapter 25.
MOTEL/HOTEL: A building or buildings in which lodging units are offered for
persons, for compensation by the day or the week.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure containing more than one dwelling unit with
separate ingress-egress from outside and having no interconnectibility between
the units.
MUSEUM: An institution for the acquisition, preservation, study and exhibition
of works of artistic, historical or scientific value and for which any sales
relating to such exhibits are incidental and accessory to the exhibits
presented.
NATIVE ANIMALS: Animals that are common to the State of Idaho but which are
wild and not domestic.
NEIGHBOR: A person possessing or owning contiguous land or property.
NET FLOOR AREA: That portion of the gross floor area of the building occupied
by the listed use or uses and shall include hallways, storage and packaging
space, dressing or rest rooms, and laboratory or workrooms; provided, however,
that floor space within the building reserved for parking or loading of
vehicles, and space used only for building maintenance and utilities shall be
excluded.
NONCONFORMING PROPERTY: A property that lawfully existed prior to the effective
date of this chapter, but that does not now conform to the dimensional
standards for the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure that was lawfully constructed and/or
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, but that does not now
conform to the zoning standards.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use, structure, or parcel of land that lawfully existed
prior to the effective date of this chapter but that does not now conform to
the land use restrictions for the district in which it is located.
NUISANCE: See public nuisances, section
02-01-05: of this Code.
NURSERY: A place where plants are grown for sale or transplanting and where
seventy five percent (75%) of the products offered for sale are grown on the
premises.
NURSERY (RETAIL/WHOLESALE): The selling of products and plants at retail and/or
wholesale.
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING: An open off street area of land other than a
street or public way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading
and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue
interference with public streets and alleys.
OPEN SPACE LAND: Any undeveloped or predominately undeveloped land which may be
set aside for any of the following:
   (1)   Park and recreation purposes;
   (2)   Conservation of land and other natural resources;
   (3)   Conservation of wildlife habitat and natural space;
   (4)   Historic or scenic purposes;
   (5)   Common areas;
   (6)   Any area without structures that provides an open view.
OPERATION PLAN: A plan of action to include, but not be limited to, time
requirements, commencement of the operation, hours of operation, noise levels,
dust levels, air and water quality, raw material delivery, finished product and
marketing, site improvements, public and private facilities, public amenities
and infrastructure.
ORIGINAL PARCEL: A parcel of platted or unplatted land as it existed on
September 6, 1979 (the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance 79-008),
including any property boundary adjustments as defined in this chapter and any
reduction in area due to creating a parcel for the exclusive use by Canyon
County, a municipality within Canyon County, a local highway district, Idaho
Transportation Department, utility company or corporation under the
jurisdiction of the Idaho Public Utilities Commission, or other local, State,
or Federal agency.
OVERLAY ZONE: A set of zoning requirements that are described in this chapter's
text and maps, and subsequently imposed in addition to those of the underlying
district. Development within the overlay zone must conform to the requirements
of both zones. They are usually employed to deal with special physical
characteristics such as floodplains, historic preservation areas, steep slopes,
shorelines or other environmentally sensitive areas, but have other
applications as well.
OWNER OR LANDOWNER: The person or persons holding title by deed to land or
holding title as vendees under a land contract or holding any other title.
PARCEL: A tract of land described by metes and bounds, chains, rods or aliquot
parts or by lot and block. Land that is described by metes and bounds that
includes all or parts of multiple, preexisting parcels or portions of platted
lots, all of which are not separately defined or labeled as separate parcels or
lots, shall be considered one parcel.
PARK, PUBLIC: "Public park" means a park within the County which is under
operation or management of a government entity that dedicates an area of land,
usually in a largely natural state, for the enjoyment of the public, having
facilities for rest, recreation, educational opportunities and other ancillary
uses associated with a park.
PARKING LOT: An open, graded, compacted and improved surfaced area, other than
a street or public way, to be used for the parking or storage, for limited
periods of time, of operable passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles, and
available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation
to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: Usable space within a public or private parking lot, not less
than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9 feet x 20 feet), exclusive of
access drives, aisles or ramps for the storage of one passenger vehicle or
commercial vehicle.
PATHWAY: See definition of pedestrianway.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A walkway designed for pedestrians to move from one point to
another.
PERMITTED USE: The utilization of land which shall be permitted to take place
in any district as set forth by this chapter after obtaining a conditional use
permit.
PERSON: Includes, but is not limited to, an individual, association, joint
venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary,
corporation, limited liability company, agency, department, or division, and
all other or any other similar entities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of land in which a variety of
residential, commercial, industrial, or other land uses are provided for under
single ownership or control, up until the final plat is recorded, and allows
for flexibility in site design and dimensional standards to develop
residential, commercial and/or industrial uses not allowed individually within
specific zoning districts.
PLAT: An engineered map of a land subdivision in compliance with local and
State law.
Final Plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial
conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared by a registered
professional engineer or a registered land surveyor in accordance with this
chapter, Federal, State and local regulations.
Preliminary Plat: A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a
proposed subdivision development, prepared in accordance with applicable
Federal, State and local regulations consisting of an approximate drawing of a
proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots,
and blocks in the subdivision.
Recorded Plat: A final plat bearing all of the certificates of approval
required in this chapter and duly recorded in the County Recorder's Office.
Short Plat: The combined approval process of preliminary and final plats.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: A county, city, school district, highway district,
irrigation district, fire district or other district recognized by the Idaho
Code.
PRESIDING PARTY: The Board, commission, hearing examiner, or Hearing Officer.
PRIVATE ROAD: A road serving more than two (2) permanent dwellings or
commercial or industrial uses which is privately maintained, and not accepted
for maintenance by the local highway district having jurisdiction.
PRIVATE TOWER WITH ANTENNA: A tower for private communications such as amateur
radio, not for commercial use.
PROCESS: The mode, method, or operation necessary to prepare for market or to
convert into marketable form.
PROPERTY LINE (FRONT): Property lines that abut any public or private road or
are intersected by an ingress/egress easement.
PROPERTY LINE (REAR): The property line that is most opposite the front
property line. If a property has more than one front property line, then the
rear property line is that which is most opposite the front property line
containing the access approach. The remaining property lines, opposite the
other front property lines, may be side property lines.
PROPERTY LINE (SIDE): Property lines that are not front or rear property lines.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any land dedicated to the public and under the
jurisdiction of a public highway agency. A public right-of- way can be open or
closed to public travel and the highway district has no obligation to construct
or maintain said right- of-way for vehicular traffic.
PUBLIC SERVICE AGENCY TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES: Police, fire, emergency
medical services, highway district, and Idaho Transportation Department
facilities which permit communication between public service agency dispatching
facilities and public service agency personnel with each other. A public
service agency telecommunication facility does not lose its designated status
because it leases out a portion of its communication towers to private
telecommunication facilities as long as the public service agency
telecommunication facilities are the predominating use.
PUBLIC STREET: All roads, streets, alleys, or bridges open to public use and
maintained by a public agency.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and
structures, but not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the
storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service
facilities. Also public owned buildings, fire and police stations, libraries,
Post Offices, and public utilities administration buildings.
QUASI-JUDICIAL MATTER (HEARING): A term applied to the action of public
administrative officers or bodies at public hearings, who are required to
investigate facts, or ascertain the existence of facts, hold hearings, and draw
conclusions from them, as a basis for their official action, and to exercise
discretion of a judicial nature. However, State law rules of evidence apply to
judicial proceedings and do not apply to quasi-judicial hearings.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE (PERMANENT): Hospitals, convalescent homes, colleges, and
other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable, or philanthropic
nature that are nonprofit organizations or exempt properties.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE (TEMPORARY): An activity of a quasi-public nature which has a
duration not to exceed seven (7) days and seven (7) nights in a six (6) month
period and is allowed in all zones within the unincorporated parts of the
County. Activities may include, but are not limited to, religious retreats,
revivals, carnivals and like uses, musical concerts, theatrical performances,
and sporting events.
RACETRACK: A configured course where races are run with animals, machines, or
equipment.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A motor home, travel trailer, fifth- wheel trailer,
park model recreational vehicle, truck camper or folding camping trailer, with
or without motive power, designed for recreational or emergency occupancy. It
does not include pick-up hoods, shells, or canopies designed, created or
modified for occupational usage. School buses or van type vehicles which are
converted to recreational use, are defined as recreational vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARKS: A parcel of land designed and intended for the
use of recreational vehicles for a fee as temporary living quarters for
recreation or vacation purposes.
RECYCLED ASPHALT: Recycled or reclaimed asphalt pavement which is used as a
base material, or to supplement the virgin aggregate and oil in plant mix
pavement. It is pavement which is supplemented with oil and acceptable binding
materials, to be used as an asphalt surface.
REFINERY: A facility where a group of chemical engineering unit processes and
unit operations are used to convert raw material into products of value.
RENDERING PLANT: A facility where animal parts are converted into industrial
fats and oils or fertilizers.
REPLAT: A new plat of all or a portion of an existing subdivision plat.
RESIDE: Dwell or inhabit.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building, or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation.
REZONE: Changing the zoning classification of land from one zone to another.
RIBBON CURBING: At a minimum, curbing matching the slope and grade of adjoining
road(s), with a two foot (2') wide six inch (6") thick concrete roadway edging
strip (ribbon curbing), using road base in the same thickness as the adjoining
road and designed to channel water from the road into adjacent infiltration
swale.
ROAD LOT: A private road that provides access to more than two (2) lots within
a subdivision.
ROADSIDE STAND: The site used for the sale of agricultural products where the
majority of the products are produced by the landowner.
SCHOOL (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE): "Public or private schools" means an institution of
learning or instruction primarily catering to minors, whether public or
private, which is licensed at such facility by either the city or the State of
Idaho. This definition includes nursery schools, kindergarten, elementary
schools, junior high schools, middle high schools, senior high schools or any
special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department
of Education, but not including professional and vocational schools, charm
schools, dancing schools, music schools or similar limited schools nor public
or private universities or colleges.
SEASONAL ACTIVITIES: Activities dependent on a particular season of the year.
SECONDARY RESIDENCE: A dwelling, other than a temporary residence, that is
detached from the primary residence.
SETBACK: The space on a lot required to be left open and unoccupied by
buildings or structures, either by the front, side or rear yard requirements of
this chapter, or by delineation on a recorded subdivision map or a record of
survey.
SHOOTING RANGE: An indoor or outdoor facility designed for the use of firearms
and for which a fee is charged.
SIGN: Any sign, copy, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly
names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other
commercial, industrial, or public activity.
SIMILAR USES: A use that has characteristics generally like those of a listed
or defined use.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING:
   (1)   A dwelling for one family.
   (2)   Any dwelling in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or
physically handicapped or elderly persons reside and which is supervised and
conforms to Idaho Code sections 67-6531 and 67-6532.
   (3)   A manufactured home as defined by Idaho Code section 39-4105(8).
SITE PLAN: A scaled drawing showing the parcel and all existing and proposed
uses and structures and roads all with dimensions, distances and private and
public road names. It includes lot lines, lot area, parking spaces, private
roadways, walkways, topographic features, reserved open space, buildings and
other structures, major landscape features, and the location of proposed
utility easements. A site plan is a more detailed representation of a proposed
development than shown in a plat, and may also include density and statistical
data.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE: A facility where animals are killed and may be processed into
meat products.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which is
intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of utility power.
SPECIAL EVENTS: Any temporary event including, but not limited to, weddings,
picnics, barbecues, holiday events and parties, dances, concerts, footraces and
walks, bazaars, and harvest festivals.
STAGING AREA: An area where equipment and/or materials are stored for use
conducted entirely off site.
STRUCTURE: Any building used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy as defined in the Canyon County Building Code.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into more than
four (4) parts since recognition of the original parcel under this chapter for
the purpose of development or transfer of ownership.
SUBDIVISION REVIEW TEAM: A committee of DSD employees which reviews proposed
preliminary and final subdivision plats.
SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the State of Idaho to engage in the
practice of land surveying.
SWINE: Any of the various stout short legged, hoofed mammals with bristly skin
and flexible snout including, but not limited to, pigs, hogs or boars.
SWINE FARM: Land where swine are raised for compensation or animal care
projects.
TANNERY (COMMERCIAL): A facility where the tanning process is applied to hides
to produce leather.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption
on the premises, not including restaurants where the principal business is
serving food.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Public or private cellphone, broadcast,
communication, or wireless internet towers and associated facilities.
TEMPORARY USE: A land use intended to last or continue for a limited time.
TRACT: A parcel of land.
URBAN DENSITY: Development of land into parcels of less than one acre in size.
UTILITIES: Installations or facilities, underground or overhead, furnished for
use by the public, including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, steam,
communications, water, drainage, irrigation, sewage disposal or flood control,
owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or
board duly authorized by State or municipal regulations. Utility or utilities
as used herein may also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments
or boards.
UTILITY DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: A system used to deliver any utility.
UTILITY FACILITY: Any facility providing utility services including, but not
limited to, buildings, plants, substations, reservoirs or wastewater treatment
plants owned or operated by a utility provider regulated by the Idaho Public
Utility Commission or other regulatory agency or political subdivision of the
State.
VARIANCE: A modification of the bulk and placement requirements of this chapter
as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard,
setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other ordinance provision
affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure
upon lots, or the size of lots.
VEHICLE SALES LOT: Premises on which new or used passenger vehicles, trailers,
mobile homes or trucks in operating condition are displayed in the open for
sale or trade.
VEHICLE SERVICE AND/OR FUELING STATION: Premises used for the sale and delivery
of petroleum products and parts such as fuel, lubrication oils, tires, and
incidental vehicular accessories and related services, including minor motor
vehicle repairs and/or rental of vehicles.
VEHICLE SERVICE FACILITY: Premises on which repair and service work to vehicles
is performed.
VEHICLE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings,
on which two (2) or more motor vehicles not in licensed operating condition are
standing more than thirty (30) days, or on which motor vehicles not in licensed
operating condition, or parts thereof, are dismantled, displayed, stored,
recycled or sold.
VIABLE FARMLAND: Land that is capable of producing marketable farm animals or
crops.
WAREHOUSING: Storage of goods or merchandise.
WATER INFILTRATION: A process in which water is applied to an area of land.
WIND FARM: Multiple wind turbines grouped in a single location for the purpose
of generating a large amount of electric power.
WIND TURBINE: A structure that uses moving air to generate electricity through
the use of blades that are turned by the wind.
WINERY: A place where wine is produced.
YARD: An area that extends along a property line to a depth or width specified
in the setback regulations for the zone in which the property is located.
YARD (FRONT): The open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front street line and the nearest line of a structure.
YARD (REAR): The open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of a structure.
YARD (SIDE): The open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
lying between the side lot line and the nearest line of a structure.
YARD/GARAGE SALE: A sale of used or unwanted household goods, personal items,
bric-a-brac typically held in one's garage or yard.
ZONING MAP: An official map designating land use zones in the County. (Ord. 19-
038, 8-30-2019; amd. Ord. 20-012, 5-29-2020)
ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
07-03-01: Planning And Zoning Commission; Membership And Duties
07-03-03: Director Of The Development Services Department; Duties
07-03-05: Hearing Officer
07-03-07: Hearing Examiner
07-03-01: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION; MEMBERSHIP AND DUTIES:
   (1)   Membership: The Canyon County planning and zoning commission is
established to perform both planning and zoning duties specified in the Idaho
"local land use planning act", Idaho Code, title 67, chapter 65 and this
chapter.
   (2)   Term: The length of the appointment term for commissioners shall be
four (4) years unless removed for cause pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6504.
A commissioner must have resided in the county for two (2) years prior to his/
her appointment, and must remain a resident of the county during his/her
service on the commission. Commissioners serving when this chapter is adopted
shall continue to serve the terms for which they were appointed.
   (3)   Officers: The commission shall elect a chairman and create and fill
other positions as provided for in Idaho Code section 67-6504(b).
   (4)   Duties And Powers: The commission shall have those powers and perform
those planning and zoning duties assigned by the board that are provided for in
the local land use planning act, Idaho Code, title 67, chapter 65 and in county
ordinances. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 21-033, 10-21-2021)
07-03-03: DIRECTOR OF THE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT; DUTIES:
The director shall perform those duties assigned by the board. (Ord. 10-006, 8-
16-2010)
07-03-05: HEARING OFFICER:
The chairman of the board, when confirmed by majority vote of board, may
appoint a hearing officer. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-03-07: HEARING EXAMINER:
   (1)   Appointment, Authority, Duties And Procedures: Any hearing examiner
appointed by the board shall perform such duties as assigned by the board
pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6520. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 4
FEES
SECTION:
07-04-01: Established
07-04-03: Development Services Department Fees
07-04-05: Fee Waivers
07-04-07: Refunds
07-04-01: ESTABLISHED:
By resolution, the board shall establish fees to defray the costs of processing
all applications, renewals and requests for action filed pursuant to this
chapter. All fees shall be established in accordance with Idaho Code sections
31-870(1) and 63-1311A. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-04-03: DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT FEES:
Any person filing any application, renewal or request authorized by this
chapter shall pay the fees authorized by the board. No application, renewal or
request for action, except as hereafter provided, shall be accepted by DSD,
unless accompanied by the required filing fee. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-04-05: FEE WAIVERS:
Notwithstanding any required fee, only the board shall have the authority to
waive, in whole or in part, any fee established by the board for an
application, renewal or request for action filed by any governmental agency or
persons when such a fee would present an undue hardship. An application for a
hardship waiver must be in writing, must specifically describe the undue
hardship, and must be filed with the clerk of the board for board action. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-04-07: REFUNDS:
Upon request, the director shall determine the percentage of application
processing time and expenditures that have been incurred and may recommend to
the board that the applicant be refunded that portion of the processing fee
which has and will not be used. All refunds shall not be issued unless approved
by resolution by the board. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 5
NOTICE, HEARING, AND APPEAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
07-05-01: Notice Procedure
07-05-03: Board, Commission Or Hearing Examiner Hearing Procedures
07-05-05: General Appeal Procedures
07-05-07: Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision
07-05-09: Mediation Of Quasi-Judicial Land Use/Land Division Matters
07-05-01: NOTICE PROCEDURE:
   (1)   Notice Procedures: Notice shall be given for all proceedings in
accordance with Idaho Code sections 67-6509, 67-6511 and 67-6512, as
applicable, except as provided for in subsection (2) of this section.
   (2)   Special Notice Procedures: When notice is required to two hundred
(200) or more property owners or purchasers of record, notice shall be provided
as follows:
      A.    Notice shall be provided to property owners or purchasers of
record, within the land being considered and properties within six hundred feet
(600') beyond the external boundaries of the land being considered; and
      B.    The county shall publish the public hearing notice in the official
newspaper or newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) calendar
days prior to the date of hearing. In addition, the county shall provide notice
through a display advertisement at least four inches (4") by two (2) columns in
size in the official newspaper of the county at least fifteen (15) calendar
days prior to the hearing date. Notice shall also be posted on all public and/
or private roads abutting the development not less than one week prior to the
hearing.
   (3)   Deemed To Have Had Notice: Any person that appears at a hearing, or
who submits any exhibit to be considered at such hearing, shall be deemed to
have had actual notice by such appearance. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-05-03: BOARD, COMMISSION OR HEARING EXAMINER HEARING PROCEDURES:
   (1)   The following hearing procedures shall be followed in all matters
heard by the presiding party:
      A.    The presiding party shall adhere to the requirements of chapter 1,
article 17 of this code.
      B.    Prior to the commencement of a hearing, a sign up sheet shall be
provided for prospective witnesses to sign.
      C.    The hearing shall be opened with a statement of the rules and
procedures.
      D.    The chairman or his designee shall administer the oath or
affirmation to the witnesses, except at legislative hearings where public input
is solicited.
      E.    The applicant shall provide reports and testimony which will
provide information necessary to enable the presiding party to render a
decision on an application.
      F.    The presiding party may refuse to permit any person to testify who
has not signed the witness list, is disruptive of the hearing proceedings, or
is belligerent.
      G.    The presiding party shall approve, modify, or deny an application
after reviewing whether or not the application satisfies the applicable
provisions of the comprehensive plan, ordinances, and the local land use
planning act, Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. The applicant carries the burden
of persuasion.
      H.    When the presiding party makes a recommendation to the board the
FCOs, the minutes, and documents regarding the notice of hearing shall be
certified to the board and shall be included in the official record of the
board.
      I.    The presiding party shall issue FCOs, reflecting its final
decision.
      J.    A copy of the signed FCOs shall be mailed to the applicant and/or
the applicant's representative. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-05-05: GENERAL APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   (1)   The decisions of the commission or the hearing examiner may be
appealed to the board by filing a written notice of appeal with DSD within
fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the FCOs were signed. The notice of
appeal should include a statement of the reasons for the appeal and must be
accompanied by a filing fee as established by the adopted fee schedule. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-05-07: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION:
   (1)   Appeal To Board: An affected person aggrieved by a final
administrative decision or action of the director that was made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the board.
   (2)   Appeal Procedures:
      A.    Appeals shall be filed with DSD within fifteen (15) calendar days
after the date of the decision. A notice of appeal should include a statement
of the reasons for the appeal and must be accompanied with all appropriate fees
as established by the adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
      B.    At the public hearing held in accordance with this article, the
board shall consider the decision of the director and any additional evidence
that may be offered by the public, applicant or director.
      C.    The board may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the
director's decision. (Ord. 12-006, 3-22-2012)
07-05-09: MEDIATION OF QUASI-JUDICIAL LAND USE/LAND DIVISION MATTERS:
The procedure for mediation shall be in accordance with the provisions of Idaho
Code section 67-6510. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the rights of any
party regarding mediation of land disputes. The county shall not be liable for
nor pay the fees or expenses of any mediation requested by any applicant or
affected property owner. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 6
REZONE, AMENDMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN,
AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
07-06-01: Initiation Of Proceedings
07-06-03: Comprehensive Plan Amendment Criteria
07-06-05: Zoning Amendment Criteria
07-06-07: Conditional Rezone
07-06-01: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS:
   (1)   Type Of Change: Any person may apply for the following:
      A.    An amendment to the county comprehensive plan and/or map;
      B.    An amendment to this chapter; or
      C.    Amendment to official zoning maps (rezone or conditional rezone).
(Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
   (2)   Applications: All applications for the above changes or amendments
shall be filed with DSD. An application must be accompanied by a filing fee as
established by the adopted fee schedule. Applications shall contain all
required information.
   (3)   Comprehensive Plan Changes: Requests for comprehensive plan changes
and ordinance amendments may be consolidated for notice and hearing purposes.
Although these procedures can be considered in tandem, pursuant to Idaho Code
section 67-6511(b), the commission, and subsequently the board, shall
deliberate first on the proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan; then,
once the commission, and subsequently the board, has made that determination,
the commission, and the board, should decide the appropriateness of a rezone
within that area. This procedure provides that the commission, and subsequently
the board, considers the overall development scheme of the county prior to
consideration of individual requests for amendments to zoning ordinances. The
commission, and subsequently the board, should make clear which of its findings
relate to the proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan and which of its
findings relate to the request for an amendment to the zoning ordinance.
   (4)   Zoning Ordinance Changes:
      A.    If an amendment to the ordinance text is approved, then the
approved changes shall be effective in accordance with time requirements of
Idaho Code sections 31-715 and 31-715A. The board shall, when considering an
application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, consider the
comprehensive plan and other evidence gathered through the public hearing
process.
      B.    If an amendment to a zone or zone boundary is approved, then the
approved amendment shall be effective immediately upon written approval and
shall be established and clearly indicated, as soon as practicable, on the
zoning map or maps adopted as part of this chapter. The board shall, when
considering an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, consider
the comprehensive plan and other evidence gathered through the public hearing
process. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-06-03: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT CRITERIA:
   (1)   The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of
each proposed comprehensive plan amendment and make a recommendation regarding
the same to the board. The commission and the board shall determine whether the
proposed amendment meets the requirements of the local land use planning act,
Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65, and is consistent with the comprehensive
plan's purposes, goals and policies:
      A.    Is the requested type of growth generally in conformance with the
comprehensive plan;
      B.    When considering the surrounding land uses, is the proposed land
use more appropriate than the current comprehensive plan designation;
      C.    Is the proposed comprehensive plan amendment compatible with
surrounding land uses;
      D.    Do development trends in the general area indicate that the current
designation and circumstances have changed since the comprehensive plan was
adopted; and
      E.    Will the proposed comprehensive plan amendment impact public
services and facilities. What measures will be implemented to mitigate impacts?
(Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-06-05: ZONING AMENDMENT CRITERIA:
   (1)   The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of
each proposed zoning amendment and make a recommendation regarding the same to
the board. The presiding party shall make its review in terms of the following
standards and shall find adequate evidence regarding the following criteria
when evaluating the proposed zoning district boundary amendment:
      A.    Is the proposed zone change generally consistent with the
comprehensive plan;
      B.    When considering the surrounding land uses, is the proposed zone
change more appropriate than the current zoning designation;
      C.    Is the proposed zoning map amendment compatible with surrounding
land uses;
      D.    Will the proposed zoning map amendment negatively affect the
character of the area? What measures will be implemented to mitigate impacts?
      E.    Will adequate facilities and services including sewer, water,
drainage, irrigation and utilities be provided to accommodate the proposed
zoning map amendment;
      F.    Does legal access to the subject property for the zoning map
amendment exist or will it exist at the time of development;
      G.    Does the proposed zoning map amendment require public street
improvements in order to provide adequate access to and from the subject
property to minimize undue interference with existing or future traffic
patterns created by the proposed development? What measures have been taken to
mitigate road improvements or traffic impacts; and
      H.    Will the proposed zoning map amendment impact essential public
services and facilities, such as schools, police, fire and emergency medical
services? What measures will be implemented to mitigate impacts? (Ord. 16-007,
6-20-2016)
07-06-07: CONDITIONAL REZONE:
   (1)   Restrictions: In approving a conditional rezone application, the
presiding party may establish conditions, stipulations, restrictions, or
limitations which restrict and limit the use of the rezoned property to less
than the full use allowed under the requested zone, and which impose specific
property improvement and maintenance requirements upon the requested land use.
Such conditions, stipulations, restrictions or limitations may be imposed to
promote the public health, safety and welfare, or to reduce any potential
damage, hazard, nuisance or other detriment to persons or property in the
vicinity to make the land use more compatible with neighboring land uses. When
the presiding party finds that such conditions, stipulations, restrictions or
limitations are necessary, land may be rezoned upon condition that if the land
is not used as approved, or if an approved use ends, the land use will revert
back to the zone applicable to the land immediately prior to the conditional
rezone action.
   (2)   Development Agreement: Any condition, stipulation, restriction or
limitation imposed pursuant to this article shall be incorporated as part of
any site plan, plat, document of title of conveyance and building permit
relating to the restricted land. Any predevelopment condition, stipulation,
restriction or limitation imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be verified
as being met prior to the issuance of any building permit. The applicant must
execute a written development agreement to implement and be bound by any such
condition, stipulation, restriction, or limitation. No final conditional rezone
action shall be taken until such development agreement is recorded in the
office of the county recorder. The development agreement shall have the effect
and impact provided by Idaho Code section 67-6511A. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
   (3)   Conditional Rezoning Designation: Such restricted land shall be
designated by a CR (conditional rezoning) on the official zoning map upon
approval of a resolution by the board for an "order of intent to rezone". An
"order of intent to rezone" shall be submitted to the board for approval once
the specific use has commenced on the property and all required conditions of
approval have been met and any required improvements are in place. Land uses
that require approval of a subdivision shall have an approved final plat in
accordance with this chapter before the "order of intent to rezone" is
submitted for approval by the board. Designation of a parcel as CR shall not
constitute "spot" zoning and shall not be presumptive proof that the zoning of
other property adjacent to or in the vicinity of the conditionally rezoned
property should be rezoned the same.
   (4)   Time Requirements: All conditional rezones for a land use shall
commence (see definition of "commence", section
07-02-03: of this chapter) within two (2) years of the approval of the board.
If the conditional rezone has not commenced within the stated time requirement,
the application for a conditional rezone shall lapse and become void. All
subsequent developments on the property shall reapply for land use approval.
   (5)   Notice That Conditional Rezone Conditions Not Being Met: If any
person, including staff or member of the commission, files a written notice
presenting sufficient evidence, as determined by the director, to establish
that the rezone conditions have not been met, or that a use approved by
conditional rezoning has been abandoned or has ended, the commission shall
notice a public hearing pursuant to article 5 of this chapter, said hearing to
be conducted pursuant to article 5 of this chapter. The burden of proof at such
hearing shall be on the person who filed the notice. If the commission finds
that the rezone conditions are not being followed or that the use approved by
conditional rezoning has ended, it may recommend to the board a time schedule
for compliance or may recommend that the board order the zone to revert back to
the zone from which the property was conditionally rezoned, as provided by
subsection (7)I of this section. (Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
   (6)   Conditional Rezone Approval:
      A.    Standards Of Evaluation: The presiding party shall review the
particular facts and circumstances of the proposed conditional rezone. The
presiding party shall apply the following standards when evaluating the
proposed conditional rezone:
         1.    Is the proposed conditional rezone generally consistent with the
comprehensive plan;
         2.    When considering the surrounding land uses, is the proposed
conditional rezone more appropriate than the current zoning designation;
         3.    Is the proposed conditional rezone compatible with surrounding
land uses;
         4.    Will the proposed conditional rezone negatively affect the
character of the area? What measures will be implemented to mitigate impacts?
         5.    Will adequate facilities and services including sewer, water,
drainage, irrigation and utilities be provided to accommodate proposed
conditional rezone;
         6.    Does the proposed conditional rezone require public street
improvements in order to provide adequate access to and from the subject
property to minimize undue interference with existing or future traffic
patterns? What measures have been taken to mitigate traffic impacts?
         7.    Does legal access to the subject property for the conditional
rezone exist or will it exist at time of development; and
         8.    Will the proposed conditional rezone amendment impact essential
public services and facilities, such as schools, police, fire and emergency
medical services? What measures will be implemented to mitigate impacts? (Ord.
16-007, 6-20-2016)
      B.    Conditions Must Be Met: If the commission recommends and the board
approves such order of preliminary rezoning, the order shall include any
conditions, stipulations, restrictions or limitations which the commission
recommends and the board finds are necessary to the public health, safety and
welfare. Such conditions, stipulations, restrictions or limitations must be met
before the "order of intent to rezone" is issued. The development agreement
must be signed and recorded before final approval is given.
      C.    Conditions Incorporated Into Document: Any conditions,
stipulations, restrictions or limitations imposed pursuant to this section
shall be incorporated as part of any site plan, plat, document of title of
conveyance, and building permit relating to the restricted land.
   (7)   Provisions Governing The Creation, Form, Recording, Modification,
Enforcement And Termination Of A Development Agreement:
      A.    Creation Of Development Agreement: The county may enter into a
development agreement with a developer for the development of real property in
accordance with these rules and the board's FCOs following a public land use
hearing; provided that the development agreement shall:
         1.    Describe the land subject to the development agreement;
         2.    Specify the permitted uses of the property, the density or
intensity of use, and the maximum height and size of proposed buildings;
         3.    Specify any ongoing performance of owner or developer and the
consequence for any owner's or developer's noncompliance therewith;
         4.    Provide, where appropriate, for reservation or dedication of
land for public purposes;
         5.    State that the development agreement shall not prevent the
county, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new
rules, regulations or policies that do not conflict with development agreements
applicable to the property as set forth in the agreement;
         6.    Provide that the director shall administer the development
agreements after such agreements become effective;
         7.    Provide that the director shall conduct a review of compliance
with the terms and conditions of the development agreement on a periodic basis
as established by the development agreement; and
         8.    Provide that a development agreement must be approved by the
board, upon recommendation of the commission, which recommendation may be
accepted, modified or rejected. A preliminary conditional rezoning approval
becomes final when the conditions set forth in the recorded development
agreement have been fully met by the developer as determined by the director,
in the exercise of the director's discretion including, but not limited to,
unforeseen circumstances.
      B.    Development Agreement Duration: The development agreement shall run
with the land and bind the property, only as in accordance with law, and shall
inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the parties, and any of their
respective legal representatives, heirs, successors and assignees.
      C.    Subject Matter: The development agreement may also cover any other
matter not inconsistent with this chapter, which is reasonably related to the
project, and not prohibited by law.
      D.    Parties: In addition to the county and developer, any federal,
state or local government agency or body may be included as a party to the
development agreement. If more than one government body is made party to a
development agreement, the development agreement shall specify which agency
shall be responsible for the overall administration of the development
agreement.
      E.    Form Of Development Agreements: Development agreements shall
include, in the board's discretion, but not be limited to, a clear statement of
the intent of the parties in regard to entering the agreement, necessary real
property descriptions, schedules and exhibits, a detailed statement regarding
the development of the property, and periodic review, as established by the
development agreement. The development agreement shall address the requirements
and conditions for conditional rezoning approval and shall be accompanied by,
or include, a statement necessitating the need for a development agreement.
      F.    Modification Of Development Agreements: A development agreement by
a developer concerning the use or development of the subject parcel may be
modified only by permission of the board after complying with the notice and
hearing provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6509. The modification proposal
must be in the form of a revised development agreement and must be accompanied
by a statement demonstrating the necessity for the requested modification.
      G.    Recording Of Development Agreements: Development agreements or
amended development agreements shall be recorded by the director in the office
of the county recorder and shall take effect upon the adoption by the board.
The director shall provide a copy of the recorded development agreement or
amended development agreement to the prosecuting attorney and to the developer.
Should a development agreement be terminated by the county, and the zoning
designation upon which the use is based is reversed, a document authorizing
such termination and zoning reversal shall be recorded by the director in the
office of the county recorder and supplied to the same parties noted above.
      H.    Enforcement Of Development Agreements:
         1.    Unless terminated pursuant to subsection (7)I of this section, a
development agreement, amended development agreement, or modified development
agreement, shall be enforceable by any party thereto, or their successors in
interest, notwithstanding any subsequent change in any applicable law adopted
by the county which alters or amends the laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
or policies (hereafter referred to as "laws") specified in this section.
         2.    All laws governing permitted uses of the land that is the
subject of the development agreement, including, but not limited to, uses,
density, design, height, size, and building specifications of proposed
buildings, construction standards and specifications, and water utilization
requirements applicable to the development of the property subject to a
development agreement, shall be those laws made applicable and in force at the
time of execution of the development agreement, notwithstanding any subsequent
change in any applicable laws adopted by the county, which alter or amend the
laws specified in this section. Such subsequent change shall be void as applied
to the property subject to such development agreement to the extent that it
changes any laws which any party to the development agreement has agreed to
maintain in force as written at the time of execution; provided that a
development agreement shall not prevent the board from requiring the developer
to comply with laws of general applicability enacted subsequent to the date of
the development agreement, if they could have been lawfully applied to the
property which is the subject of the development agreement at the time of
execution of the development agreement, provided the board finds it necessary
to impose the requirements because a failure to do so would place the residents
of a subdivision or of the immediate community, or both, in a condition
perilous to the residents' health or safety, or both.
      I.    Termination Of Development Agreements:
         1.    A development agreement may be terminated and the zoning
designation upon which the use is based reversed, upon the failure of the
developer to comply with the provisions in the development agreement. The
developer shall comply with the requirements set forth in the development
agreement. A development agreement may be terminated only after complying with
the notice and hearing provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6509.
         2.    If, as a result of a periodic review, the director finds and
determines that the developer has committed a breach of the terms or conditions
of the development agreement, the director shall serve notice in writing,
within a reasonable time period after the periodic review, upon the developer
setting forth with reasonable particularity the nature of the breach and the
evidence supporting the finding and determination, and provide a reasonable
time period in which to cure such material breach. If the developer fails to
cure the breach within the time period given, the county may terminate or
modify the development agreement only after complying with the notice and
hearing provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6509 and subsection (5) of this
section.
   (8)   Final Rezoning Approval ("Order Of Intent To Rezone"): A conditional
rezoning approval becomes final when the conditions set forth in the
development agreement have been fully met by the developer. Such approval shall
be in the form of a board action known as an "order of intent to rezone", and
the property shall be designated by a CR mark on the official zoning map so
that persons using the map will be put on notice. Building permits may not be
issued until the "order of intent to rezone" is approved by the board and
recorded in the county recorder's office by the developer. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-
2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
ARTICLE 7
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
07-07-01: Purpose
07-07-03: Application Process
07-07-05: Hearing Criteria
07-07-07: Additional Standards For A Temporary Residence That Requires A
Conditional Use Permit
07-07-09: Additional Standards For Daycares That Require A Conditional Use
Permit (CUP)
07-07-11: Additional Standards For Mineral Extraction (Long Term) 1  (Rep. by
Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-07-13: Standards For A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) For A Wind Farm 2  (Rep.
by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-07-15: Standards For Manufacturing Or Processing Of Hazardous Chemicals Or
Gases 3  (Rep. by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-07-17: Special Conditions
07-07-19: Additional Studies
07-07-21: Violation Of Conditions
07-07-23: Land Use Time Limitations
07-07-25: Request For Extension
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  07-14-19: of this chapter.
2 2. See section
  07-14-33: of this chapter.
3 3. See section
  07-14-15: of this chapter.
07-07-01: PURPOSE:
Every use which requires the granting of a conditional use permit is declared
to possess characteristics which require review and appraisal by the commission
to determine whether or not the use would cause any damage, hazard, nuisance or
other detriment to persons or property in the vicinity. The commission may
require higher standards of site development than those listed specifically in
this chapter in order to assure that the proposed use will be compatible with
other property and uses in the vicinity. The commission may revoke or modify
its approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the hearing and appeals procedures found in article 5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-07-03: APPLICATION PROCESS:
A conditional use permit application shall be subject to a public hearing,
review, and approval, as provided by article 5 of this chapter. The application
process shall be as follows:
   (1)   Form: Applications for conditional use permits, including a
development plan and/or an operation plan if applicable, shall be filed with
DSD.
   (2)   Fee: An application must be accompanied by a filing fee as established
by the adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-07-05: HEARING CRITERIA:
The presiding party shall consider each conditional use permit application by
finding adequate evidence to answer the following questions in its FCOs:
   (1)   Is the proposed use permitted in the zone by conditional use permit;
   (2)   What is the nature of the request;
   (3)   Is the proposed use consistent with the comprehensive plan;
   (4)   Will the proposed use be injurious to other property in the immediate
vicinity and/or negatively change the essential character of the area;
   (5)   Will adequate water, sewer, irrigation, drainage and stormwater
drainage facilities, and utility systems be provided to accommodate the use;
   (6)   Does legal access to the subject property for the development exist or
will it exist at the time of development;
   (7)   Will there be undue interference with existing or future traffic
patterns; and
   (8)   Will essential services be provided to accommodate the use including,
but not limited to, school facilities, police and fire protection, emergency
medical services, irrigation facilities, and will the services be negatively
impacted by such use or require additional public funding in order to meet the
needs created by the requested use? (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-07-07: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR A TEMPORARY RESIDENCE THAT REQUIRES A
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   (1)   The decision making body shall consider the following:
      A.    The uses of the surrounding properties in the determination of the
compatibility of the proposed temporary use permit with such uses;
      B.    Duration of the proposed use;
      C.    Considerations of site and building design and capabilities; and
      D.    Recommendations from applicable government agencies.
   (2)   The decision making body may require conditions as are necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of parcels within the
set notification distance, as well as conditions that would protect the uses of
surrounding properties. (Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-07-09: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR DAYCARES THAT REQUIRE A CONDITIONAL USE
PERMIT (CUP):
   (1)   If the presiding party approves a daycare, it shall specify the
maximum number of children as a condition of approval. The presiding party
shall also consider all health and safety requirements, considerations of site
and building design and capabilities, and recommendations from applicable
government agencies.
   (2)   The board shall consider the uses of the surrounding properties in the
determination of the compatibility of the proposed daycare center with such
uses. Additional conditions as are necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the children may be required. (Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-07-11: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR MINERAL EXTRACTION (LONG TERM) 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  07-14-19: of this chapter.
07-07-13: STANDARDS FOR A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP) FOR A WIND FARM 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  07-14-33: of this chapter.
07-07-15: STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURING OR PROCESSING OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS OR
GASES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
 
Notes
1 3. See section
  07-14-15: of this chapter.
07-07-17: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
Special conditions may be attached to a conditional use permit including, but
not limited to, conditions which:
   (1)   Minimize adverse impact, such as damage, hazard, and nuisance, to
persons or the subject property or property in the vicinity;
   (2)   Control the sequence and timing of development;
   (3)   Control the duration of development;
   (4)   Designate the exact location and nature of development;
   (5)   Require the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services;
   (6)   Require more restrictive standards than those generally required in
this chapter; or
   (7)   Mitigate the negative impacts of the proposed development upon service
delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts, providing
services within the county. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-
2011)
07-07-19: ADDITIONAL STUDIES:
Prior to making a decision concerning a conditional use permit request, the
presiding party may require studies at the applicant's expense of the social,
economic, fiscal, and environmental effects of the proposed conditional use.
(Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-07-21: VIOLATION OF CONDITIONS:
If any person, including staff or a member of the commission, files a written
notice presenting sufficient evidence, as determined by the director, that the
conditions of the conditional use permit have been violated, the presiding
party that made the final decision, shall set the matter for a public hearing
noticed in accordance with article 5 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010;
amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-07-23: LAND USE TIME LIMITATIONS:
   (1)   Commencement: When a conditional use permit is granted, the land use
or construction of its facility proposed in the application must have commenced
within three (3) years of the date of the final decision by the presiding party
or a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The improvements for the approved use
must be completed within five (5) years of the same date. If the use is not
commenced or completed within these time periods, the use and its approval
shall expire as provided for in subsection (2) of this section. Upon expiration
of the use or the approval of that use as provided by this section, the
applicant can seek approval of the use only by filing a new initial
application. However, gravel pits and public utility facilities are excepted
from the commencement and time completion requirements. The presiding party has
the discretionary power to establish commencement and completion requirements
as specific conditions of approval for gravel pits and power plant public
service facilities. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
   (2)   Expiration: After the three (3) year period has expired, if any
person, including staff or member of the commission, files a written notice
presenting sufficient evidence, as determined by the director, to establish
that the land use or construction of its facility provided for in the
conditional use permit, has not commenced or after the five (5) year period
that said use has been abandoned, ended, or not completed, the use has expired.
(Ord. 12-006, 3-22-2012)
      A.    Appeal By Affected Person: Any affected person who is aggrieved by
the director's decision as to an application pursuant to this subsection, may
file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision", of this chapter.
      B.    Reversion: If an appeal is not received or if the commission finds
that the use has been abandoned, ended, or not completed, the prior approval
shall be set aside and the property shall revert to its prior status. (Ord. 10-
006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-07-25: REQUEST FOR EXTENSION:
   (1)   Request: An applicant may request extension of the time period
provided by this section by filing an application for extension with DSD. Such
application must be filed prior to the date of expiration of the three (3) year
period for commencement of the land use or prior to the expiration of the five
(5) year period for completion of the project. The matter shall be heard at a
public hearing before the presiding party who made the final decision, in
accordance with the notice and hearing procedures of article 5 of this chapter.
If the application is not timely filed, it shall not be accepted. (Ord. 12-006,
3-22-2012)
   (2)   Decision: The presiding party may extend the commencement period or
the completion period upon proof of good cause by the applicant. The burden of
proof as to the showing of good cause for the extension shall be on the
applicant, and good cause shall be determined at the discretion of the
presiding party. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
ARTICLE 8
VARIANCE
SECTION:
07-08-01: Application
07-08-03: Criteria
07-08-05: Approval Or Denial
07-08-07: Appeal
07-08-01: APPLICATION:
   (1)   The applicant shall submit to DSD an application for variance along
with the appropriate fee.
   (2)   The director may grant a variance, as an administrative decision, of
up to thirty three percent (33%) of the following requirements: lot size, lot
width or depth, structure height, setback distances for the front, back, or
side yards, or parking space.
      A.    Application And Administrative Requirements: A site plan and letter
of intent shall be submitted to DSD for review together with all appropriate
fees as established by the adopted fee schedule. The burden of proof lies upon
the applicant to show whether characteristics of the site create an undue
hardship.
      B.    Notifications: Upon acceptance of an application, DSD shall provide
notification by mail of the variance request to the owners of parcels within
three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the parcel and shall
provide such individuals a period of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date
of the mailing to submit comments concerning the proposed variance.
      C.    Comments: The director shall consider all comments that are
received within the fifteen (15) calendar day comment period prior to making a
final written decision concerning the variance request. In considering
comments, the director shall evaluate whether granting the variance will be
consistent with the comprehensive plan and whether characteristics of the site
create an undue hardship.
      D.    Notice Of Decision: The director shall give notice of the decision
granting or denying the application, to those previously notified of the
pending application.
   (3)   The commission shall consider all other applications for variances in
accordance with the notice and hearing procedure of article 5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-007, 5-18-2011)
07-08-03: CRITERIA:
   (1)   A variance shall be granted in compliance with Idaho Code section 67-
6516, and notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to property
owners adjoining the subject property.
   (2)   The presiding party shall ask and answer the following questions in
their FCOs:
      A.    Will granting the variance be consistent with the comprehensive
plan;
      B.    Do characteristics of the site create an undue hardship; and
      C.    Is the variance in conflict with the public interest? (Ord. 10-006,
8-16-2010)
07-08-05: APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
Whenever the presiding party grants or denies a variance, it shall specify:
   (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
   (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
   (3)   If denied, what actions, if any, the applicant might propose to try to
obtain the variance upon submission of a new application. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-
2010)
07-08-07: APPEAL:
Any affected person who is aggrieved by the decision made pursuant to this
article, may file a written notice of appeal in accordance with article 5 of
this chapter. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 9
AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA ACT
SECTION:
07-09-01: Purpose
07-09-03: Definitions
07-09-05: Creation And Designation Of APA
07-09-07: Review Process
07-09-09: Expansion Or Modification Of An APA
07-09-11: Termination Of An APA
07-09-13: Enrollment Duration
07-09-15: Fees
07-09-17: Prohibitions
07-09-01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this ordinance is to comply with an Idaho's Agricultural
Protection Area Title 67-Chapter 97, Idaho Code, as amended. (Ord. 25-006, 4-
18-2025)
07-09-03: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall:
 
                                        A County employee appointed by the
                                        Board of County Commissioners to
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:                 fulfill the duties of the planning and
                                        zoning administrator or other
                                        administrative officer pursuant to
                                        section 67-9706, Idaho Code.
                                        Activities or conditions conducted on
                                        land actively devoted to agriculture as
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION:                 defined in section 63-604, Idaho Code,
                                        or on forest land as defined in section
                                        63-1701, Idaho Code.
                                        Specific parcels of land in a
                                        designated geographic area voluntarily
AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA (APA):      created under the authority of this
                                        chapter for the purpose of protecting
                                        and preserving agricultural land.
                                        The advisory board to the governing
AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA COMMISSION: body created pursuant to section 67-
                                        9705, Idaho Code.
                                        Anyone who owns five (5) acres or more
                                        of land that has been in active
                                        agricultural or forest production for
                                        the previous three (3) consecutive
AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA APPLICANT:  years, consistent with the provisions
                                        of sections 63-604 and 63-1701, Idaho
                                        Code, and who voluntarily applies for
                                        that land to be part of an agricultural
                                        protection area.
                                        A situation or circumstance over which
                                        a landowner in an agricultural
                                        protection area has no control and can
                                        then petition for removal for reasons
                                        that include but are not limited to an
HARDSHIP:                               adverse result in litigation against
                                        the farm or landowner, death of a close
                                        family member that would lead to
                                        unanticipated financial hardships,
                                        significant tax liabilities, bankruptcy
                                        due to another person's fraud, or any
                                        other illegal activity.
                                        Written documents submitted to a
                                        governing body or agricultural
PROPOSAL:                               protection area commission from a
                                        landowner regarding his property. (Ord.
                                        25-006, 4-18-2025)
 
07-09-05: CREATION AND DESIGNATION OF APA:
   A.   An APA designation is a voluntary land use designation available to
landowners who wish to protect their agricultural land from future
nonagricultural development. To qualify for an APA designation, the land must
be:
      1.   At least five (5) contiguous acres, and
      2.   Actively devoted to an agricultural production as defined in Canyon
County code, and
      3.   Appraised as agriculture land, with a current agricultural
exemption, and
      4.   Designated as "Agriculture" on the County Comprehensive Plan, and
      5.   Zoned as "Agriculture" on the County Zoning map, and
      6.   Under one ownership.
   B.   Landowners wishing to establish an AP A must provide a completed
application to the County Development Services Department ("DSD") in a format
and content prescribed by DSD.
   C.   At a minimum, the application shall include the following:
      1.   Name, phone number, email, and mailing address of the land owner;
      2.   Affidavit of legal land ownership;
      3.   A legal description of the parcels, structures, and facilities
proposed to be included in the APA;
      4.   A map showing the proposed boundaries of the proposed APA;
      5.   History of ownership, the number of years the land has been in
agricultural production, the types of agricultural commodities produced, and
the applicant's plan to continue using the land for agricultural purposes;
      6.   A letter of intent addressing all application criteria, reasons for
seeking an APA designation, the current contiguous acreages of land, land use,
agricultural productivity, other relevant characteristics of the land to be
included in the APA, the number of years the land has been in agricultural
production, the types of agricultural commodities produced, and the applicant's
plan to continue using the land for agricultural purposes; and
      7.   Soil surveys, documentation of water rights, flood plain
designation, and any other relevant environmental assessments. (Ord. 25-006, 4-
18-2025)
07-09-07: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Upon receipt of the proposed application and payment of fees, DSD shall
have up to forty-five (45) days for review, provide notification to cities if
applicable, compilation and posting of application materials, and scheduling of
the APA Commission meeting. If the proposed APA is within one mile of a city's
area of impact boundary, that city or cities shall be notified of the
application and be given a minimum of fourteen (14) days to provide comment.
Comments from a city or cities shall be considered in context of the below
listed criteria.
   B.   The application shall be evaluated on the following criteria:
      1.   The total contiguous acreage of the land is at least five (5) acres
in size and is actively devoted to agricultural production;
      2.   Potential of conflict with city annexation, development plans, or
agreements;
      3.   Proximity to existing public rights of way;
      4.   Proximity to planned transportation corridors, improvements, or
future public rights of way;
      5.   Proximity to existing or planned utility locations;
      6.   Proximity to planned airport expansion or development;
      7.   Proximity to any planned improvements described in the County Parks
Plan;
      8.   Compatibility and consistency with existing development patterns,
comprehensive plan designations, zoning designations, or planned development
with land use entitlements;
      9.   Degree of transitional of the land use in the proximity of the
proposed APA;
      10.   Agricultural production capability of the land within the proposed
APA;
      11.   Soil classification, water rights and usage, and any effect on
provision of essential services to the requested APA land or nearby land; and
      12.   Other local impacts relevant to the proposed APA.
   C.   Within sixty (60) days of receiving a recommendation from APA
commission to support or reject an application, the planning and zoning
administrator or other administrative officer appointed by the board of county
commissioners shall approve or deny the application to include land in an
agricultural protection area in a written decision. The administrative
officer's written decision shall specify, at minimum:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The agricultural protection area commission's recommendation;
      3.   A reasoned explanation for the decision reached by the administrator
or other administrative officer, if appointed; and
      4.   If applicable, the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
obtain approval.
   D.   If the administrative officer, fails to issue a written decision within
sixty (60) days of receiving a recommendation from the agricultural protection
area commission, the recommendation of the agricultural protection area
commission shall become the decision of the administrative officer.
   E.   An aggrieved applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of County
Commissioners within thirty (30) days of receiving the administrative officer's
written decision or of the APA commission's recommendation become final because
the administrative officer did not issue a timely written decision. The Board
of County Commissioners shall review the appeal in the time and manner
prescribed in section 67-9706, Idaho Code and hold the public hearing as
required. Within sixty (60) days of the closing of the public hearing, the
board of county commissioners shall issue a final decision approving or denying
the application. The board of county commissioners' final decision shall be
subject to judicial review.
   F.   Upon the final approval of an application, the Clerk of the Board of
County Commissioners shall:
      1.   Record a date of creation or dissolution of an APA, a legal
description of the area, and approved findings and facts related to the APA
with the County Recorder within ten (10) days from the date of its final
decision;
      2.   Notify relevant public officials and agencies of the designation.
(Ord. 25-006, 4-18-2025)
07-09-09: EXPANSION OR MODIFICATION OF AN APA:
An expansion or modification of an existing APA shall follow the same
application, review, and hearing procedures outlined in this code. Any
expansion of an AP A shall be contiguous to the existing APA. (Ord. 25-006, 4-
18-2025)
07-09-11: TERMINATION OF AN APA:
A landowner wishing to terminate an AP A must request in writing a meeting with
the Board of County Commissioners. The meeting request shall include a proof of
undue hardship. The Board of County Commissioners shall acknowledge receipt of
the petition for removal in writing. Early termination of the APA shall only
occur upon the proving by the land owner of an undue hardship. The landowner
seeking to terminate an APA bears the burden of proof in demonstrating the
undue hardship. (Ord. 25-006, 4-18-2025)
07-09-13: ENROLLMENT DURATION:
Per Idaho State code, lands designated as an APA will remain so designated for
a period of twenty (20) years. A landowner wishing to end an approved APA
designation must notify the Board of County commissioners in writing of their
desire not to renew the land's APA designation before their land designation
expires. Removal will occur upon the expiration of the current twenty (20) year
designation period or ten (10) years from the written request for removal,
whichever is sooner. Failure of the landowner to request removal, will result
in the APA designation automatically renewing for another twenty (20) years.
The clerk of the board of county commissioners shall record the renewal of an
agricultural protection area pursuant to Idaho Code Section 67-9707.
As a courtesy, Canyon County DSD may send written notice approximately fifteen
(15) months prior to the deadline for automatic renewal as a reminder of the
date. Failure of DSD to send notice or a landowner's claim of not receiving
notice from DSD will not be a defense to the automatic renewal under Idaho Code
67-9708. (Ord. 25-006, 4-18-2025)
07-09-15: FEES:
Fee amounts are established and periodically updated by the Board of County
Commissioner's approval of the DSD fee schedule. A completeness review fee will
be required if submitted materials require more than two (2) staff reviews
prior to acceptance. Upon acceptance by DSD, an application fee shall not
exceed the cost of covering administrative expenses, including, but not limited
to, reviewing materials, processing and recording documents, and conducting
public meetings. In addition, if the APA is approved by the Board of County
Commissioners, all applicable fees associated with updating the agricultural
protection area map shall be required before the APA is finalized. Any
application for changes to an APA shall be the same as the fees requesting
establishment. (Ord. 25-006, 4-18-2025)
07-09-17: PROHIBITIONS:
Unless otherwise approved by the Board of County Commissioners, the following
land uses are prohibited within an APA unless such uses are also contributing
to agricultural production:
   A.   The siting of residential, commercial, manufacturing, industrial, solar
energy structures, or wind energy structures; or
   B.   Any other non-agricultural land use not explicitly allowed in an
agricultural zone in the Canyon County land use matrix. (Ord. 25-006, 4-18-
2025)
ARTICLE 10
ZONES
SECTION:
07-10-01: Zones Enumerated
07-10-03: Private Road And Driveway Requirements
07-10-05: Public Street Right-Of-Way Widths
07-10-07: Unspecified Uses
07-10-09: Transmission Poles And Lines
07-10-11: Functional Classification Map
07-10-13: Signs
07-10-15: Property Boundary Coverage
07-10-17: Property Boundary Adjustment
07-10-19: Section Line Setback
07-10-21: Setbacks; Minimum Parcel Or Lot Size; Height Regulations
07-10-23: City Impact Areas
07-10-25: Purposes Of Zones
07-10-27: Land Use Regulations (Matrix)
07-10-01: ZONES ENUMERATED:
For the purpose of promoting pride of ownership, health, safety, and general
welfare within its area of jurisdiction, the County is hereby divided into the
following zones:
A    (Agricultural) Zone
R-R  (Rural Residential) Zone
R-1  (Single-Family Residential) Zone
R-2  (Combined Medium-Density Residential) Zone
C-1  (Neighborhood Commercial) Zone
C-2  (Service Commercial) Zone
M-1  (Light Industrial) Zone
M-2  (Heavy Industrial) Zone
MU-A (Mixed Use - Arterial) Zone
F    (Flood Hazard Overlay) Zone
AP   (Airport Overlay) Zone
 
(Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10-03: PRIVATE ROAD AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Frontage, Easement, Or Road Lot Required: For the purpose of providing
adequate access for equipment, emergency vehicles and other services to
inhabited buildings, each parcel must demonstrate access by one of the
following prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance:
      A.    Frontage: A minimum property frontage of sixty feet (60') is
required along the right-of-way of a public road for the purpose of ingress/
egress. The frontage width requirement may be reduced to a width not less than
fifty feet (50') in accordance with subsection (1)D of this section.
      B.    Driveway Or Private Road Application, Easement And Maintenance
Agreement:
         1.    Applications for driveways serving two (2) properties and all
private roads shall be filed with DSD.
            (A) An application on a form provided by the Director and the fees
shall be submitted. Additional fees shall be charged for any requested
alternative standards which require review by the County Engineer.
            (B) When the application is filed, the Director shall review the
application to determine if: 1) the proposed driveway serving two (2)
properties or private road is in accord with the standards in this section and
chapter 6, article 5 of this Code and 2) will not disrupt regional or local
long range transportation plans. Conditions may be placed on the approval to
ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this section.
         2.    Driveways serving two (2) properties and all private roads shall
be located within a recorded permanent, perpetual easement, having a minimum
width of sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way of a public street to the
property for the purpose of ingress/egress. The easement width requirement may
be reduced to a width not less than twenty eight feet (28') in accordance with
subsection (1)D of this section.
         3.    Driveways serving two (2) properties and all private roads shall
have a recorded road users maintenance agreement that describes the responsible
parties for construction and maintenance, including repairs, and necessary
improvements to accommodate additional accesses in the future. The agreement
shall also list any construction warranties applicable to the specific driveway
or private road. Failure to maintain a previously approved driveway or private
road shall be a violation of this article subject to the enforcement procedures
in article 19 of this chapter.
         4.    All properties taking access to a private road shall be in
compliance with the addressing standards in chapter 6, article 5 of this Code.
         5.    Driveways serving two (2) residences and all private roads shall
be located to minimize disruption of existing agricultural practices.
      C.    Private Road On Subdivision Plat: A private road shall be shown as
a separate, nonbuildable lot in accordance with the requirements of section
07-17-31: of this chapter.
      D.    Width Reduction: The width of a parcel's road frontage, easement or
private road may be reduced by the Director if the reduction demonstrates all
of the following:
         1.    Will the proposed reduction provide adequate access;
         2.    Do physical characteristics of the site require a width
reduction; and
         3.    Would approval of the request cause injury, damage, or a safety
hazard?
   (2)   Fire District Road Requirements: The construction of driveways or
private roads longer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the public street
right-of-way line to the most distant portion of an inhabited building must be
approved in writing from the applicable fire district.
   (3)   Driveway And Private Road Requirements:
      A.    Minimum Standards: Driveways and private roads shall be built to
the following minimum standards in table 1 of this subsection:
   TABLE 1
 
                 Subbase Or                     Plant Mix
                 Ballast        Base Course     Pavement (ISPWC Surface Width
                                                Class III Mix)
Driveways
(serving a
maximum of 2
inhabited
buildings per                                                 
definition in
section
07-02-03: of
this chapter):
                                4" thick 3/
                                4 minus gravel
  Existing                      base or                         12' wide all
 driveways that n/a            equivalent      n/a             weather driving
  add a second                  recycled                        surface
  residence                     asphalt paving
                                (RAP), graded
                                and compacted
                 If less than   4" thick 3/
                 150': n/a      4 minus gravel
  New driveways                base or                         12' wide all
 built after    If 150' or     equivalent      n/a             weather driving
  January 19,    longer: 9" of  recycled                        surface
  2005           uncrushed      asphalt paving
                 aggregate (pit (RAP), graded
                 run)           and compacted
Private roads
(serving more
than 2 permanent
dwellings or
inhabited                                                     
buildings as
defined in
section
07-02-03: of
this chapter):
  Private roads                 4" thick 3/
  that are                      4 minus gravel                  20' wide all
 estimated to   n/a            base, graded    n/a             weather driving
  serve 100 ADT                 and compacted                   surface
  or less
  Private roads  9" of minus 6" 6" of 3/4"                      24' for local
  that are       uncrushed      crushed                         roads and 26'
 estimated to   aggregate (pit aggregate       2.5" thick      for collector
  serve more     run)           (gravel)                        roads1
  than 100 ADT
 
Note:
   1.    Alternative pavement section designs that include geotextile fabrics,
geogrids, cemented treated base, etc., may be submitted to the county for
consideration and approval following review by the county engineer. Subbase
thickness shall not be less than twice the maximum sized aggregate and base
layer thickness shall not exceed 10 inches. Base is to be replaced in the GE
pavement section at a ratio of 2.2:1 for plant mix and 0.9:1 for subbase.
         1.    Base to meet the requirements of ISPWC section 802, Table 1 -
Type I Crushed Aggregate Base.
         2.    Subbase to meet the requirement of ISPWC section 801, Table 1 -
8 Inch, 6 Inch, Or 3 Inch Uncrushed Aggregate.
         3.    Trip generation per dwelling is 9.52 trips/day per ITE, "Trip
Generation 9th Edition", rates for single-family detached housing. Total ADT
for a private road is the total daily trips for the total dwellings entitled on
properties using any segment of a private road.
         4.    The structural section of a private road shall be in accordance
with the minimum section thickness as indicated in the table. Thinner sections
of private roads may be possible based upon a traffic index proposed by the
applicant and reviewed by the county engineer, an R-value (ITD method T-8)
determined during the geotechnical investigation and the following formula:
GE (inches) = 0.0384*(TI)*(100-R) where GE equals gravel equivalence or the
entire section of ISPWC - 3/4" base (section 802), TI = traffic index and R =
R-value test result
R-value is to be determined by soil laboratory on a representative sample(s)
from the project subgrade. Maximum subgrade R-value for design to be R-35.
Subgrade is to be confirmed at the time of construction to be firm and stable.
Soft, wet, or deflecting subgrade is to be addressed by project civil/
geotechnical engineer(s).
         5.    Any private road shall be named and a sign conforming to the
applicable highway district standards shall be erected and maintained at the
property owners' expense. The road must have a road name approved by the
director. The naming of roads shall comply with chapter 6, article 5 of this
code. Verification of installation of road signs shall be provided to DSD.
      B.    Inspection And Certification: A driveway or private road must be
constructed prior to final inspection of an inhabited building. The
construction of driveways longer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a
public street right of way to the most distant portion of an inhabited building
and private roads shall be inspected and certified by the applicant's engineer
prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy. This requirement may be waived
by the director if a road construction warranty has been recorded.
      C.    Bridges: Bridges shall be inspected and certified by an engineer of
the developer's choice, to have been constructed in compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws.
      D.    Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall have a fifty foot (50') radius for a
driving surface and a seventy foot (70') radius for right of way or easement.
(Ord. 16-007, 6-20-2016)
07-10-05: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY WIDTHS:
Public street right of way widths shall be determined and approved by the
governing highway district or agency. (Ord. 16-007, 6-20-2016)
07-10-07: UNSPECIFIED USES:
Uses not specified are prohibited, unless determined by the director to be
similar or accessory to at least one of the allowed or permitted uses for that
particular zone. If a proposed use is similar to or accessory to a
conditionally permitted use, the applicant may only receive permission for the
similar or accessory use through a conditional use permit. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-
2010)
07-10-09: TRANSMISSION POLES AND LINES:
Transmission poles and lines greater than one hundred feet (100') in height or
greater as allowed by the federal aviation administration are an allowed use in
all zones. (Ord. 12-006, 3-22-2012)
07-10-11: FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION MAP:
The adopted Canyon County functional classification map shall be considered in
all development requests to the county. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-10-13: SIGNS:
   (1)   No signs are allowed in any zones without an approved administrative
decision with the following exceptions:
      A.    Nonilluminated Signs: The following types of signs, when not
illuminated, do not require an administrative decision:
         1.    Signs related to home occupations in accordance with section
07-14-13: of this chapter.
         2.    Directional or information signs bearing no advertising message
located within a parcel, and signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area
erected for the convenience of the public, such as signs identifying restrooms,
public telephones, walkways and similar features or facilities.
         3.    Any sign which is visible only from the parcel on which it is
located.
         4.    Campaign signs, provided they are removed within seven (7) days
after the election.
         5.    Property signs advertising the availability of property for
sale, lease, or rent, but shall not be greater than thirty two (32) square
feet.
         6.    Home signs. An accessory sign or nameplate announcing the names
of the owners or occupants of the premises.
         7.    Memorial signs or tablets and names of buildings and dates of
erection when cut into the surface or facade of the building.
         8.    Signs placed by a public utility showing the location of
underground facilities.
         9.    Traffic or other county signs, signs required to be mentioned by
law, railroad crossing signs, legal notices and such temporary emergency or
nonadvertising signs as may be authorized by the board.
      B.    Agricultural Zone: Signs for any allowed or approved use not
exceeding thirty two (32) square feet in area and not exceeding ten feet (10')
in height. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
      C.    Commercial And Industrial Zones: For commercial and industrial
uses, the area of the sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet and
shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height, unless approved by an administrative
decision from the director. Signs may be lighted, electric, or have moving
parts but may not be a distraction to the public so as to be a traffic hazard.
(Ord. 12-006, 3-22-2012)
   (2)   No sign shall be placed on a highway district right of way unless
authorized by the highway district having jurisdiction.
   (3)   All signs must be placed so as not to block vision by oncoming
traffic.
   (4)   All signs shall be maintained in good order and repair. If damaged, it
shall be repaired or removed from the premises within thirty (30) days of
notice from DSD.
   (5)   A building permit for a sign may be required upon review by DSD, or if
the sign is over six feet (6') in height and permanently affixed to the ground.
   (6)   Standards for signs that require an administrative decision:
      A.    Application And Administrative Requirements: A site plan and letter
of intent shall be submitted to DSD for review together with all appropriate
fees as established by the adopted fee schedule.
      B.    Notifications: Upon acceptance of an application, DSD shall provide
notification of the sign application by mail to the owners of parcels within
six hundred feet (600') of the external boundaries of the parcel on which the
sign will be located and shall provide such individuals a period of fifteen
(15) calendar days from the date of the mailing to submit comments concerning
the proposed sign. DSD shall also provide notice to the appropriate highway
district for comment.
      C.    Comments: The director shall consider all comments that are
received within the fifteen (15) day comment period prior to making a final
decision concerning the sign request. In considering comments, the director
shall evaluate whether such comments adequately demonstrate that the sign would
be reasonably compatible with the surrounding vicinity.
      D.    Approval Shall Be At The Discretion Of The Director: The director
shall consider all of the application materials as well as all comments
received relating to the application and the uses of the surrounding properties
in the determination of the compatibility of the proposed sign. The burden is
on the applicant to show compatibility. The director may require conditions
that are necessary to make the sign compatible with the surrounding vicinity.
      E.    Notice Of Decision: The director shall give notice of the decision
granting or denying the application, to those previously notified of the
pending application.
      F.    Appeal By Affected Person: Any affected person who is aggrieved by
the director's decision as to an application pursuant to this subsection, may
file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision", of this chapter. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-10-15: PROPERTY BOUNDARY COVERAGE:
In residential and agricultural zones, there are no county regulations
regarding the maximum area of a lot which shall be occupied by impervious
surface. In commercial and industrial zones, the area of a lot occupied by
impervious surface shall not exceed eighty five percent (85%) of the total area
of the lot. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-10-17: PROPERTY BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT:
Property lines of unplatted parcels may be adjusted in accordance with the
following:
   (1)   The adjustment does not create eligibility for a building permit or
administrative lot split on a parcel that was otherwise ineligible;
   (2)   The adjustment does not create any additional parcels;
   (3)   The adjustment does not result in the relocation of a building permit
or provide for an administrative lot split onto a contiguous parcel that is not
eligible for an administrative lot split;
   (4)   A recorded survey showing all changes to affected property lines shall
be submitted to DSD;
   (5)   The adjustment does not create parcels smaller than the minimum lot
size for the zone in which the property is located, unless the adjustment
increases the size of an existing parcel that was smaller than the minimum lot
size for the corresponding zone prior to the adjustment;
   (6)   Original property lot lines may not be adjusted by more than eighty
feet (80') except that the director may allow the adjustment of over eighty
feet (80') if the adjustment does not cause injury, damage or a safety hazard;
   (7)   The adjustment shall not alter the location of any platted lot line;
   (8)   The property owner has submitted the application form, required
supporting information and the applicable fee as established by the adopted fee
schedule;
   (9)   If the adjustment involves contiguous parcels with different owners,
both property owners shall submit their written consent to the adjustment with
the application. However, only one application form and fee are required;
   (10)   Upon compliance with the above items of this section, the Director
shall, within ten (10) business days, issue a permit for the property boundary
adjustment. The property owner shall record the permit from the Director and
the corresponding survey and legal description with the Canyon County
Recorder's Office. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-10-19: SECTION LINE SETBACK:
No permanent structure shall be located closer than seventy feet (70') to any
section line or quarter section line preserved for a future road unless the
highway district having jurisdiction waives the seventy foot (70') setback
requirement. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-10-21: SETBACKS; MINIMUM PARCEL OR LOT SIZE; HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Setback Requirements:
      A.    Agricultural And Residential Zones:
      TABLE 1
      AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL ZONES
      SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
 
                                    Front Side Rear Corner
Agricultural Zone A                 30'   10'  20'  30'
Residential Zones R-R, R-1, and R-2 20'   10'  20'  20'
 
         1.    Front Yard: Unless the provisions of subsection (1)A4 of this
section apply, front setbacks shall be measured from the greatest of either the
front property line, public street right-of-way line, or private road easement
line. Long established setbacks are permissible:
            (A) When the alignment of existing buildings is matched on two (2)
or more parcels, with at least one contiguous parcel; and
            (B) When not a corner parcel; and
            (C) When in a platted subdivision.
         2.    Rear Yard: Rear setbacks shall apply except that long
established existing setbacks are permissible:
            (A) When the alignment of existing buildings is matched on two (2)
or more parcels, with at least one contiguous parcel; and
            (B) When in a platted subdivision.
         3.    Corner Parcel: Front yard setback requirements are applicable
from property lines along a public street and/or private road of a corner
parcel with no exceptions made for long established setbacks.
         4.    Principal Arterial And Major Collector Preservation:
            (A) No building or structure shall be erected nearer than fifty
feet (50') from the centerline of any major collector shown on the Canyon
County functional classification map unless the highway district having
jurisdiction waives such setback.
            (B) No building or structure shall be erected nearer than one
hundred twenty feet (120') from the centerline of U.S. 20/26, ninety five feet
(95') from the centerline of SH44, ninety feet (90') from the centerline of
SH55 and seventy feet (70') from the centerline of any other principal arterial
shown on the Canyon County functional classification map unless the highway
district having jurisdiction waives such setback.
         5.    Front And Corner Yard: Front and corner setbacks shall be
measured from the greatest of either the property line, public street right-of-
way line, or private road easement line.
      B.    Commercial, Mixed Use And Industrial Zones:
         1.    Parcel Adjacent To Parcel In Unlike Zone: Setbacks on all lot
lines adjacent to a parcel of any other zoning classification shall be
determined by the sum of the setbacks where the zones abut, divided by two (2),
when not located on section or quarter section line.
         2.    Parcel Adjacent On All Boundaries To Other Parcels In Like Zone:
If a parcel is adjacent on all boundaries to other parcels within the same
zoning classification, then there are no side or rear setback requirements.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no building or structure shall be erected nearer
than twenty feet (20') from the front property line, and any public street
right- of-way line or private road easement line, except that long established
setbacks are permissible:
            (A)   When the alignment of existing buildings is matched on two
(2) or more parcels, with at least one contiguous parcel; and
            (B)   When not a corner parcel or not fronting a principal
arterial; and
            (C)   When in a platted subdivision.
         3.    Principal Arterial And Major Collector Preservation:
            (A)   No building or structure shall be erected nearer than fifty
feet (50') from the centerline of any major collector shown on the Canyon
County functional classification map unless the highway district having
jurisdiction waives such setback.
            (B)   No building or structure shall be erected nearer than one
hundred twenty feet (120') from the centerline of U.S. 20/26, ninety five feet
(95') from the centerline of SH44, ninety feet (90') from the centerline of SH
55 and seventy feet (70') from the centerline of any other principal arterial
shown on the Canyon County functional classification map unless the highway
district having jurisdiction waives such setback.
   (2)   Minimum Parcel Or Lot Size:
         TABLE 2
         MINIMUM PARCEL OR LOT SIZE
 
                              Minimum Lot Size                Minimum Lot Width
                              40 acres or in accordance with
Agricultural Zone A           the administrative land         60'
                              division requirements of
                              article 18 of this chapter
Residential Zone R-R          Average minimum lot size of 2   60'
                              acres for a residential lot 3,4
Residential Zone R-1          Average minimum lot size of 1   60'
                              acre for a residential lot1,3,4
                              Average minimum lot size of 1/
Residential Zone R-2          2 acre for a residential        60'
                              lot1,3,4
Commercial and Industrial
Zones C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2, and No minimum lot size             80'2
MU-A
 
Notes:
    1.    For parcels within the Area of City Impact with central sewer and/or
water services, the parcel or lot size may be reduced to 12,000 square feet.
    2.    There is no minimum lot width requirement for parcels or platted lots
containing or intended for noninhabited structures.
    3.    Where a property owner dedicates land for public use or right-of-way
for roadways where no direct lot access is provided, the total number of lots
that can be created on a property through subdivision is calculated by the
total parcel size prior to platting divided by the average minimum lot size.
The resulting lots, and residential lots created through an administrative land
division in subsection
07-18-01(1) of this chapter, may reduce the average minimum lot size by no more
than 15 percent.
    4.    The average minimum lot size shall be calculated for the residential
lots within each phase of a subdivision.
   (3)   Height Regulations: The following table sets forth the maximum height
requirements:
         TABLE 3
         HEIGHT REGULATIONS
 
                      Residential    Accessory Structure Commercial/ Industrial
                                                         Structures
Agricultural Zone A   35'            35'                 Not applicable
Residential Zones R-  35'            35'                 Not applicable
R, R-1, and R-2
Commercial Zones C-1, Not applicable 50'                 50'
C-2, MU-A
Industrial Zones M-   Not applicable 75'                 75'
1 and M-2
 
Exceptions:
Type Height Allowance Zones
Type                                Height Allowance Zones
Manufacturing processing - columns,
towers, smokestacks, or like        100'1            M-1 and M-2
structures
Transmission poles and lines        100'1            All zones
Telecommunication facilities        100'1            All zones
Private tower with antenna          100'1            All zones
Agricultural facilities/operations  100'1            A, M-1 and M-2
Mechanical equipment parapet wall   5'               C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2, MU-A
Church steeples or spires           No limit         All zones except M-2
 
Note:
   1.    No structure shall exceed the zone height, except structures that are
listed above shall be permitted up to 100 feet or a height greater as allowed
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019 ; amd. Ord. 20-012, 5-29-2020 )
07-10-23: CITY IMPACT AREAS:
Within adopted City Impact Areas, the applicable city's setback and height
requirements may be applied. Combinations of County setbacks and heights and
city setbacks and heights are not allowed. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-10-25: PURPOSES OF ZONES:
   (1)   The purposes of the A (Agricultural) Zone are to:
      A.    Promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the people of the
County by encouraging the protection of viable farmland and farming operations;
      B.    Limit urban density development to Areas of City Impact in
accordance with the comprehensive plan;
      C.    Protect fish, wildlife, and recreation resources, consistent with
the purposes of the "Local Land Use Planning Act", Idaho Code title 67, chapter
65;
      D.    Protect agricultural land uses, and rangeland uses, and wildlife
management areas from unreasonable adverse impacts from development; and
      E.    Provide for the development of schools, churches, and other public
and quasi-public uses consistent with the comprehensive plan.
   (2)   The purpose of the R-R (Rural Residential) Zone is to encourage and
guide growth in areas where a rural lifestyle may be determined to be suitable.
   (3)   The purpose of the R-1 (Single-Family Residential) Zone is to promote
and enhance predominantly single-family living areas at a low density standard.
   (4)   The purpose of the R-2 (Combined Medium-Density Residential) Zone is
to provide medium-density residential development areas. Medium-density
development concentrations should have a full range of community services and
facilities available or projected for establishment.
   (5)   The purpose of the C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial) Zone is to provide
for local commercial service needs and to restrict incompatible uses.
   (6)   The purpose of the C-2 (Service Commercial) Zone is to provide areas
where activities of a service nature, which are more intensive in character
than in other Commercial Zones, may be carried out.
   (7)   The purpose of the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone is to provide for and
encourage the grouping together of light industrial uses capable of being
operated under such standards as to location and appearance of buildings and
the treatment of the land about them so that they will be unobtrusive and not
detrimental to surrounding commercial or residential uses.
   (8)   The purpose of the M-2 (Heavy Industrial) Zone is to encourage
industries to locate in and provide for suitable areas in which heavy
industrial uses may be established, substantially free from residential, light
industrial or commercial activities which could interfere with heavy industrial
development and operations.
   (9)   The purpose of the MU-A (Mixed Use - Arterial) Zone is to encourage a
mix of residential, commercial and industrial uses along principal arterials
within Areas of City Impact which are designed in accord with adopted access
management standards for State highways or arterials under the control of a
local highway agency. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10-27: LAND USE REGULATIONS (MATRIX):
This section lists uses within each land use zone: allowed uses (A), permitted
uses through a conditional use permit (C), Director administrative decision
(D), not applicable because covered by different use/section (n/a), or
prohibited (-).
   ZONING AND LAND USE MATRIX
Zoning Classification A R-R R-1 R-2 C-1 C-2 M-1 M-2 MU-A
Zoning Classification                        A R-R R-1 R-2 C-1 C-2 M-1 M-2 MU-A
Accessory uses and/or structures to a        D D   D   D   D   D   D   D   D
permitted use
Accessory uses and/or structures to allowed  A A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
use
Agricultural research facility               A -   -   -   -   -   A   A   A
Agriculturally related activities            A C   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Agriculture, except those animal uses with
more restrictive provisions within this      A A   A   A   -   -   A   A   A
article and all other uses specifically
listed in other zones1
Airpark                                      C C   -   -   -   -   C   C   -
Airport                                      C -   -   -   -   -   C   -   -
Airstrip excepting intermittent use          C C   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Amusement park, theme park or commercial     C -   -   -   -   C   -   -   C
racetrack
Animal cremation service                     C -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Animal facility (large): bird farm, calf
raising operation, dairy, feedlot, and swine C -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -
farm1
Animal facility (small) on 5 acres or more1  A A   C   -   -   -   A   A   A
Animal facility (small) on less than 5 acres C C   C   -   -   -   A   A   A
Animal hospital                              C C   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Animals are allowed as long as it is not an  A A   A   A   A   A   A   -   A
animal facility or CAFO1
Arena (commercial)                           C C   -   -   C   A   A   -   A
Assisted care facility                       D D   D   D   A   A   -   -   A
Auction establishment                        C -   -   -   -   C   A   A   C
Batch plants                                 C -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Bed and breakfast (with employees)           D D   D   D   -   -   -   -   -
Bed and breakfast (without employees)        A A   A   A   -   -   -   -   -
Bulk storage as an accessory use of any      - -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
flammable liquid above or below ground
Bulk storage for wholesale distribution of   - -   -   -   -   -   C   A   -
any flammable liquid above or below ground
CAFO                                         C -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -
Caretaker residence                          C -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Cemetery                                     C C   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Church                                       C C   C   C   A   A   A   -   -
Clinics or hospitals                         - -   -   -   A   A   -   -   A
Commercial and private off street parking    - -   -   -   -   A   A   A   A
facilities for vehicles
Contractor shop                              C -   -   -   C   A   A   A   A
Daycare facilities:                                                 
   Family daycare home (1 - 6 children)   A A   A   A   A   A   -   -   A
   Group daycare facility (7 - 12 childrenD D   D   D   A   A   -   -   A
   Daycare center (13+ children)          - -   -   -   A   A   -   -   A
Drive-in theater                             C -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Equipment rentals (outdoor)2                 - -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Ethanol plant                                C -   -   -   -   -   C   A   -
Farm implement sales or service, farm supply C -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
sales
Fertilizer processing facility               C -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Firewood sales                               D C   -   -   D   A   A   A   -
Fireworks sales                              - -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Food processing facility                     C -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Golf course                                  C A   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Group home                                   C C   C   C   C   C   -   -   C
Home business                                D D   D   D   -   -   -   -   -
Home occupations                             A A   A   A   -   -   -   -   -
Impound yard2                                - -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Indoor recreation                            - -   -   -   A   A   A   -   A
Junkyards and vehicle wrecking yards2        - -   -   -   -   -   -   A   -
Kennel                                       C C   C   C   C   C   A   A   C
Landscape business                           A -   -   -   A   A   A   -   C
Light manufacturing, assembly, testing and/  - -   -   -   -   -   A   A   A
or packaging facilities
Lumberyard                                   - -   -   -   -   A   A   A   -
Manufacturing, assembling, fabricating,
processing, packing, repairing, or storage   - -   -   -   -   -   A   A   A
uses
Manufacturing or processing of hazardous     - -   -   -   -   -   -   C   -
chemicals or gases
Mineral extraction (long term)               C -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Mineral extraction (short term)3             D D   D   D   -   -   A   A   D
Ministorage and/or RV storage facility       - -   -   -   C   A   A   A   C
Mobile or manufactured home sales            - -   -   -   -   C   A   A   C
Mortuaries, cremation, and funeral home      - -   -   -   A   A   A   -   A
Multi-family dwellings limited to not more   - -   -   C   -   -   -   -   A
than 8 units per lot
Multi-family dwellings limited to not more   - -   -   A   -   -   -   -   -
than 4 units per lot
Museum                                       C -   -   -   A   A   A   -   A
Nursery                                      A A   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Nursery (retail/wholesale)                   C C   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Outdoor sales or displays (accessory to      A -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
allowed use)
PUDs                                         - C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C
Private roads and driveways serving 2        D D   D   D   D   D   D   D   D
properties
Private tower with antenna                   A A   D   D   A   A   A   A   A
Public service agency telecommunication      D D   D   D   D   D   D   D   D
facilities 75 feet or greater
Public uses and quasi-public uses            C C   C   C   A   A   A   A   A
Quasi-public uses (temporary)                D D   D   D   -   -   -   -   -
Radio, television and broadcasting stations  - -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Recreational vehicle (RV) park               C -   -   -   C   A   -   -   C
Refinery                                     - -   -   -   -   -   -   A   -
Rehabilitation of manufactured/mobile homes2 - -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Rendering plant                              - -   -   -   -   -   C   A   -
Retail stores, personal service shops,
banks, offices, hotels, motels,              - -   -   -   A   A   A   -   A
microbrewery, and restaurants
Sale (commercial) of hay, grain, seed and    C -   -   -   -   A   A   A   A
related supplies
Sale of heavy building materials and         - -   -   -   -   A   A   A   A
machinery
Sale of salvage goods2                       - -   -   -   -   -   A   A   -
Sanitary landfill                            C -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
School (public or private)                   C C   C   C   A   A   A   A   A
School (vocational or trade)                 C -   -   -   -   A   A   A   A
Seasonal activities                          A A   -   -   A   A   -   -   A
Secondary residence                          A A   A   C   -   -   -   -   -
Shooting range (indoor)                      C -   -   -   -   A   A   A   A
Shooting range (outdoor)                     C -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
Similar uses to a conditional use            C C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C
Similar uses to allowed use                  A A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
Single-family dwelling, 1 per lot or parcel  A A   A   -   -   -   -   -   -
unless otherwise provided in this chapter
Single-family dwellings, but not more than 2
such dwellings per lot or parcel unless      - -   -   A   -   -   -   -   -
otherwise provided for in this chapter
Slaughterhouse                               C -   -   -   -   -   C   A   -
Small wind energy systems                    D D   D   D   D   D   D   D   D
Special events facility                      C -   -   -   A   A   -   -   A
Staging area                                 C -   -   -   A   A   A   A   A
Tannery                                      - -   -   -   -   -   -   A   -
Taverns, lounges, or wine bars               - -   -   -   C   C   C   -   C
Telecommunication facility                   C C   C   C   C   C   A   A   C
Temporary uses                               D D   D   D   -   -   -   -   -
Theater                                      - -   -   -   C   A   A   -   A
Transit or trucking terminal and/or service  - -   -   -   -   C   A   A   C
facility
Utility distribution system                  A A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
Utility facility                             D D   D   D   A   A   A   A   A
Vehicle fueling station with convenience     - -   -   -   C   A   A   A   C
store
Vehicle sales lot                            - -   -   -   -   A   A   -   A
Vehicle service facility                     - -   -   -   C   A   A   A   A
Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution    - -   -   -   -   C   A   A   C
facilities
Water infiltration                           C -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -
Wind farm                                    C -   -   -   -   -   C   C   -
Winery, distillery, brewery                  D -   -   -   -   -   A   A   C
Yard/garage sales (associated with any       A A   A   A   -   -   -   -   -
residential uses)
Zoo                                          C -   -   -   -   -   C   -   -
 
Notes:
    1.    See confined animal feeding operation (CAFO), chapter 8 of this Code.
    2.    With a sight obscuring fence (see section
07-02-03: of this chapter).
    3.    In accordance with subsection
07-14-17(6) of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019 ; amd. Ord. 20-012, 5-29-2020 )
ARTICLE 10A
FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
07-10A-01: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
07-10A-03: Definitions
07-10A-05: General Provisions
07-10A-07: Administration
07-10A-09: Floodplain Development Application, Permit And Certification
Requirements
07-10A-11: Provisions For Floodplain Hazard Reduction
07-10A-13: Variance Procedures
07-10A-15: Appeals
07-10A-17: Legal Status Provision
07-10A-01: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
   (1)   Statutory Authority: The Legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant
to Idaho Code section 46-1020 through section 46-1024, authorized local
government to adopt Floodplain Management Ordinances that identify floodplains
and minimum floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and
protect human life, health, and property. Therefore, the Board of County
Commissioners of Canyon County, Idaho does hereby ordain as follows.
   (2)   Findings Of Fact:
      A.    The flood hazard areas of Canyon County are subject to periodic
inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      B.    These flood losses are caused by development in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
      C.    Local government units have the primary responsibility for
planning, adopting and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management.
   (3)   Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of this article is to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      A.    Protect human life, health, and property;
      B.    Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
      C.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      D.    Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      E.    Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      F.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      G.    Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
      H.    Ensure those who occupy the areas of the special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
   (4)   Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to
accomplish its purpose, this article includes methods and provisions to:
      A.    Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      B.    Restrict or prohibit developments which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood
heights, velocities, or erosion;
      C.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
      D.    Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
      E.    Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store flood waters. (Ord. 19-038,
8-30-2019)
07-10A-03: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this article its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: See section
07-02-03: of this chapter.
APPEAL: A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation
of provisions of this article or request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of special flood hazard area
(SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): A determination by the Federal Insurance
Administrator of the water surface elevation of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area,
it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or
other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation,
when combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of structure.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or
critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a
flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation,
police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the
flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as hazardous materials facility,
power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment plant.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum
currently adopted by the Federal government as a basis for measuring heights is
the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials. Pursuant to Idaho Code sections 46-1021; 46-1022
"development" specifically including the construction of berms, dikes and
levees and does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of
any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or
drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to
lawful rights and obligations. Note: Should the State alter or repeal any
portion of this definition or should a court of competent jurisdiction decide
that any portion of this definition is unlawful or invalid, such decision shall
only affect those specific sections and the remaining portions of the
definition shall remain in full force and effect.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit; such as; the construction of
buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial
improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and
pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of
materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: An administrative tool of the NFIP that is used to
provide elevation information, to determine the proper flood insurance premium
rate; and it may be used to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment
(LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F).
ENCLOSURE: An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed
when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or
partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below
the BFE/FPE is not considered an enclosure.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings,
structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the
flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
original floodplain management regulations adopted by the community, June 17,
1975.
EXISTING STRUCTURES: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. May also
be referred to as "existing construction".
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: See definition of Flood Insurance Study (FIS).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has
been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map
(DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source;
   (3)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as
defined in subsection (2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid
and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is
carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; or
   (4)   The collapse of subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents
of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in this definition.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The base flood elevation plus the freeboard.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD ZONE: A geographical area shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that
reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area, and applicable insurance
rate.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this article, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic
effects of urbanization in a watershed. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus the
freeboard establishes the flood protection elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be
one foot (1').
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not
include long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation
information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register.
   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district.
   (3)   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or
   (4)   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
A. By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior,
or
B. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): A general term used to refer to the several types
of revisions and amendments to FIRMs that can be accomplished by letter. They
include:
   (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to
an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a
property's or structure's location in relation to the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property or structure has been
inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high
ground above the base flood elevation.
   (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). LOMR's are generally based on the
implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic
characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the
existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or
the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report,
and when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is
generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM
or FIS report.
   (3)   Letter of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of
the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
The LOMR-F does not change the FIRM or FIS report.
   (4)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon
submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building
permits and/or flood development permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR,
because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to building
elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR section 60.3 and this
article.
MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition in section
07-02-03: of this chapter.
MARKET VALUE: The building value, not including the land value and that of any
accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW): Describes a condition where there is a river, flow,
or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
mudslide may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress,
and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if the mudflow, and
not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): The NFIP is a Federal program created
by Congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide through sound,
community-enforced Building and Zoning Ordinance and to provide access to
affordable, Federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after September 28,
1984 and before the effective start date of this article is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
construction was within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
POST-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
PRE-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before September 28, 1984, the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   (1)   Built on a single chassis, and
   (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, and
   (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel and seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE: An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least two
(2) paid flood losses of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each in any
10-year period since 1978.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects
the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION: See section
07-02-03: of this chapter.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. See
definition of "substantial improvement". Substantial damage also means flood-
related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a
10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
   (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications,
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   (2)   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure" and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this
article.
TEMPERATURE-CONTROLLED: Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Floodplain Administrator from a requirement
of the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required within 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourses
includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may
occur. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10A-05: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (1)   Lands To Which This Article Applies: This article shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of Canyon County. Nothing in
this article is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise
prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance.
   (2)   Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The special flood hazard areas
identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and
engineering report titled "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Canyon County,
Idaho, and Incorporated Areas", dated June 7, 2019, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), and
other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this
article. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the Office of the Development
Services Department 111 North 11th Avenue, Suite 140, Caldwell, Idaho, of
Canyon County.
   (3)   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this
article prior to the commencement of any development activities within special
flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of section 07-
10A-09 of this article.
   (4)   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this article,
all provisions shall be:
      A.    Considered as minimum requirements;
      B.    Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
      C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
   (5)   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
   (6)   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This article shall not in any way
repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
laws, ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions,
etcetera. However, where this article and others conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes more stringent or greater restrictions shall control.
   (7)   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
article does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of Canyon County or by any
officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   (8)   Enforcement: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply
with the preceding sections, or any part or provision, of this chapter. Upon
conviction violations shall be punishable according to section
01-01-07 of the County's Ordinance, General Penalty. Criminal enforcement shall
not foreclose use of other remedies in this chapter.
   (9)   Civil penalties: In addition to, and exclusive of, the criminal remedy
provided by this section, the County may institute any civil enforcement
proceedings pursuant to section
07-19-01 of the County's Ordinance, Civil Enforcement Procedure. Actions to
abate for a violation of this section shall require an additional finding by
the Board that there is an imminent threat to human health or safety. (Ord. 19-
038, 8-30-2019; amd. Ord. 21-030, 10-14- 2021)
07-10A-07: ADMINISTRATION:
   (1)   Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator: The Director of
Development Services, or designee, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain
Administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this article. (Based on comments from FEMA Region 10.)
   (2)   Duties: The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited
to, the following duties:
      A.    Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits
for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that
the requirements of this article have been satisfied.
      B.    Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas
to assure that all necessary local, State and Federal permits have been
received, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
      C.    Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water
Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification by means of a LOMC to the Federal Insurance Administrator
(FIA).
      D.    Assure by means of a hydraulic and hydrology analysis that the
flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
      E.    Prevent encroachments into floodways unless the certification and
flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 07-10A-11(4) of this article
are met.
      F.    Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of
all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 07-10A-09(3) of this article.
      G.    Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities
have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of subsection 07-10A-
09(3) of this article.
      H.    Review plans to verify public utilities are constructed in
accordance with the provisions of subsections 07-10A-11(1)E through (1)G of
this article.
      I.    When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
and maintain certifications from a registered professional engineer or
architect in accordance with the provisions of subsections 07-10A-09(3)B and
07-10A-11(2)B of this article.
      J.    Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, and floodways (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity through
application of a LOMC from FEMA to appeal the interpretation as provided in
this article.
      K.    When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 07-10A-05(2) of this article,
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data
available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data developed
pursuant to subsection 07-10A-11(3)A2 of this article, in order to administer
the provisions of this article.
      L.    When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of subsection 07-10A-
05(2) of this article, require that no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zone AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      M.    Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration
of this article and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
      N.    As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses,
the Floodplain Administrator may make as many inspections of the work as may be
necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of
the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of the proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community
at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement
action. The stop-work order shall constitute a request for voluntary compliance
under section
07-19-01: of this chapter provided the stop-work-order is in substantial
compliance with the form and procedure for a voluntary request for compliance
required by that section.
      O.    The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of
the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing
stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications;
for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws;
or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
State or local law may also be revoked.
      P.    Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
      Q.    Administer requests for variances in compliance with section 07-
10A-13 of this article.
      R.    Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 07-10A-05(2) of this article,
including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by
FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of your community's mapping
needs.
      S.    Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of
Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
      T.    A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease
resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as
practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator
(FIA) of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance
with volume 44 Code of Federal Regulations section 65.3. Such a submission is
necessary to that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting
flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements
will be based upon current data.
      U.    Upon occurrence, notify the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA)
in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that FIRMs accurately represent the community's boundaries, include
within such notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for
reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for
which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10A-09: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Application Requirements: Upon determination by the Floodplain
Administrator, an application for a floodplain development permit shall be made
prior to any development activities located within the special flood hazard
areas. The following items shall be presented to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      A.    A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         1.    The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         2.    The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM as determined in subsection 07-10A-05(2) of this article, or a
statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;
         3.    The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area
as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 07-
10A-05(2) of this article;
         4.    The boundary of the floodway(s) as determined in subsection 07-
10A-05(2) of this article;
         5.    The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
subsections 07-10A-05(2) and (3); or subsection 07-10A-11(3) of this article;
         6.    The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         7.    The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      B.    Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         1.    Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures;
         2.    Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, and AO will be floodproofed; and
         3.    Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility equipment and machinery will be elevated or floodproofed.
      C.    If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures will be required prior to Certificate of
Occupancy/Completion.
      D.    A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this article are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         1.    The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation,
or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         2.    Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with subsection 07-10A-11(1)H2 of this
article when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH, and
AO.
      E.    Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      F.    Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      G.    Certification that all other local, State, and Federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      H.    Documentation for placement of recreation vehicles and/or temporary
structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of subsection 07-
10A-11(2)E of this article are met.
      I.    A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream.
   (2)   Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      A.    A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, rip-
rap, docks, grading, paving excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials, etcetera).
      B.    The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in subsection 07-10A-05
(2) of this article.
      C.    The flood protection elevation required for the lowest floor and
all attendant utilities.
      D.    The flood protection elevation required for the protection of all
utility equipment and machinery.
      E.    All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      F.    A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway of any watercourse, as applicable.
      G.    The flood openings requirements.
      H.    All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
start of construction of work within one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance unless the permitted activity has commenced as per the start of
construction definition.
      I.    Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
      J.    All materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant materials.
   (3)   Certification Requirements:
      A.    Elevation Certificates:
         1.    A Construction Drawings Elevation Certificate (form provided by
FEMA) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall
be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation to mean sea
level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit.
         2.    A Final As Built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate
(form provided by FEMA) is required after construction is completed and prior
to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy. The Finished Construction Elevation
Certificate certifier shall provide at least two (2) photographs showing the
front and rear of the building taken within ninety (90) days from the data
certification. The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building
description and diagram number provided in section A of the certificate. To the
extent possible, these photographs should show the entire building including
foundation. If the building has split-level or multi- level areas, provide at
least two (2) additional photographs showing side views of the building. In
addition, when applicable, provide a photograph of the foundation showing a
representative example of the flood openings or vents. All photographs must be
in color and measure at least 3" x 3". Digital photographs are acceptable.
      B.    Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, design plans, with
supporting data, an operation plan and an inspection and maintenance plan are
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review
the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance
plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant
prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit. Prior to request for a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy a
Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA 086-0-34) shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and approval.
      C.    Manufactured Home: If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A,
AE, AH, and AO, and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty six inches
(36") in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required
in accordance with the provisions of subsection 07-10A-11(2)D2 of this article.
      D.    Alter Or Relocate Watercourse: If a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit:
         1.    A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; and
         2.    A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
         3.    A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation; and
         4.    An Idaho stream channel alteration permit approval shall be
provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
      E.    Certification Exemptions: The following structures are exempt from
the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in subsections
(3)A and (3)B of this section:
         1.    Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection 07-10A-
11(2)E of this article;
         2.    Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection 07-10A-
11(2)F of this article; and
         3.    Accessory structures one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet or less meeting requirements of subsection 07-10A-11(2)G of this article.
(Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10A-11: PROVISIONS FOR FLOODPLAIN HAZARD REDUCTION:
   (1)   General Standards: In all special flood hazard areas the following
provisions are required:
      A.    All new construction, substantial improvements, and development
shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      B.    All new construction, substantial improvements, and development
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
      C.    All new construction, substantial improvements, and development
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
      D.    All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
      E.    All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      F.    All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      G.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      H.    A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially
improved structures, which is below the lowest floor used solely for parking,
access, and storage shall:
         1.    Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to
the flood protection elevation; and
         2.    Include, in Zones A, AE, AH, and AO, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
            (A)   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of
each enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (B) The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (C) If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
            (D) The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot (1') above the grade;
            (E) Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
            (F) Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or flood resistant wood underpinning, regardless of
structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as
outlined above.
      I.    Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this article.
      J.    New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood
protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 07-10A-09(3) of this article.
      K.    All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      L.    All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      M.    All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      N.    All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
      O.    All subdivision proposals and other development proposals greater
than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include
within such proposals base flood elevation data.
      P.    When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard
area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
      Q.    When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
   (2)   Specific Standards: In all special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsection 07-10A-05(2)
of this article, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of
subsection (1) of this section, are required:
      A.    Residential Construction: New construction, substantial
improvements, and development of any residential structure (including
manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 07-10A-03
of this article.
      B.    Non-Residential Construction: New construction, substantial
improvements, and development of any commercial, industrial, or other non-
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
no lower than the flood protection elevation as defined in section 07-10A-03 of
this article. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, and AO may be floodproofed
to the flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas
of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
below the flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in
accordance with subsection (5)B of this section. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator as set forth in subsection 07-10A-09(3) of this
article, along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
      C.    Additions/Improvements:
         1.    Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            (A) Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure; or
            (B) A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         2.    Additions to non-compliant post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with modifications to the existing structure other than
a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply
with the standards for new construction.
         3.    Additions and/or improvements to non-compliant post-FIRM
structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any
interior modifications to the existing structure are:
            (A) Not substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
            (B) A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      D.    Manufactured Home Standards:
         1.    New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is not lower than the flood
protection elevation, as defined in section 07-10A-03 of this article.
         2.    Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety's "Idaho Manufactured
Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code section 44-2201(2).
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis
thirty six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation
of the chassis is above thirty six inches (36") in height, an engineering
certification is required.
         3.    All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of subsections (1)H1 and (1)H2 of this section.
         4.    An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within a flood prone area. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
      E.    Recreational Vehicles: Temporary placement of recreational vehicles
shall:
         1.    Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and has no permanently
attached additions); or
      F.    Temporary Non-Residential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval:
         1.    A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one
year;
         2.    The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
         3.    The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
         4.    A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
         5.    Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
      G.    Accessory Structures:
         1.    Accessory Structures (Footprint Greater Than 1,500 Square Feet):
When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) used solely for
parking, and storage are to be placed within a special flood hazard area,
elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory
structures in accordance with subsection 07-10A-09(3) of this article, and the
following criteria shall be met:
            (A) Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
            (B) Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
            (C) Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
            (D) Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
            (E) Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (1)A of this section. All utility equipment
and machinery, such as electrical, shall be installed in accordance with the
provisions of subsection (1)D of this section; and
            (F) Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of subsection (1)H of this section.
         2.    Accessory Structures (1,500 Square Feet Or Less): An accessory
structure with a footprint less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet that satisfies the criteria outlined in subsections (2)G1(A) through (2)G1
(F) of this section is not required to provide the elevation certificate per
subsection (2)B of this section.
         3.    Accessory Structures Not Used Solely For Parking Access And
Storage: Accessory structures not used solely for parking access, and storage
must be elevated per subsections (2)A and (2)B of this section.
      H.    Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
         1.    Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the
effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
         2.    Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be
attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
         3.    Not elevated above-ground tanks may be permitted in flood hazard
areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects
of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris;
         4.    Tank inlets, fill opening, outlets and vents shall be:
            (A) At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with
covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents
of the tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
            (B) Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
      I.    Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
         1.    The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall,
must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
         2.    There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
         3.    The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five
feet (5') per second for any crawlspace.
      J.    Other Development In Floodways:
         1.    Fences that have the potential to block the passage of
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection (4) of this section.
         2.    Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that
involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations
of subsection (4) of this section.
         3.    Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges,
culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to
travel from one side of the watercourse to the other side, which encroach into
regulated floodways, shall meet the limitations of subsection (4) of this
section.
         4.    Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage
tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection (4) of this section.
         5.    Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking
facilities, port facilities, ship building, and ship repair facilities that
encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection (4)
of this section.
         6.    Gravel and sand extraction: See sections 07-14-17 and 07-14-19
of this chapter.
      K.    Subdivision Plats In Flood Zone:
         1.    Development Plan: For any proposed subdivision that is located
within a map floodplain, the developer/applicant shall provide a development
plan of adequate scale and supporting documentation that demonstrates
consistency with subsection (1) of this section and includes the following:
            (A) Location of all planned improvements;
            (B) The location of floodways and the floodway fringe in accordance
with sound engineering practices;
            (C) The location of the present water channel;
            (D) Any planned rerouting of waterways;
            (E) All major drainageways;
            (F) Areas of frequent flooding;
            (G) Means of floodproofing buildings; and
            (H) Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
         2.    Review: To give additional guidance in approving any proposed
subdivision within a floodplain, the commission shall review proposed
developments considering the new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures within the floodplain shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood; and
for new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures,
the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to or above the level
of the 100-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall be floodproofed up to the level of the 100-year flood.
         3.    Justification For Development: Upon determination that buildings
are planned within the floodplain or that alterations of any kind are
anticipated within the floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the
developer/applicant shall demonstrate conclusively that such development will
not present a hazard to life or limb, hazard to property, adverse effects on
the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel and not have
an adverse impact on the natural environment. Justification shall be submitted
in letter form with the preliminary plat.
         4.    Appropriateness Of Subdivision: In determining the
appropriateness of subdivision for land located within the floodplain, the
presiding party and board shall consider the objectives of this chapter and at
least the following upon consideration of the preliminary plat:
            (A) The danger to life and property due to the increased flood
heights or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads and intended uses;
            (B) The danger that intended uses may be swept on the other lands
or downstream to the injury of others;
            (C) The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions under flood conditions;
            (D) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
            (E) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (F) The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location;
            (G) The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed subdivision and land uses;
            (H) The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
            (I) The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the
comprehensive plan and any floodplain management programs for the area;
            (J) The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in
times of flood;
            (K) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
            (L) The cost of providing governmental services during the after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
            (M) No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees,
fills, structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will
individually or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or
danger. If only part of the proposed subdivision can be safely developed,
development shall be limited to that part and the County shall require
development to proceed consistent with that determination.
         5.    Floodproofing Plans: Floodproofing plans must be individually
approved by the Board upon recommendation from the commission before such uses
are constructed. Floodproofing may include, but not be limited to, the
following:
            (A) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement;
            (B) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or
similar methods of closure;
            (C) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressure;
            (D) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls;
            (E) Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation;
            (F) Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface
drainage systems to relieve external foundation walls and basement flood
pressures;
            (G) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as
to prevent the entrance of floodwaters;
            (H) Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface
drainage systems to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood
pressures;
            (I) Building design and construction to resist rupture or collapse
caused by water pressure or floating debris;
            (J) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and
stormwaters into buildings or structures;
            (K) Location and installation of all electrical equipment, circuits
and electrical appliances so that they are protected from inundation by the
regulatory flood; and
            (L) Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives,
buoyant materials, flammable liquids or other toxic material which could be
hazardous to public health, safety and welfare at elevations above the height
associated with the regulatory protection elevation or design of such
facilities to prevent flotation of storage containers, or damage to storage
containers which could result in the escape of toxic materials into
floodwaters.
      L.    Critical Facilities: Applications for the construction of a
critical facility shall include a statement from a licensed engineer specifying
the design flood event and base flood elevations.
   (3)   Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations:
Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A (also known as
unnumbered A Zones) and established in subsection 07-10A-05(2) of this article,
where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection (1) of this
section, shall apply:
      A.    The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE)
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
         1.    When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in subsections (1) and
(2) of this section.
         2.    When floodway data is available from a Federal, State or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements with the floodway
areas shall also comply with the requirements of subsections (2) and (4) of
this section.
         3.    Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for subdivisions greater than 50 lots or 5
acres, whichever is the lesser), include within such proposals base flood
elevation data. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with subsection 07-10A-05(2) of this article and
utilized in implementing this article.
         4.    When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
Federal, State or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor shall be
elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to two feet (2') above the highest
adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the flood protection elevation
(FPE) whichever is higher, as defined in section 07-10A-03 of this article. All
other applicable provisions of subsection (2) of this section shall also apply.
   (4)   Standards For Floodways: Areas designated as floodways located within
the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 07-10A-05(2) of this
article. The floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential
projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
subsections (1) and (2) of this section, shall apply to all development within
such areas:
      A.    No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         1.    It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practices and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         2.    A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six (6)
months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
      B.    If subsection (4)A of this section is satisfied, all development
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
article.
      C.    Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following
provisions are met:
         1.    The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection (2)D of
this section; and
         2.    The encroachment standards of subsection (4)A of this section.
   (5)   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO And AH): Areas
designated as shallow flooding areas have special flood hazards associated with
base flood depths of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined
channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate. In addition to subsections (1) and (2) of this section, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following
requirements:
      A.    The lowest floor shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of one foot (1'), above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two
feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. A
minimum of two feet (2') is required and four feet (4') is recommended where a
depth is not provided.
      B.    Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in subsection (5)A of this section
so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required in accordance with subsection 07-10A-09(3) of this
article, and subsection (2)B of this section.
      C.    Accessory structure (sheds, detached garages, etc.):
         1.    Used solely for parking, access, and storage:
            (A) Shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the
depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of one foot (1'), above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two
feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. A
minimum of two feet (2') is required and four feet (4') is recommended where a
depth is not provided; or
            (B) Shall have flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization
of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below Flood Protection Elevation
in conformance with the provisions of subsection (1)H of this section.
         2.    Not used solely for parking, access, and storage:
            (A) Shall be elevated per subsections (2)A and (2)B of this
section.
      D.    Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 19-
038, 8-30-2019)
07-10A-13: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Application And Process:
      A.    An application for a variance must be submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator on the form provided by the Canyon County Development Services
Department and include, at a minimum, the same information required for a
development permit, an explanation for the basis for the variance request and
appropriate fee.
      B.    Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the
variance request will be reviewed by the Floodplain Administrator. Compliance
with granting a variance shall be within the discretion of the Floodplain
Administrator following a full review of the facts as stated on the application
and as a result of the required agency notification.
      C.    Prior to decision by the Floodplain Administrator, notice of the
variance request will be provided to the applicable Flood District and Idaho
Department of Water Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) at least fifteen (15) days prior to decision by the
Floodplain Administrator.
      D.    The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
   (2)   Issuance: Variances shall only be issued:
      A.    Upon a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;
      B.    For the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure;
      C.    Upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;
      D.    Upon showing of good and sufficient cause;
      E.    Upon determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
      F.    Upon showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity of water. This includes
only facilities defined in section 07-10A-03 of this article in the definition
of "functionally dependent use".
   (3)   Variance Criteria:
      A.    In considering variance applications, Canyon County shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this article, and:
         1.    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         2.    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         3.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         4.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         5.    The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as
defined under section 07-10A-03 of this article as a functionally dependent
facility, where applicable;
         6.    The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use;
         7.    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         8.    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         9.    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         10.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         11.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      B.    Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (4)   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted development will have its
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk. The
Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10A-15: APPEALS:
   (1)   Hearing And Decision: The Board of Canyon County Commissioners shall
hear and decide appeals from the interpretations of the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (2)   Filing: An appeal must be filed with the Floodplain Administrator
within fourteen (14) days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of
the Administrator. Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a
failure to exhaust the administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the
interpretation of the Floodplain Administrator and a narrative setting forth
the facts relied upon by the appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the
error in the interpretation.
   (3)   Ruling: Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be
scheduled for the next available Board of Commissioners meeting to be heard.
The Board of Commissioners shall consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
      A.    All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in this section, including:
         1.    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         2.    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         3.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
         4.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         5.    The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         6.    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         7.    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         8.    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         9.    The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         10.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         11.    The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions;
         12.    Including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (4)   Decision: The Board of Commissioners' decision on appeal shall be in
writing and set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for
the decision. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10A-17: LEGAL STATUS PROVISION:
   (1)   Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance: This article, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of
some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted
September 28, 1984 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather
to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing
provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are
reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this article shall not affect
any action, suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of Canyon County enacted on September 28,
1984, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
   (2)   Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits: Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain
development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his or
her authorized agents before the time of passage of this article. Provided,
however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit
within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
ARTICLE 10B
AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
07-10B-01: Purpose
07-10B-03: Uses Allowed And Permitted
07-10B-05: Conflict
07-10B-07: Other Considerations
07-10B-09: Nonliability Clause
07-10B-01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the AP (Airport Overlay) Zone is to provide zoning protection to
the present and long term use of airports and airport facilities. Uses within
the AP Zone are generally associated with airport related activities, open
space and agricultural uses which are harmonious with the use of airports. The
AP Zone is superimposed over other zones. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10B-03: USES ALLOWED AND PERMITTED:
   (1)   A use is allowed or permitted within the AP Zone only by approval of
the commission after a hearing held pursuant to the conditional use permit
procedure as set forth in article 7 of this chapter.
   (2)   All uses allowed and all uses permitted by conditional use permit in
the respective zone over which the AP Zone is superimposed are appropriate, but
uses of airports and airport related facilities such as radio facilities,
directional aids to navigation and other structures or facilities as may be
determined to be essential to air navigation and operation, agriculture uses,
structures used for the habitation of people, and those uses, operations or
structures where people might congregate or meet may be approved by the
commission only following the conditional use permit procedure. The commission
shall not permit a use which would conflict with the airport presently or in
the future, unless the conflict can be avoided by imposition of special
conditions.
   (3)   Utility distribution facilities not in violation of any applicable
Federal airport standard or regulation applicable to the airport. (Ord. 19-038,
8-30-2019)
07-10B-05: CONFLICT:
If any of the regulations specified in article 10A, "Flood Hazard Overlay
Zone", of this chapter differ from regulations in this article, then the
regulations of article 10A, "Flood Hazard Overlay Zone", of this chapter shall
govern. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10B-07: OTHER CONSIDERATIONS:
   (1)   In evaluating a proposed land use, the presiding party shall consider
the following:
      A.    Evaluation of the effect of a proposed use on airport facilities
will be made based not only on a single use acting alone but upon the
reasonable assumption that other landowners within the AP (Airport Overlay)
Zone may need or desire to establish similar land uses. As such, accumulative
effects will be considered in making decisions.
      B.    Different construction material and methods may be required for
sound control purpose beyond those normally required to avoid adverse effects
from noise.
      C.    Auditoriums, churches, schools, hospitals, theaters, and other uses
where congregations of people are common, shall be avoided whenever possible.
      D.    Criteria related to the established noise contours for the airport
shall be used in considering conditional use permit applications.
      E.    Criteria related to Federal Aviation Administration Regulations
shall be used in considering conditional use permit applications.
      F.    Input from government entities. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-10B-09: NONLIABILITY CLAUSE:
   (1)   The granting of a conditional use permit for a use in the AP Zone
shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind or
nature by the commission or the Board or by any office or employee thereof of
the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed and shall create no
liability upon or cause action against such public body, officer or employee
for any damage that may result pursuant thereto. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
ARTICLE 11
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
07-11-01: Purpose
07-11-03: Applicability
07-11-05: Nonconforming Property
07-11-07: Nonconforming Use
07-11-09: Nonconforming Structure
07-11-11: Violations
07-11-01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to allow any nonconforming property, use, or
structure that was lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this
chapter to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
continuation. It is further the intent of this article that nonconforming uses
shall not expand or extend the nonconforming aspect of the property, use, or
structure, unless approved subject to the regulations of this chapter. (Ord.
19-001, 1-11-2019)
07-11-03: APPLICABILITY:
   (1)   These regulations shall apply to any lawfully existing nonconforming
property, use, or structure in Canyon County, except: In the event that a
property, use, or structure that was deemed nonconforming under past zoning
regulations now complies with the standards of this chapter, such property,
use, or structure shall be deemed conforming.
   (2)   These regulations shall apply to properties that were not created in
accord with the regulations of this chapter (an illegal division of property)
and that were of record in the Canyon County Recorder's Office prior to
September 6, 1979, the boundaries of which shall not have changed except by
governmental action.
      A.    A property shall be deemed conforming and shall be eligible for
building permits if it meets the dimensional standards for the base district in
which it is now located.
      B.    A property shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be eligible for
building permits if it meets one of the following standards:
         1.    The property met the dimensional standards for the applicable
base district at the time it was created.
         2.    A dwelling, as herein defined, was constructed or placed on the
property prior to September 6, 1979 provided, in the event that the dwelling is
subsequently damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake,
war, riot, calamity or other catastrophic event after September 6, 1979, the
property remains eligible for a building permit. (Ord. 19-001, 1-11-2019)
07-11-05: NONCONFORMING PROPERTY:
   (1)   The nonconforming property shall not be further diminished in size.
   (2)   Any property reduced by governmental action that reduces an existing
conforming parcel below the required property size shall be deemed as a
conforming property for the purpose of development. To be deemed a conforming
property, the owner or applicant shall submit documents to the Director proving
the following:
      A.    The property was in compliance with the minimum property size
requirement of the applicable zoning district prior to the decrease in property
size; and
      B.    The decrease in property size was caused by acquisition through
prescription, purchase, or other means by Canyon County, a municipality within
Canyon County, a highway district within Canyon County, Idaho Transportation
Department, utility company or corporation under the jurisdiction of the Idaho
Public Utilities Commission, or other local, State, or Federal agency. (Ord.
19-001, 1-11-2019)
07-11-07: NONCONFORMING USE:
   (1)   The nonconforming use may continue as long as the use remains lawful
and is not expanded or extended, unless approved subject to the regulations of
this chapter.
   (2)   For the purposes of this article, the term "expanded or extended"
shall include, but not be limited to: increased hours; increased services or
programs; increased number of residential dwellings; interior renovations or
structural additions that increase the occupant load of the structure dedicated
to the nonconforming use (see Canyon County Building Code as set forth in
chapter 6 of this Code); any new structures accessory to the nonconforming use;
expansion or replacement of the structure (or portions thereof) dedicated to
the nonconforming use; anything beyond regular maintenance and minor repairs
(as required by the Canyon County Building Code as set forth in chapter 6 of
this Code); and any action that extends the duration of the nonconforming use.
   (3)   If a nonconforming use has ceased for ten (10) years or has been
replaced with a conforming use, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned
and shall not be reestablished. If nonuse or vacancy continues for a period of
a year or longer, the County may request resolution of the nonconforming use
right according to procedures outlined in Idaho Code section 67-6538(2) as it
may be amended or retitled from time to time.
   (4)   A nonconforming use or structure housing a nonconforming use that is
damaged more than fifty percent (50%) of its current assessed taxable value by
fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, calamity, or other
catastrophic event, shall comply with this chapter upon reconstruction. If the
damage to the nonconforming use or structure housing the nonconforming use is
fifty percent (50%) or less of the current assessed taxable value, the
nonconforming use may continue, provided that the nonconforming use commences
within ten (10) years of the event. If nonuse or vacancy continues for a period
of a year or longer, the County may request resolution of the nonconforming use
right according to procedures outlined in Idaho Code section 67-6538(2) as it
may be amended or retitled from time to time. (Ord. 19-001, 1-11-2019)
07-11-09: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
   (1)   Nonconforming structures may be enlarged or modified, provided that
the additions or modifications to the structure conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
   (2)   A nonconforming structure that is damaged more than seventy five
percent (75%) of its current assessed taxable value by fire, flood, explosion,
wind, earthquake, war, riot, calamity, or other catastrophic event, shall
comply with this chapter upon restoration or reconstruction. If the damage to
the nonconforming structure is seventy five percent (75%) or less of the
current assessed taxable value, the structure may be restored or reconstructed,
provided that restoration or reconstruction commences within twelve (12) months
of the event. (Ord. 19-001, 1-11-2019)
07-11-11: VIOLATIONS:
Properties, uses, or structures that were in violation of previous land use
regulations and that remain a violation under this chapter shall be considered
continuing violations. (Ord. 19-001, 1-11-2019)
ARTICLE 12
CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
SECTION:
07-12-01: Provisions For Certificate Of Zoning Compliance
07-12-01: PROVISIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
   (1)   Certificate Of Zoning Compliance Required: A certificate of zoning
compliance is required for all structures requiring a building permit, and for
agricultural structures exempt from the requirement to obtain a building
permit. An application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be on a
form approved by the director. The application shall be filed with the DSD and
accompanied by a filing fee as established by the adopted fee schedule.
   (2)   Illuminated Address Numbers: Address numbers for dwellings shall be
illuminated for emergency services prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
   (3)   Division Of Land: No certificate of zoning compliance for a new
dwelling shall be issued until the subject property, if divided, has been
divided according to county ordinances and has access as required in section
07-10-03: of this chapter. However, an existing dwelling located on a parcel of
land that was not divided in accordance with county ordinance provisions for
the division of land may be rebuilt or replaced.
   (4)   Hazardous Material Storage: The storage of any hazardous materials, as
defined by title 40 of CFR part 261, shall require a list of those materials to
be submitted to the Canyon County sheriff's office, the Canyon County
paramedics, DSD, and the applicable fire district, prior to issuance of a
certificate of zoning compliance.
   (5)   Expiration Of Certificate Of Zoning Compliance: A certificate of
zoning compliance is valid as long as the building permit for the applied-for
structure is valid. For agricultural structures exempt from the requirement to
obtain a building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance expires upon
failure to obtain a setback inspection within one hundred eighty (180) calendar
days from the date of issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 13
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
07-13-01: Off Street Parking And Loading
07-13-03: Number Of Spaces Required
07-13-01: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   (1)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises is
increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity or other unit of measurement requiring parking or loading facilities,
such parking and loading facilities shall be increased to provide for the
intensity of use.
   (2)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter
be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use.
   (3)   Access roads from state and local highway district highways into
parking areas as required herein for commercial and industrial uses shall be
forty feet (40') wide at the curb line.
   (4)   No lawfully existing building shall be deemed to be a nonconforming
building solely because of the lack of any such required spaces; provided, that
space being used for off street parking or loading in connection with any such
building at the time of the effective date hereof shall not be further reduced
in area or capacity.
   (5)   When the calculation of the required number of spaces called for
herein results in a fractional number, fractions equal to or greater than one-
half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next highest whole number of spaces.
   (6)   Parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned in
this article shall be the same as for a use specified which has similar traffic
generating characteristics.
   (7)   Except as required for dwellings and motels, off street parking
facilities for several buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be
provided collectively if the total number of spaces so located together shall
not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each of the buildings
or uses.
   (8)   Every open off street parking area having more than four (4) parking
spaces shall be hard surfaced.
   (9)   Lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be directed
away from residential properties.
   (10)   Off street parking areas may be required to screen any side adjoining
any residential property by a wall, fence, or hedge to a height of six feet
(6'), except for the front yard setback areas of the adjoining residential
property, which shall be a maximum height of three feet (3').
   (11)   Required parking spaces for dwellings shall be upon the same premises
as the dwelling, and no parking space shall be located in any public right of
way. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
07-13-03: NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED:
Parking spaces as hereinafter set forth shall be provided for all uses allowed
and conditional uses permitted in any zone, provided that a greater number of
spaces may be required in any case where a conditional use permit is involved
and further provided these regulations are subject to the Americans with
disabilities act and state law:
(1)  For each dwelling unit               2 spaces inclusive of a garage,
                                           carport, or open off street parking
     For each guest bedroom in a hotel,    1 parking space, plus 1 additional
(2)  motel, bed and breakfast, club,      parking space for each 3 beds in a
     lodging house, fraternity or          room, plus 2 parking spaces for each
     sorority house                        3 employees
     For each 2 persons in a               1 parking space, plus 1 parking
(3)  convalescent, nursing or rest home,  space for each doctor assigned full
     sanatorium or home for the care of    time to the staff, plus 2 parking
     children or the aged                  spaces for each 3 employees
                                           1 parking space for each 1,000
(4)  For a hospital                       square feet of net floor area, plus
                                           1 parking space for each 2 employees
     For a church, school auditorium or    1 parking space for each 5 persons
(5)  gymnasium, auditorium, theater, or   based on building capacity
     sports arena
     For floor space used by the public    A number of parking spaces equal to
     or by members in a social hall,       20 percent of the capacity in
(6)  dance hall, nightclub, pool hall,    persons. For the purpose of this
     restaurant, or other similar          section, "capacity in persons" shall
     enterprise or establishment           mean the gross floor area used by
                                           the public divided by 15 square feet
(7)  For a bowling alley                  3 parking spaces for each bowling
                                           lane
                                           An additional parking area at the
(8)  For a drive-in theater               entrance containing 1 parking space
                                           for each 10 vehicles accommodated
                                           within the theater
(9)  Business offices, not otherwise      1 parking space for each 250 square
     specified                             feet of net floor area
(10) Medical or dental office or clinic   1 parking space for each 250 square
                                           feet of net floor area
(11) Mortuary                             1 parking space for each 5 seats
                                           based on building capacity
                                           1 parking space for each 200 square
(12) Retail stores, banks, and shops      feet of net floor area; and for
     other than as specified below         drive-in banks 3 additional parking
                                           spaces for each teller window
     Retail sales establishments
     handling only durable goods or
(13) bulky merchandise such as            1 parking space for each 600 square
     machinery, furniture or vehicles,     feet of net floor area
     personal service and repair shops,
     or wholesale stores
                                           1 parking space for each employee,
(14) For manufacturing establishments     based on the greatest number of
                                           employees on site at any one time
     For every building containing more    1 loading space not less than 30
     than 15,000 square feet in area and   feet in length and 10 feet in width,
(15) which is designed to be occupied by  exclusive of access platforms and
     any use requiring regular receipt     maneuvering areas
     or dispatch of merchandise by truck
(16) Subdivision community facility       1 parking space for every 300 square
                                           feet of net floor area
 
(Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010)
ARTICLE 14
USE STANDARDS
SECTION:
07-14-01: Reserved
07-14-03: Applicability
07-14-05: Assisted Care Facilities
07-14-07: Bed And Breakfast (With Or Without Employees)
07-14-09: Contractor Shop
07-14-11: Home Business
07-14-13: Home Occupations
07-14-15: Manufacturing Or Processing Of Hazardous Chemicals Or Gases
07-14-17: Mineral Extraction Short Term
07-14-19: Mineral Extraction Long Term
07-14-21: Ministorage Facility
07-14-23: Roadside Stand
07-14-25: Secondary Residence
07-14-27: Small Wind Energy System
07-14-29: Staging Area
07-14-31: Vehicle Sales Lot
07-14-33: Wind Farm
07-14-35: Private Tower With Antenna
07-14-01: RESERVED:
(Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-03: APPLICABILITY:
   (1)   The provisions of this article apply to all properties where a use is
listed as an allowed use, a conditional use, or a director's decision in
section
07-10-27: of this chapter (land use matrix). (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-05: ASSISTED CARE FACILITIES:
   (1)   If a director's decision is required, the director shall specify the
maximum number of clients within the decision. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-07: BED AND BREAKFAST (WITH OR WITHOUT EMPLOYEES):
   (1)   The operator of the establishment may dwell in the home. (Ord. 16-001,
1-8-2016)
07-14-09: CONTRACTOR SHOP:
   (1)   The use shall be contained within a building or behind a sight
obscuring fence. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-11: HOME BUSINESS:
   (1)   The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes.
   (2)   The use is conducted entirely within a dwelling or only one of its
existing accessory structures.
   (3)   Not more than one-third (1/3) of the gross area of the dwelling may be
devoted to such use, whether said use is carried on in the dwelling or in an
accessory building.
   (4)   No more than three (3) persons other than the residents of the
dwelling may work on the premises.
   (5)   The use does not adversely affect the uses allowed or permitted in the
zone in which it is to be located.
   (6)   One sign no larger than four (4) square feet is allowed, which may not
be internally illuminated or constructed of reflective materials.
   (7)   A home business permit shall not be issued to any use that is allowed
or permitted or otherwise defined by this chapter within the agricultural or
residential zones or to any use of an industrial nature. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-
2016)
07-14-13: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   (1)   The home occupation shall not cause the premises to differ from its
residential character in the appearance, lighting, or in the emission of noise,
fumes, odors, vibrations, or electrical interference.
   (2)   The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes.
   (3)   The home occupation shall not adversely affect the uses allowed or
permitted in the zone in which it is to be located.
   (4)   The use requires no additional off street parking space.
   (5)   No persons other than the residents of the dwelling work on site.
   (6)   Not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the gross area of dwelling may be
devoted to such use, whether said use is carried on in the dwelling or in an
existing accessory building.
   (7)   A nonobtrusive, nonelectric sign with no moving parts is allowed when
it is no larger than four (4) square feet in the message board.
   (8)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of more than one vehicle
necessary for the home occupation. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-15: MANUFACTURING OR PROCESSING OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS OR GASES:
   (1)   The standards shall apply to the manufacture or processing of
hazardous chemicals or gases as a permitted use in this chapter. The standards
shall not apply to research and development facilities.
   (2)   All structures shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet (300')
from any property line.
   (3)   The use shall be located a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from
any Residential District or approved hospital use.
   (4)   All hazardous chemicals or gases shall be stored and/or used within an
enclosed structure.
   (5)   The facility shall be enclosed by a minimum eight foot (8') high
security fence or wall. Entrance and exit shall be through a gate that shall be
locked during nonbusiness hours.
   (6)   The application materials shall include written documentation from the
appropriate fire authority approving the proposed location and plan
specifications of the facilities.
   (7)   The application materials shall include maps and engineering drawings
showing proposed drainage, proposed sewer system design, the depth of the water
table, soil composition, all existing surface water, and all existing uses
within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the property. The applicant shall also furnish
evidence that the dangerous characteristics of the particular process or
activity in question have been, or shall be, eliminated or minimized
sufficiently so as not to create a public nuisance or be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
   (8)   The facility must register and maintain current hazardous waste
generation notification as required by Environmental Protection Agency and/or
Idaho Department of Environmental Quality and provide such proof of
registration. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-17: MINERAL EXTRACTION SHORT TERM:
   (1)   Setbacks:
 
           Front Side Rear Corner
Short term 30'   10'  20'  30'
 
      A.    Front and corner setbacks shall be measured from the greatest of
either the property line, right-of-way line, or road easement line of any local
or private street.
   (2)   Minerals: Gravel, sand, soil or other minerals may be excavated and
removed from a maximum of a two (2) acre site, per parcel. The minerals must be
removed from the subject property within six (6) months from the date
excavation begins. Extracted minerals may not be stored on site beyond the six
(6) month time period.
   (3)   Processing: Crushing, screening, or processing the material is allowed
on or at the excavation site at the discretion of the Director.
   (4)   Accessory Uses: Temporary asphalt mixing and concrete batching may
only be allowed as accessory uses to a pit, mine, or quarry at the discretion
of the Director.
   (5)   Submittals: Prior to commencing any phase of extraction, the landowner
or operator/extractor shall submit all appropriate fees and provide the
following to DSD:
      A.    Name of the landowner;
      B.    Name of the operator/extractor;
      C.    Legal description of the property where gravel is to be extracted;
      D.    A site plan of the property showing the area where the gravel is to
be extracted;
      E.    The extraction commencement date and completion date (no later than
6 months after commencement date); and
      F.    Reclamation plan as approved by Idaho Department of Lands.
   (6)   Time Limit: Short term mineral extraction is allowed during the
process of subdivision construction following the provisions of this section.
The six (6) month time limit shall apply to extraction during each phase as
shown on the approved preliminary plat.
   (7)   Mineral Extraction In Floodway: Gravel and sand and their subsequent
extraction on lands within the special flood hazard area that encroach into
regulated floodways shall meet the requirements of subsection 7-10A-11(4) of
this chapter. A Reclamation LOMR shall be completed within one year of the
completion of mining. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-14-19: MINERAL EXTRACTION LONG TERM:
   (1)   If a conditional use permit is required, the following standards shall
apply:
      A.    Setbacks:
 
Front Side Rear Corner
30'   30'  30'  30'
 
         1.    Front and corner setbacks shall be measured from the greatest of
either the property line, right-of-way line, or road easement line of any local
or private street.
         2.    When making a decision for a conditional use permit for the use,
the decision making body shall consider the following:
            (A) The uses of the surrounding properties in the determination of
the compatibility of the proposed application with such uses;
            (B) Duration of the proposed use;
            (C) Setbacks from surrounding uses;
            (D) Reclamation plan as approved by Idaho Department of Lands;
            (E) The locations of all proposed pits and any accessory uses; and
            (F) Recommendations from applicable government agencies.
   (2)   If the use is allowed in the zone, the following standards shall
apply:
      A.    Setbacks:
 
Front Side Rear Corner
30'   20'  20'  30'
 
         1.    Front and corner setbacks shall be measured from the greatest of
either the property line, right-of-way line, or road easement line of any local
or private street.
      B.    Submittals: Prior to commencing any phase of extraction, the
landowner or operator/extractor shall submit the following to DSD:
         1.    Name of the landowner;
         2.    Name of the operator/extractor;
         3.    Legal description of the property where gravel is to be
extracted;
         4.    A site plan of the property showing the area where the gravel is
to be extracted;
         5.    Commencement and completion date;
         6.    Reclamation plan as approved by Idaho Department of Lands.
   (3)   Mineral extraction in floodway: Gravel and sand and their subsequent
extraction on lands within the special flood hazard area that encroach into
regulated floodways shall meet the requirements of subsection 7-10A-11(4) of
this chapter. A Reclamation LOMR shall be completed within one year of the
completion of mining. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-14-21: MINISTORAGE FACILITY:
   (1)   Materials shall not be sold or delivered to customers directly from
the storage compartment. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-23: ROADSIDE STAND:
   (1)   A roadside stand must not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in
size.
   (2)   Parking and loading must occur on site. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-25: SECONDARY RESIDENCE:
   (1)   The owner of the lot or parcel containing the secondary residence must
live on site.
   (2)   The secondary residence must have its own address and address numbers
shall be placed on the home for emergency purposes. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-27: SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM:
   (1)   Lot Size: No more than one small wind energy system per one acre of
land is allowed.
   (2)   Height: When located on parcels five (5) acres or less, tower height
shall be a maximum of thirty five feet (35') above finished grade of the fixed
portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine and blades. When located on
parcels greater than five (5) acres, tower height shall be limited to eighty
feet (80').
   (3)   Proximity To Property Boundary: No part of the small wind energy
system structure, including guywire anchors, may extend closer than one hundred
feet (100') to the property boundaries of the installation site.
   (4)   Noise: Noise produced by the wind turbine shall not exceed fifty five
(55) decibels (dBA) at the site's property lines.
   (5)   Capacity: The system capacity shall not exceed one hundred kilowatts
(100 kW).
   (6)   Decision Of The Director:
      A.    The Director shall consider the following:
         1.    Lot size;
         2.    Lot configuration;
         3.    Proximity to neighboring structures;
         4.    Topography;
         5.    Viewsheds; and
         6.    The uses of the surrounding properties in the determination of
the compatibility of the proposed small wind energy system with such uses.
      B.    The Director shall specify the maximum number of towers. (Ord. 16-
001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-29: STAGING AREA:
   (1)   All work shall be conducted off site.
   (2)   Business vehicles shall be operable and parked on site, not on a
public or private road.
   (3)   Persons not employed on the premises may visit the premises for the
purpose of picking up equipment and materials to be used elsewhere, including
trucks offloading or transferring equipment and/or materials to other vehicles.
   (4)   Employees may meet on the premises to share rides to and from job
sites.
   (5)   Employees' vehicles shall be parked on site and not on a public or
private road. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-31: VEHICLE SALES LOT:
   (1)   Vehicle repair or service work is prohibited on site. (Ord. 16-001, 1-
8-2016)
07-14-33: WIND FARM:
   (1)   The presiding party shall consider the following when making a
decision:
      A.    Lot size;
      B.    Lot configuration;
      C.    Proximity to neighboring structures;
      D.    Topography;
      E.    Viewsheds; and
      F.    The uses of the surrounding properties in the determination of the
compatibility of the proposed wind farm with such uses. (Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-14-35: PRIVATE TOWER WITH ANTENNA:
The intent of this section is to provide reasonable accommodation of amateur
radio towers in accordance with PRB-1.
   (1)   The tower or antenna structure is accessory to a permitted or approved
use.
   (2)   The tower must have a fall zone radius equal to fifty percent (50%) of
the height of the tower and completely within the subject property.
   (3)   Parcels one (1) acre or less in size and residentially zoned are
limited to one (1) tower per parcel.
   (4)   Building permits are required for all permanently installed towers.
   (5)   All building permit applications for amateur radio antennas shall be
accompanied by written approval as applicable from the Federal Aviation
Administration or Chief of Idaho Bureau of Aeronautics.
   (6)   All building permit applications shall include the manufacturer’s
specifications that describes the facility height and design (including a cross
section and elevation) and adapted for the local climate design criteria.
   (7)   A non-operational or abandoned tower or antenna structure shall be
removed within six (6) months of abandonment. (Ord. 20-012, 5-29-2020)
ARTICLE 15
DIRECTOR ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
SECTION:
07-15-01: Applicability
07-15-03: Application, Procedure, Approval, Renewal, Revocation
07-15-05: Temporary Use Permit Additional Requirements/Standards
07-15-07: Home Business Permit Additional Requirements/Standards 1  (Rep. by
Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
07-15-09: Daycare Facilities Additional Requirements/Standards
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  07-14-11: of this chapter.
07-15-01: APPLICABILITY:
This article applies to land uses that require approval of a director's
administrative decision in accordance with the zoning and land use matrix in
section
07-10-27: of this chapter. (Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-15-03: APPLICATION, PROCEDURE, APPROVAL, RENEWAL, REVOCATION:
   (1)   Application: The applicant shall submit to DSD an application for a
director's administrative decision along with the appropriate fee. DSD shall
provide notification by mail of the application to the owners of parcels within
six hundred feet (600') of the external boundaries of the parcel, as well as
any applicable agencies and shall provide such individuals and agencies a
period of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the mailing to submit
comments concerning the proposed application. (Ord. 12-006, 3-22-2012)
   (2)   Compliance With This Code: Prior to issuance of a director's
administrative decision, the subject property shall be in compliance with the
public nuisance ordinance (chapter 2, article 1 of this code), the building
code (chapter 6 of this code), and with all other articles of this chapter.
   (3)   Compliance With All Applicable Regulations: The property shall comply
with all applicable federal, state, and county laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations that pertain to the property and/or business.
   (4)   Compliance With County Ordinances: The property shall be in compliance
with the Canyon County zoning ordinance, public nuisance ordinance and building
ordinance.
   (5)   Nontransferable: This permit is not transferable to any other property
or individual and is not valid for any business or use other than that
specifically approved by the director.
   (6)   Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with
article 13 of this chapter. No parking space shall be located in any public
right of way.
   (7)   Decision Of The Director:
      A.    Review Of Application: Compliance with granting an administrative
approval shall be within the discretion of the director following a full review
of the facts as stated on the application and as received as a result of the
required notification process. The burden of persuading the director to grant a
permit is on the applicant. The director shall consider the uses of the
surrounding properties in the determination of the compatibility of the
proposed use with such uses.
      B.    Additional Conditions: The director may require additional land use
related conditions as are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of parcels within six hundred feet (600'), as well as
conditions that would protect the uses of surrounding properties.
      C.    Notice Of Decision: The director shall give notice of the decision
granting or denying the application, to those previously notified of the
pending application.
   (8)   Appeal By Affected Person: Any affected person who is aggrieved by the
director's decision may file a written notice of appeal in accordance with
section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision", of this chapter. An
appeal shall be noticed and heard as a conditional use permit.
   (9)   Renewals: Renewals are not required for administrative decisions
unless specifically addressed in the additional standards of this article.
Development services will conduct periodic reviews of approved administrative
decisions to ensure compliance with conditions of approval.
   (10)   Revocation/Violation Of Conditions:
      A.    Any person, including staff, may file a written notice with the
director presenting evidence that the conditions of the administrative decision
have been violated. The director shall review the evidence and may conduct an
additional investigation if deemed necessary. If the director determines that
sufficient evidence shows a violation of the conditions, he shall provide by
mail notice of such findings to the permit holder. The permit holder shall be
given thirty (30) days to bring the condition into compliance.
      B.    The director may issue written findings revoking a permit for
noncompliance if the permit holder fails to comply with the conditions of the
notice given.
      C.    The director's revocation may be appealed in accordance with
section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision", of this chapter. (Ord.
11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-15-05: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS/STANDARDS:
   (1)   In zones allowing a temporary use, the landowner may apply for a
temporary use permit for the following reasons:
      A.    For farmworkers engaged in performing a substantial amount of the
operation of the applicant's bona fide farming activities in an agricultural
zone;
      B.    While a single-family dwelling is being constructed;
      C.    Residing in an RV outside an RV park for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days within a calendar year. (Ord. 12-006, 3-22-2012)
07-15-07: HOME BUSINESS PERMIT ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS/STANDARDS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  07-14-11: of this chapter.
07-15-09: DAYCARE FACILITIES ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS/STANDARDS:
   (1)   If a daycare facility is approved the director shall specify the
maximum number of children within the decision.
   (2)   Group daycare facility and daycare center general standards:
      A.    There shall be a minimum of thirty five (35) square feet of net
floor area indoors per child. This space shall be measured wall to wall in
rooms that are regularly used by the children, exclusive of halls, bathrooms,
and kitchen.
      B.    On site vehicle pick up and turnaround areas shall be provided to
ensure safe discharge and pick up of children, in addition to the required off
street parking for the dwelling.
      C.    The applicant or owner shall secure and maintain a basic daycare
license from the state of Idaho department of health and welfare family and
children's services division.
      D.    The applicant shall provide a minimum outdoor play area of one
hundred (100) square feet per child. The minimum play area requirement may be
waived if:
         1.    There is greater or equal area of parks that abut the facility
that can be used by the children; or
         2.    The program design is such that the number of children using the
play area at any one time conforms to the one hundred (100) square feet per
child criteria.
      E.    All outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum
six foot (6') barrier to secure against exit/entry by small children and to
screen abutting properties. The fencing material shall meet the swimming pool
barrier requirements of the Canyon County building code as set forth in chapter
6 of this code. (Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
ARTICLE 16
HOME OCCUPATIONS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 16-001, 1-8-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  07-14-13: of this chapter.
ARTICLE 17
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
07-17-01: Purpose
07-17-03: Jurisdiction
07-17-05: Applicability
07-17-07: Preplatting Building Permits
07-17-09: Preliminary Plat
07-17-11: Final Plat Application
07-17-13: Final Plat
07-17-15: Completion Of Bonded Improvements
07-17-17: Combining Preliminary And Final Plats
07-17-19: Simple Changes To Recorded Plat
07-17-21: Minor Replats And Amendments
07-17-23: Changes Involving Rights Of Way In A Recorded Plat
07-17-25: Lot Requirements
07-17-27: Existing Natural Features
07-17-29: Road And Utility Improvement Requirements
07-17-31: Required Improvements
07-17-33: Special Developments
07-17-35: Subdivision/Easement Vacations
07-17-37: Mineral Extraction
07-17-01: PURPOSE:
These regulations provide for the following:
   (1)   Uniform standards for the subdivision of property and to protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Canyon County.
   (2)   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat.
   (3)   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approval authorities including procedures for the equitable review
and approval of all plats of subdivisions covered by these provisions. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-03: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall apply to the subdividing of all land within the
unincorporated parts of the county and shall include the following:
   (1)   The subdivision of land into more than four (4) lots, parcels or
tracts since September 6, 1979, for transfer of ownership or development.
   (2)   Any change to a recorded plat.
   (3)   The following are exceptions to the subdivision requirements of this
article:
      A.    A parcel, resulting from the subdivision of land, that is used
exclusively for agricultural purposes (on which there is no permanent dwelling)
and is described on the deed, whether including or excluding a public right of
way, and consists of one-fourth (1/4) of one-fourth (1/4) of a section of land
or forty (40) or more acres.
   B.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined
and allowed in the Idaho Code and when the dedication of a right of way for
public purposes is initiated by a public body.
   C.   Simple changes to a recorded plat in accordance with section 07-17-19
of this article.
   D.   A lot or parcel created for the exclusive use of a public or private
school, other political subdivisions, or public or private utility facilities.
   E.   Land that is divided into no more than four (4) from the original
parcel in accordance with Article 18 of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-007, 6-20-2016; amd. Ord. 21-033, 10-21-2021; Ord. 22-017, 9-14-2022)
07-17-05: APPLICABILITY:
   (1)   No person shall subdivide any tract or parcel of land located wholly
or in part in the county except in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
   (2)   No person shall purchase, sell or exchange any parcel of land which is
any part of a subdivision or a proposed subdivision submitted to the
commission, nor offer for recording in the office of the county clerk, any deed
conveying such parcel of land or any fee interest therein, unless such
subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions
of this article. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-07: PREPLATTING BUILDING PERMITS:
DSD shall not issue a zoning compliance for construction of residences within
any area or upon any property approved for development that requires platting
until the final plat has been recorded with the county recorder's office, the
applicable conditions of this code met, and the required improvements are
constructed or bonded. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-09: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   (1)   Application: The applicant shall file with DSD a copy of the completed
subdivision application form as prescribed by the director and a copy of the
preliminary plat with data as required in this section including, but not
limited to, preliminary irrigation plans, the availability of irrigation water
to the property, and a preliminary drainage plan. All applicable fees shall be
paid at this time.
      A.    Form Of Presentation: The information hereinafter required as part
of the preliminary plat submitted shall be shown graphically or by note on
plans, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements or required
data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same standard
engineering scale, having a scale of no more than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100'), unless otherwise approved by DSD prior to submission. The
drawing shall measure no larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches
(24" x 36").
      B.    Identification And Descriptive Data:
         1.    Proposed name of subdivision and its location by section,
township and range.
         2.    Reference by dimension and bearing to a section corner or
quarter section corner.
         3.    Name, address and phone number of developer.
         4.    Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the plat.
         5.    North arrow.
         6.    Date of preparation.
         7.    Revision block showing dates of any revisions subsequent to the
original preparation date. The revision block shall be part of the title block
which shall be placed along the right edge of the drawing sheet.
         8.    Vicinity map drawn to scale clearly showing proposed subdivision
location in relationship to adjacent subdivisions, main arterial routes,
collector streets, etc.
      C.    Existing Conditions Data:
         1.    The general standard for topography shall be by two foot (2')
contours and shall be shown on the preliminary plat map which sets out the
proposed subdivision layout unless the director determines that another
appropriate contour interval would adequately reflect the character and
drainage of the land and highlight or show all areas in excess of fifteen
percent (15%) slope.
         2.    Location of water wells, streams, canals, irrigation laterals,
private ditches, washes, lakes or other water features; direction of flow;
location and extent of known areas subject to inundation.
         3.    Location, widths and names of all platted streets, railroads,
utility rights of way of public record, public areas, permanent structures to
remain, including water wells and municipal corporation lines, within or
adjacent to the tract.
         4.    Name, book and page numbers of any recorded adjacent subdivision
having a common boundary with the tract.
         5.    By note, the existing zoning classification of the tract.
         6.    By note, the approximate acreage of the tract.
         7.    Boundary dimensions of the tract.
         8.    Names and addresses of adjoining property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the tract.
      D.    Proposed Conditions Data:
         1.    Road layout including location, width and proposed names of
roads, alleys, pathways, easements, and roadway connections, if any, to an
adjoining platted tract.
         2.    Typical lot dimensions including curvilinear data to scale; each
lot numbered individually; total number of lots by type and grand total. A
private road must be a lot.
         3.    Location, width and use of easements.
         4.    Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for public
use with use indicated.
         5.    If plat includes land for which multi-family, commercial, or
industrial use is proposed, such areas shall be clearly designated together
with existing zoning classification and status of zoning change, if any.
         6.    If the proposed subdivision is part of a larger area intended
for development, a development master plan of the entire area shall be
provided.
         7.    Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area such as hillside, PUD,
floodplain, cemetery, manufactured home, large scale development, hazardous and
unique areas of development.
         8.    All roads must be labeled as either "private" or "public" behind
or beneath the road name.
      E.    Proposed Utility Methods:
         1.    Sewage: A statement as to the type of proposed sanitary sewage
facilities.
         2.    Water Supply: A statement as to the type of proposed water
supply facilities.
         3.    Stormwater Disposal: A statement as to the type of stormwater
disposal facilities which may include evidence as may be required to the design
and operation of proposed stormwater system.
         4.    Irrigation System: A statement as to proposed irrigation system,
which may include evidence as may be required relative to the design and
operation of any proposed irrigation system.
         5.    Utility Easement: The utility easement width shall be a minimum
of ten feet (10') from the exterior boundaries and five feet (5') from the
interior boundaries. Utility easements shall be shown graphically on the plat.
      F.    Special Developments: If applicable, all requirements of section
07-17-33, "Special Developments", of this article shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat.
   (2)   Acknowledgment: Upon receipt of the application, preliminary plat, and
applicable fees, DSD shall acknowledge, sign, and date the application and deem
it accepted.
   (3)   Agency Review:
      A.    The DSD shall transmit one copy of the preliminary plat to county
departments and any such other agencies that may have jurisdiction or an
interest in the proposed subdivision for their review and recommendation.
      B.    If no written reply is received from any of the various departments
or interested agencies within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of
notification, approval of the preliminary plat by such department or agency
will be considered to be granted. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-
16-2011)
   (4)   Commission Review:
      A.    The commission or hearing examiner shall hold a noticed public
hearing on the preliminary plat. The hearing body shall recommend that the
board approve, approve conditionally, modify, or deny the preliminary plat. The
reasons for such action will be shown in the commission's minutes. The reasons
for action taken shall specify:
         1.    The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         2.    Recommendations for conditions of approval that would minimize
adverse conditions, if any;
         3.    The reasons for recommending the approval, conditional approval,
modification, or denial; and
         4.    If denied, the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
gain approval of the proposed subdivision.
      B.    Upon recommendation by the commission, the preliminary plat,
together with the commission's recommendation, shall be transmitted to the
board. (Ord. 15-009, 4-23-2015)
   (5)   Board Action:
      A.    The board shall consider the commission's recommendation at a
noticed public hearing.
      B.    The board shall base its findings upon the evidence presented at
the board's public hearing, and within thirty (30) calendar days declare its
findings. It may sustain, modify or reject the recommendations of the
commission and make such findings as are consistent with the provisions of this
chapter and the Idaho Code. The findings shall specify:
         1.    The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         2.    The reasons for approval or denial; and
         3.    If denied, the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
gain approval of the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord.
11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-11: FINAL PLAT APPLICATION:
   (1)   After approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the
developer may cause the subdivision, or part thereof, to be surveyed and a
final plat prepared in accordance with the preliminary plat as approved.
   (2)   The developer shall file with DSD a copy of a completed final plat
application and five (5) copies of the final plat with data as required in this
section including, but not limited to, final irrigation plans, if irrigation
water is available to the property, and a final drainage plan. The applicant
must submit with the final plat application an engineered construction drawing
of the private road design, including curbing and drainage. All fees shall be
paid at the time the application is received by DSD. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010;
amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-13: FINAL PLAT:
   (1)   Method And Medium Of Presentation:
      A.    All plats to be recorded shall be prepared on a drafting medium in
accordance with the requirements of Idaho Code, title 55, chapter 19, section
55-1905, paragraph (1) for records of survey maps;
      B.    The plat shall be drawn to an accurate scale of not more than one
hundred feet to an inch (100' = 1") unless otherwise approved by DSD prior to
submission; and
      C.    The final plat drawings shall be additionally submitted in digital
form approved by the director.
   (2)   Identification Data Required:
      A.    A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location
by number of section, township, range and county shall be placed together at
one location at the top of the sheet and generally centered.
      B.    Name, address and official seal of the surveyor preparing the plat.
      C.    North arrow.
      D.    Date of preparation.
      E.    Revision block showing dates of any revisions subsequent to the
original preparation date. The revision block shall be part of the title block
which shall be placed along the right edge of the drawing sheet.
   (3)   Survey Data Required:
      A.    Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided and the interior lots are
to be fully balanced and closed, showing all bearings and distances determined
by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet
and decimals thereof.
      B.    Any excepted lots within the plat boundaries shall show all
bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the field. All
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
      C.    Basis of bearing on the plat shall be referenced.
   (4)   Descriptive Data Required:
      A.    Name, right of way lines, courses, lengths, width of all private
and public streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements.
      B.    All drainageways.
      C.    All easements provided for public services or utilities and any
limitations of the easements.
      D.    All lots and blocks shall be numbered throughout the plat in
accordance with Idaho Code. "Exceptions", "tracts" and "private parks" shall be
so designated, lettered or named and clearly dimensioned.
      E.    All sites to be dedicated to the public will be indicated and the
intended use specified.
      F.    All roads must be labeled as either "private" or "public" behind or
beneath the road name.
      G.    The area of each lot shall be stated in acres and decimals thereof.
      H.    The statement from Idaho Code section 22-4503 or any later or
amended statutory language shall appear on all final plats located in a zone
where agricultural uses are allowed or permitted.
      I.    A note as to the type of sewage disposal facilities to be provided.
      J.    A note as to the type of water supply facilities to be provided.
      K.    Required section and quarter section line setbacks.
   (5)   Dedication And Acknowledgment:
      A.    Dedication: A statement of dedication of all streets, alleys,
pedestrianways and other easements for public use by the persons holding title
of record and by persons holding title as vendees under land contract.
      B.    Acknowledgment Of Dedication: The dedication referred to in
subsection (5)A of this section shall be in the form of a certificate
acknowledged in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-1309. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-
2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
   (6)   Required Certifications: The following certifications shall be placed
on the signature page of the final plat:
      A.    Landowner's signature.
      B.    Certification by a surveyor stating that the plat is correct and
accurate and that the monuments described in it have been located as described.
      C.    Certification of plat approval by the county surveyor.
      D.    Certification of plat approval by the board.
      E.    Approval or certification by impacted agencies that may include:
highway districts, health department, the city when the development is in an
area of impact, treasurer, recorder, and state and federal agencies having
jurisdiction. (Ord. 15-009, 4-23-2015)
   (7)   Time Limitations:
      A.    The following time limitations are in accordance with section
07-07-23: of this chapter:
         1.    In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is
made in successive continuous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of twenty four (24) months, may be
considered for final plat approval. In the event a longer period elapses, the
preliminary plat must be reviewed by the commission and approved by the board;
         2.    Final plat application must be submitted and accepted by DSD
within two (2) years of the date of written approval of the preliminary plat;
and
         3.    The final plat shall be filed with the county recorder within
sixty (60) days after approval of the board; otherwise, such approval shall
become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted.
(Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
   (8)   Commission Review: (Rep. by Ord. 15-009, 4-23-2015)
   (9)   Board Action:
      A.    Upon receipt of the final plat and all other data as required
herein, the board shall thereafter place the final plat on its agenda for
consideration at a regular meeting held not less than fifteen (15) calendar
days after the date of submittal.
      B.    The board, following receipt of the final plat, shall consider said
plat and any changes from the approved preliminary plat. If the plat conforms
to the requirements of the subdivision regulations and Idaho Code, the board
shall approve the plat.
      C.    At the time of approval and recording of the final plat, the board
shall accept the dedications shown thereon. As a condition precedent to the
approval of any final plat, the board may require the developer to improve or
agree to improve the streets and all other public improvements to the standards
approved for the preliminary plat by furnishing a surety bond or other
guarantee. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-15: COMPLETION OF BONDED IMPROVEMENTS:
All subdivision improvements covered by surety bond or other guarantee shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 10-006, 8-
16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-17: COMBINING PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS:
   (1)   The developer may request that the subdivision application be
processed as both a preliminary and final plat, known as a short plat, if all
of the following exist:
      A.    The proposed subdivision does not exceed fourteen (14) lots;
      B.    No major special development considerations are involved such as
development in floodplain, hillside development, etc.; and
      C.    All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in acceptable form. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-
16-2011)
07-17-19: SIMPLE CHANGES TO RECORDED PLAT:
This chapter establishes the procedure and requirements for making simple
changes to a recorded plat when not involving a vacation or dedication of a
public street right of way or private road easement. (Ord. 16-007, 6-20-2016)
   (1)   Application For Change:
      A.    The person seeking a change must file an application on a form
provided by the director, and the fees. The application must demonstrate full
compliance with all requirements established by the board as prerequisites for
making a change to a plat.
      B.    When the application is filed, the director shall have a period of
fourteen (14) calendar days from the time of receipt of the application to
determine whether the application is complete.
      C.    If the director determines that the application is not complete,
the application shall be returned to the applicant with written instructions as
to what deficiencies must be satisfied. No further consideration will be given
to the application until it is returned by the applicant and determined by the
director to be complete.
      D.    When a fully completed application has been filed and the fees
paid, the director shall conduct a review. The burden of proof is on the
applicant to show compliance with the requirements for a simple change to a
recorded plat. The director may grant the application only if the changed plat
can meet all requirements of the zone in which it is located.
   (2)   Approval Or Denial:
      A.    If the director denies the application, he shall state his reasons
in written findings within fourteen (14) calendar days of the denial. A copy
shall be forwarded by mail to the applicant at the address given on the
application.
      B.    If the director grants the application, the applicant must submit a
record of survey showing the plat change pertaining to the request and a metes
and bounds description of all changed lots. The record of survey must bear in
the title or in a side note on the record of survey that the purpose of the
record of survey is to change the specific plat, stating the name of the plat,
with affected lots and blocks. The written decision of the director and a copy
of the record of survey must be recorded at the applicant's expense.
      C.    Any affected person who is aggrieved by the director's decision may
file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision", of this chapter. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-21: MINOR REPLATS AND AMENDMENTS:
This section establishes the procedure and requirements for making minor
modifications to a previously recorded subdivision plat or portion of a plat,
when the modification cannot be accomplished as a simple change to a recorded
plat in accordance with section
07-17-19: of this article. A minor correction on a final plat or an amendment
that does not create a new lot or alter the character or purpose of a
subdivision, may be made by application to the director who shall determine the
validity of the requested correction and record, at the applicant's expense,
any approved change. A new mylar and signature page reflecting the correction
or amendment shall be required. Minor modifications include insignificant
changes in wording, corrections, adjustments between platted and unplatted
parcels, consolidations and lot line adjustments for up to five (5) lots where
easements not utilized are adjusted with the lot line.
Substantial changes to a recorded plat must comply with the requirements of
section
07-17-13: of this article, and may not be accomplished through the provisions
of this section. Substantial changes include those that would affect the
location of public streets or private roads, septic systems, building
envelopes, no build envelopes, easements or utilities that are currently
utilized; adjustments that would create additional lots; adjustments that would
affect more than five (5) lots; or significant changes in plat language that
might affect a property owner's use of their land, or of commonly held land or
easements. (Ord. 16-007, 6-20-2016)
   (1)   Application For Approval Of Minor Replat Or Amendment:
      A.    A completed application must be submitted to the director with the
following documents:
         1.    Completed application form signed by the property owners whose
land is included in the amended plat or replat, or a notarized letter of
authorization by the property owners and a sufficient number of copies, as
determined by the director, for each agency/organization reviewing the
application, shall be submitted by the applicant.
         2.    Fees.
         3.    Preliminary title report for all lots to be replatted or
amended.
         4.    A plat meeting the final plat requirements of section
07-17-13: of this article and Idaho Code, title 50, chapter 13. The title of
the plat shall state that it is a replat or an amendment of the subdivision or
of the particular lots within the subdivision.
         5.    Narrative explaining the proposed changes to the plat.
   (2)   Approval Process And Requirements: When an application for approval of
a minor replat or amendment of a recorded plat is filed the following procedure
applies:
      A.    The director shall provide a copy of the completed application
packet to the affected agencies.
      B.    Within thirty five (35) calendar days of the acceptance of
application, the director shall review the relevant evidence in the record and
issue findings and an order of decision. The findings shall cite the applicable
legal standards; state the evidence and conclusions on which the decision was
based; explain any relevant contested facts and the evaluation of these facts;
and if the decision is denied, any action the applicant could take to gain
approval.
      C.    To approve a minor replat or amendment, the director must make a
finding that the proposed changes and the plat are in compliance with Idaho
Code, title 50, chapter 13 and with the requirements of the county and other
agencies; that the proposed changes are not substantial in nature; and that
there will be no negative effects on public agencies and private corporations
that provide services and facilities for the subdivision.
      D.    Within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of approval, the
mylar plat must be submitted in a form ready to record. The applicant shall
obtain all required signatures on the plat. If the plat is not submitted for
recordation within one hundred twenty (120) days and an extension is not
granted by the director, approval is null and void and a new application must
be submitted. The director may grant an extension for good cause.
   (3)   Appeal: Any affected person who is aggrieved by the director's
decision may file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section
07-05-07, "Appeal Of Director Administrative Decision", of this chapter. (Ord.
10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-23: CHANGES INVOLVING RIGHTS OF WAY IN A RECORDED PLAT:
Changes to any recorded plat involving a public right of way for public use
must be applied for with the highway district having and accepting
jurisdiction. Other such applications must be made to the board pursuant to
Idaho Code, title 50, chapter 13. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-
16-2011)
07-17-25: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Lot Design: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines, except where another design may be justified. (Ord. 10-
006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-27: EXISTING NATURAL FEATURES:
Existing natural features which add value to residential development and
enhance the attractiveness of the community such as streets, watercourses,
historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets shall be given consideration in
the design of the subdivision. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-
2011)
07-17-29: ROAD AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Responsibility Of Developer: Construction of improvements such as
private roads and other facilities which are required as a condition to plat
approval shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall meet county
specifications and standards of construction.
   (2)   Irrigation Supply And Distribution Systems: The developer shall
disclose, pursuant to Idaho Code section 31-3805, and file as part of the
preliminary plat with DSD, evidence that an adequate irrigation supply and
distribution system to serve the land within the plat to be recorded will be
provided and must include consideration of using existing water rights that go
with the land being platted. Such evidence shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
      A.    Copies of the plans of the proposed distribution system for the
lots and areas to be served in the proposed development; and
      B.    Copies of the community association's or similar organization's
documents which may be required precedent to the establishment of an irrigation
distribution system within the proposed development.
   (3)   Construction Drawings: The applicant shall submit to DSD with the
application for final plat, construction drawings for all required
improvements.
   (4)   Bonding: Prior to the board signing the final plat, all required
improvements shall be constructed and a certificate of completion shall be
secured from the county unless a surety bond or other acceptable guarantee of
performance to ensure the actual construction of such improvements as submitted
and approved is filed with the county clerk. Such surety bond or other
guarantee shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the
estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the county. The
improvements when covered by a surety bond shall be constructed within two (2)
years from the date of recording of the final plat; provided, however, the
board may extend the period one year upon showing of just cause by the
developer.
   (5)   Record Plans And Specifications:
      A.    Prior to acceptance by the County of any improvements installed by
the developer, two (2) sets of prints of the approved "record" plans and
specifications shall be certified by the developer's engineer and filed with
DSD.
      B.    Within ten (10) calendar days after completion of improvements and
submission of "record" plans in accordance with County specifications, the
applicant's engineer shall certify the completion and acceptance of the
construction and shall transmit a copy of the said certification to the
developer. If a surety bond or guarantee agreement has been executed by the
developer, the same shall be forwarded to the County Clerk. The County Clerk
shall thereafter release said surety bond or guarantee upon application by the
developer upon proof that the improvements have been completed. (Ord. 10-006,
8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-31: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   (1)   Road Improvements:
      A.    Private Roads:
         1.    Private roads must be a numbered lot and constructed in
accordance with section
07-10-03: of this chapter.
         2.    A minimum private road lot width of sixty feet (60') is
required. This requirement may be reduced to a width not less than fifty feet
(50'), in accordance with subsection
07-10-03(1)D of this chapter.
         3.    Curbs and gutters, if required by the Board, may be either
rolled or vertical style and must be a minimum width of two feet (2').
Sidewalks must be a minimum width of four feet (4'). Both curb and gutter shall
be constructed using three-fourths inch (3/4") aggregate in the concrete mix.
      B.    Public Streets: Public streets, including curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable highway district or, if within an Area of City Impact, the
requirements adopted by Canyon County in chapter 9 of this Code.
   (2)   Subdivision Improvements: The commission or hearing examiner may
recommend and the Board may require improvements in the subdivision, for
example curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, ribbon curbing, swales, and
stormwater retention and disposal.
   (3)   Road Names: Road name signs and traffic control signs shall be
installed by the developer in appropriate locations such as where roads and
streets intersect and are approved by the local highway district having
jurisdiction.
   (4)   Other Improvements: All other improvements required as conditions of
approval shall be completed. (Ord. 16-007, 6-20-2016)
07-17-33: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
The purpose of this section is to identify various types of special
developments that normally pose special concerns to the commission and the
Board when reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests. The provisions of
this section are in addition to other applicable requirements of these
subdivision regulations. Required information shall be submitted to the DSD
with the preliminary plat.
   (1)   Hillside Development:
      A.    Hillside Development Evaluation:
         1.    All hillside development proposals shall give consideration to
desirable land use planning, soil mechanics, engineering geology, hydrology,
and civil engineering. The evaluation includes, but is not limited to:
            (A) Planning of development to fit the topography, soils, geology,
hydrology and other conditions existing on the proposed site;
            (B) Orienting development to the site so that grading and other
site preparation is kept to a minimum; i.e., use of building or road envelopes,
and no build areas;
            (C) Shaping of essential grading to complement the natural
landforms and to minimize padding and terracing of building sites;
            (D) Division of land tracts into smaller workable units on which
construction can be completed within one construction season so that large
areas are not left bare and exposed during the winter- spring runoff period;
and
            (E) Completion of paving as rapidly as possible after grading.
         2.    Areas having soil, geology or hydrology hazards shall not be
developed unless it is shown that their limitations can be overcome; that
hazard to life or property will not exist; and that the safety, use or
stability of a public way or drainage channel is not jeopardized.
      B.    Required Data: The developer shall retain professional expertise to
obtain the following information which is required by the commission:
         1.    Soil Reports: For any proposed hillside development, a soils
report shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall include
data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils,
conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, design criteria for
corrective measures, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of
sites to be developed.
         2.    Geology Reports: For any proposed hillside development, a
geology report shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall
include an adequate description of site geology and an evaluation of the
relationship between the proposed development and the underlying geology and
recommendations for remedial actions.
         3.    Hydrology Report:
            (A) For any proposed hillside development, a hydrology report shall
be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall include an adequate
description of the hydrology, conclusions and recommendations regarding the
effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development and opinions and
recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed.
            (B) Flood frequency information shall be provided for the area
proposed for the development, if applicable.
      C.    Grading And Drainage Plan:
         1.    A preliminary grading and drainage plan shall be submitted with
each hillside preliminary plat proposal and shall include the following
information:
            (A) Approximate limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours
to be achieved by the grading, including all cut and fill slopes, proposed
drainage channels and related construction;
            (B) Preliminary plans and approximate locations of all surface and
subsurface drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs
and other protective devices to be constructed; and
            (C) A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil
and other material that is removed from the grading site, including the
location of the disposal site.
         2.    A final grading plan shall be submitted with each final plat and
include the following information:
            (A) Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be
achieved by the grading, including all proposed cut and fill slopes and
proposed drainage channels and related construction;
            (B) Detailed plans and locations of all surface and subsurface
drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs and other
protective devices to be constructed; and
            (C) A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be
completed, including the total area of soil surface which is to be disturbed
during each stage together with estimated starting and completion dates. In no
event shall the existing "natural" vegetative ground cover be destroyed,
removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the grading.
      D.    Development Standards:
         1.    Soils:
            (A) Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material, such
as vegetation and rubbish and any other material which is determined by the
soils engineer to be detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not
conducive to stability.
            (B) Cuts and fills shall be designed to provide safety, stability
and adequate setback from property lines in accordance with County standards,
drawings and specifications.
         2.    Roadways:
            (A) Road alignments shall reasonably follow natural terrain and no
unnecessary cuts or fills shall be allowed.
            (B) One-way streets, in interior subdivision roads only, shall be
permitted and encouraged where appropriate for the terrain and when public
safety would not be jeopardized. When approved by the County the one-way street
may have a thirty foot (30') right-of- way instead of a sixty foot (60') right-
of-way.
            (C) The width of the graded section shall extend three feet (3')
beyond the curb back or edge of pavement on both the cut and fill sides of the
roadway. If sidewalks are to be installed parallel to the roadway, the graded
section shall be increased by the width of the sidewalk plus one foot (1')
beyond the curb back.
            (D) Ribbon curbing and swales or concrete curb and gutter shall be
installed along both sides of paved roadways, when required by the Board.
            (E) A pedestrian walkway plan may be required.
         3.    Driveways And Parking Areas: Combinations of collective private
driveways, cluster parking areas and on street, parallel parking ways may be
used to attempt to optimize the objectives of minimum soil disturbance,
minimize impervious cover, and enhance the excellence of design and aesthetic
sensitivity.
      E.    Vegetation And Revegetation:
         1.    The developer shall submit a slope stabilization and
revegetation plan which shall include a complete description of the existing
vegetation, the vegetation to be removed and the method of disposal, the
vegetation to be planted, and slope stabilization measures to be installed. The
plan shall include an analysis of the environmental effects of such operations,
including the effects it may have on slope stability, soil erosion, water
quality and fish and wildlife.
         2.    Vegetation sufficient to stabilize the soils shall be
established on all disturbed areas as each stage of grading is completed. Areas
not contained within lot boundaries shall be protected with perennial vegetal
cover after all construction is completed. Efforts shall be made to plant those
species that tend to recover from fire damage and do not contribute to a rapid
rate of fire spread.
         3.    The developer shall be fully responsible for any destruction of
native vegetation proposed and approved for retention. He shall carry the
responsibility both for his own employees and for all subcontractors from the
first day of construction until the notice of completion is filed. The
developer shall be responsible for replacing such destroyed vegetation in kind
or its equivalent.
      F.    Maintenance: The owner of any private property on which grading or
other work has been performed, pursuant to a grading plan approved or a
building permit granted under the provisions of this chapter, shall
continuously maintain and repair all graded surfaces and erosion prevention
devices, retaining walls, drainage structures or means, and other protective
devices, plantings and ground cover installed or completed.
   (2)   Condominium And Planned Unit Developments:
      A.    Site Development Plan: The applicant shall provide the commission
with a site plan, elevations, perspective drawings and such other illustrated
information at a scale to be determined by DSD to show the proposed development
that will include at least the following:
         1.    Site plan;
         2.    Plat showing lots, including common lots and roads;
         3.    Architectural styles and building design concepts;
         4.    Architectural materials and colors;
         5.    Type of landscaping;
         6.    Screening, if proposed;
         7.    Type of solid waste facilities;
         8.    Parking concept; and
         9.    Open space areas.
      B.    Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated
needs of boats, campers and trailers. For typical residential development, one
adequate space shall be provided for every three (3) living units. This may be
reduced by the commission if there is a showing that the needs of a particular
development are less.
      C.    Parking Space: One additional parking space beyond that which is
required by the zoning regulations may be required for every three (3) dwelling
units to accommodate visitor parking.
      D.    Control During Development: Single ownership or control during
development shall be required and a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the
development is built and constructed as planned.
   (3)   Subdivision For A Cemetery:
      A.    Function: The developer shall provide the County with written
documentation that will sufficiently explain if the proposed cemetery will be
used for either human or animal remains and the functions that are anticipated
on the property.
      B.    Compliance With Idaho Code Required: The developer shall submit a
written statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures
the compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural platting
requirements and management requirements that are outlined in Idaho Code, title
27.
   (4)   Areas Of Critical Concern:
      A.    General: The development of any hazardous or unique areas that have
previously been designated as areas of critical concern by the Board, as
provided by Idaho Code, may need special consideration by the applicant, as
determined by the Board, to assure that the development is necessary and
desirable in the public interest in view of the existing unique conditions.
Areas that may be designated by the Board, through due process, as hazardous or
unique may be as follows:
         1.    Unstable soils;
         2.    Scenic areas;
         3.    Historical significance areas;
         4.    Floodplains; and
         5.    Other areas of critical concern.
      B.    Plan Submission: The applicant, if required, shall prepare and
submit an environmental assessment statement for those areas as above noted and
designated by the Board along with the preliminary plat application.
      C.    Content Of Environmental Assessment Statement: The content of the
environmental assessment statement, if required, shall usually be prepared by
professional(s) that will provide answers to the following questions:
         1.    What detrimental environmental effect may occur as a result of
the proposed development?
         2.    What corrective action or alternative plans could be developed
so as not to significantly cause detrimental environmental effects?
         3.    What adverse effects of the proposed development cannot be
mitigated? (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-17-35: SUBDIVISION/EASEMENT VACATIONS:
   (1)   Any property owner desiring to have an existing subdivision vacated,
in whole or part, including easements, shall complete and file an application
along with any fees with DSD and also file such other applications as are
otherwise required by law.
   (2)   Upon receipt of the completed application and other information as may
be required, DSD shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon. The
application shall be considered by the commission at a public hearing noticed
as provided for in article 5 of this chapter. Vacations shall be processed in
accord with the regulations set forth in Idaho Code section 50-1306A and
recorded in accord with the regulations set forth in Idaho Code section 50-
1324.
   (3)   The commission shall review the request and any agency response and
make a recommendation to the Board for approval, conditional approval or
denial. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
07-17-37: MINERAL EXTRACTION:
Short term mineral extraction is allowed during the process of subdivision
construction following the provisions of this chapter. The six (6) month time
limit shall apply to extraction during each phase as shown on the approved
preliminary plat. (Ord. 10-006, 8-16-2010; amd. Ord. 11-003, 3-16-2011)
ARTICLE 18
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND DIVISIONS
SECTION:
07-18-01: Purpose
07-18-03: Applicability
07-18-05: Application
07-18-07: Administrative Division in Agricultural Zones
07-18-09: Administrative Division Of Nonviable Parcels In An Agricultural Zone
07-18-11: Administrative Division And Relocation Of Building Permits Between
Contiguous Parcels In An Agricultural Zone
07-18-13: Administrative Land Division In All Other Zones
07-18-01: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this article allow for the division of parcels without being
subject to the subdivision regulation as set forth in article 17 of this
chapter.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
07-18-03: APPLICABILITY:
   (1)   These regulations apply to:
      A.   Parcels of land created prior to September 6, 1979.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
07-18-05: APPLICATION AND PROCESS:
   (1)   The following shall be provided with all applications for land
divisions pursuant to this Article:
      A.   Application;
      B.   Fees;
      C.   Site plan showing all lots and access locations;
      D.   An irrigation plan (if applicable);
      E.   Proof that any required conditions of county approvals are met (if
applicable)
   (2)   Parcels divided pursuant to this Chapter with slopes greater than
fifteen percent (15%) shall not be disturbed without an engineered grading and
drainage plan consistent with section
07-17-33(1)C.
   (3)   The subject property shall be in compliance with the public nuisance
ordinance (chapter 2, article 1 of this code), the building code (chapter 6 of
this code), and this chapter before the director can approve the application.
   (4)   Notification of the application shall be provided to the applicable
fire and highway districts and shall provide such districts a period of fifteen
(15) calendar days from the date of notice to submit comments concerning the
application.
   (5)   Pre-approval Decision: the following shall be provided after receiving
pre-approval of the site plan from director.
      A.   Record of Survey with metes and bounds descriptions of all lots that
shows access from each parcel complies with the requirements of section 07-10-
03: of this chapter, and that includes all existing and necessary easements;
   (6)   Decision:
      A.   If the application meets the requirements of this section, the
director may approve the division. The director may attach conditions to the
approval if applicable.
      B.   If the request is approved, the director shall issue a letter of
approval setting forth the details and requirements of the division.
   (7)   Appeal by Affected Person: Any affected person who is aggrieved by the
decision may file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section 07-05-
07 of this chapter.
   (8)   Required Language on Approvals: Language from the Idaho Right To Farm
Act shall appear on administrative land division approvals.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
07-18-07: ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION IN AGRICULTURAL ZONES:
   (1)   Purpose: The regulations of this section allow for a division of a
parcel in an agricultural zone without being subject to the subdivision
regulations as set forth in article 17 of this chapter.
   (2)   Standards: The proposed division of original parcels created prior to
September 6, 1979, shall be allowed in accordance with the following:
 
Less than 80 acres  1 division (2 residential parcels)
80 to 119 acres     2 divisions (3 residential parcels)
More than 120 acres 3 divisions (4 residential parcels)
 
      A.   The proposed parcels created and its remnant shall be at least one
(1) acre in size.
      B.   An additional parcel designated as agricultural only and at least
five (5) acres in size may be created in accordance with this article and
subject regulations in accordance with article 10 of this chapter.
   (3)   Once an administrative land division has been approved in the
agricultural zoning district, there shall be no other administrative land
divisions from that land regardless of ownership of any of the land involved
except as permitted by this Article. Previously approved divisions in the
agricultural zoning district may be amended to provide for divisions of the
original parcel that were entitled pursuant to Chapter 7 Article 18 but not
taken when the first division was approved.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
07-18-09: ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION OF NONVIABLE PARCELS IN AN AGRICULTURAL ZONE:
   (1)   Purpose: The director shall have the authority regarding the division
of nonviable land within an "A" (Agricultural) zone, in whole or in part, where
the result of the division limits negative impacts to adjacent agricultural
uses.
   (2)   Minimum Parcel: The proposed parcel created and its remnant shall be
at least one (1) acre in size.
   (3)   Application: The applicant shall submit to DSD an application for a
director's administrative decision along with the appropriate fee, including
requirements of Section 07-18-05 of this chapter. Submittal shall also include
the following:
      A.   Evidence demonstrating the land, in whole or in part, is nonviable
for agricultural use; and
      B.   Evidence demonstrating the result of the request will minimize
potential negative impacts to adjacent agricultural uses.
   (4)   Notifications: Upon acceptance of an application, DSD shall, by mail,
provide notification of the proposed division to the owners of parcels which
are contiguous to the subject parcel(s) and to the owners of parcels which are
within six hundred feet (600') of the external boundaries of the subject parcel
(s) and shall provide such individuals a period of fifteen (15) calendar days
from the date of the mailing to submit comments concerning the proposed
division. Notification of the application shall also be provided to the
applicable fire and highway districts and shall provide such districts a period
of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of notice to submit comments
concerning the application.
   (5)   Evaluation and Determination of Application: The director shall
evaluate each application on an individual basis and shall exercise discretion
in determining whether or not to approve such an application with consideration
given to each of the following requirements:
      A.   The parcel(s) must be eligible for division; and
      B.   The subject property shall be in compliance with the public nuisance
ordinance (chapter 2, article 1 of this code) and the building code (chapter 6
of this code) before the director can approve the application; and
      C.   The parcel, in whole or in part, shall consist of land with site
constraints and/or resource issues, such as lack of water, suitable soils,
topography, land compatibility, lot size or configuration, that makes
productive agricultural use extremely difficult; and
      D.   The division shall not create a negative impact to surrounding
agricultural uses. The director may include conditions of approval to mitigate
potential negative impacts.
   (6)   The applicant has the burden of proving that the application meets
these requirements.
      A.   Deliberate action to withhold agricultural land from productive use
strictly to qualify for a land division pursuant to this section shall
disqualify such land from treatment under this section.
   (7)   Decision, Division of Nonviable Parcel:
      A.   If the application meets the requirements of this section, the
director may approve the division into fewer than five (5) parcels from the
original parcel. The director may attach conditions to the approval which
limits the division or use.
      B.   If the request is approved, the director shall issue a letter of
approval setting forth the details and requirements of the division.
      C.   The director shall give notice of the decision granting or denying
the application, to those previously notified of the pending application.
   (8)   Appeal by Affected Person: Any affected person who is aggrieved by the
decision may file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section
07-05-07 of this chapter.
   (9)   Onetime Only Division: Once a nonviable parcel in an agricultural zone
has been approved, there shall be no other administrative land division from
that land regardless of ownership of any of the land involved.
   (10)   Required Language on Approvals: Language from the Idaho Right To Farm
Act shall appear on administrative land division approvals.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
07-18-11: ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION AND RELOCATION OF BUILDING PERMITS BETWEEN
CONTIGUOUS PARCELS IN AN AGRICULTURAL ZONE:
   (1)   Purpose: The director shall have the authority to relocate available
residential permits between said contiguous parcels for the purpose of
clustering said residential building permits on a destination parcel.
   (2)   Minimum Parcel Or Lot Area: The minimum parcel or lot area of this
section shall be one acre.
   (3)   Notifications: Upon acceptance of an application, DSD shall, by mail,
provide notification of the proposed relocation to the owners of parcels which
are contiguous to the destination parcel and to the owners of parcels which are
within six hundred feet (600') of the external boundaries of the destination
parcel and shall provide such individuals a period of fifteen (15) calendar
days from the date of the mailing to submit comments concerning the proposed
relocation.
   (4)   Evaluation And Determination Of Application: The director shall
consider all comments that are received within the fifteen (15) day comment
period prior to making a final decision concerning the relocation request. In
considering comments, the director shall evaluate whether such comments
articulate and demonstrate that the parcel is eligible for the relocation of
building permits. The director shall evaluate each application on an individual
basis and shall exercise discretion in determining whether or not to approve
such an application with consideration given to each of the following
requirements:
      A.   The originating and destination parcels must be contiguous.
"Contiguous" means touching at a point or along a boundary, including parcels
divided by railroad, public right of way, canal, ditch, river, or stream; and
      B.   The originating parcels must be eligible for an administrative land
division under this article or have a building permit available; and
      C.   The relocation uses the originating parcel's administrative land
division/building permit and no other administrative land division is available
for the parcel; and
      D.   The relocation must demonstrate at least one of the following:
         1.   Promotion of effective or efficient farming. If the applicant
demonstrates that the relocation would create a more cost effective or
efficient method of farming the originating parcels or make them more viable
for the production of crops; or
         2.   Clustering of structures;
      E.   Deliberate action to withhold productive farm ground from production
strictly in order to qualify for administrative relocation of building permits
pursuant to this subsection shall disqualify such farm ground from treatment
under this subsection.
   (5)   Approval, Division Of Destination Parcel:
      A.   The size, shape, and location of the destination parcel, as well as
the parcels to which it will be divided into, shall be subject to the approval
of the director.
      B.   If the application meets the requirements of this subsection, the
director may approve the division of the destination parcel into no more than
four (4) parcels. The director may attach limiting conditions to the approval.
      C.   If the request is approved, the director shall issue a letter of
approval setting forth the details and requirements of the division including
the size, shape, and location of the destination parcel.
      D.   The director shall give notice of the decision granting or denying
the application, to those previously notified of the pending application.
   (6)   Appeal By Affected Person: Any affected person who is aggrieved by the
decision may file a written notice of appeal in accordance with section
07-05-07 of this chapter.
   (7)   Onetime Only Division: Once an administrative land division has been
approved, there shall be no other administrative land division from that land
regardless of ownership of any of the land involved.
   (8)   Required Language On Approvals: Language from the Idaho right to farm
act1 shall appear on administrative land division approvals.
   (9)   Exceptions: If the land division does not qualify as an exception
under the subdivision standards of subsection
07-17-03(3) of this chapter, then all regulations of article 17 of this chapter
shall apply.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
07-18-13: ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION IN ALL OTHER ZONES:
   (1)   Purpose: The regulations of this section allow for a division of a
parcel in a commercial, industrial, and residential zone without being subject
to the subdivision regulations as set forth in article 17 of this chapter.
   (2)   An administrative land division of an original parcel in a commercial,
industrial, and residential zone is allowed in accordance with the following:
      A.   Land may be divided into no more than four (4) parcels through the
administrative land division process unless further restricted by provisions in
Chapter 9 - Areas Of City Impact.
      B.   The minimum parcel or lot area shall be subject to the minimum lot
size provisions of subsection
07-10-21(2) of this chapter.
(Ord. 22-071, 9-14-2022)
ARTICLE 19
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
07-19-01: Civil Enforcement Procedure
07-19-03: Criminal Enforcement Procedure
07-19-01: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
   (1)   Request For Voluntary Compliance: If it is determined by the
Development Services Department that a violation of this chapter exists on any
property, the Development Services Department shall cause a written request for
voluntary compliance to be issued to the owner, occupier, and/or person in
control of such property. Such request for voluntary compliance shall contain
the street address and parcel number of the property, describe the existing
violation of this chapter, request voluntary action to remedy the violation,
and establish the time period for voluntary remedy of the violation, which
shall be ten (10) days from the date of the request for voluntary compliance.
   (2)   Order Of Abatement: If, following the issuance of a request for
voluntary compliance pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, Development
Services Department finds that a violation of this chapter still exists on any
property, the Development Services Department shall cause an order of abatement
to be issued to the owner, occupier, and/or person in control of such property.
Such order of abatement shall contain the street address and parcel number of
the property, describe the existing violation of this chapter, order the
abatement of the violation, establish the time period for abatement, specify
the penalty for noncompliance, and describe the opportunity and time for
appeal. The Development Services Department shall issue such order of abatement
to the owner, occupier, or person in control of the property on which the
violation exists in one or more of the following ways:
      A.    By hand delivery upon such owner, occupier, or person in control of
the property; or
      B.    By certified mail to such owner, occupier, or person in control of
the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as
otherwise known; or
      C.    By posting such notice and order at a conspicuous place on the
property.
   (3)   Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner,
occupier, or person in charge or control of any property where any violation
exists, to abate such violation within ten (10) calendar days from notice
pursuant to this section, however, the Development Services Department may
require summary abatement of a nuisance condition where such condition presents
an imminent threat to human health or safety.
   (4)   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent the
Development Services Department from requiring, undertaking, or causing summary
abatement of a violation where such condition presents an imminent threat to
human health or safety.
   (5)   Appeal: Within seven (7) calendar days from the date of service,
mailing, or posting of the order of abatement, the owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property may appeal to the Board by
filing a written appeal with the Development Services Department, which appeal
shall enumerate the grounds for appeal. The Board shall consider written and
oral testimony from the appellant and shall affirm, withdraw, or modify the
order of abatement. The decision of the Board shall be final. If the Board
affirms the order, the appellant shall have five (5) calendar days from the
date of such affirmation to abate the violation as ordered.
   (6)   Abatement Procedures: The Board, upon recommendation by the
Development Services Department and after providing notice as provided herein,
may abate or cause the abatement of any violation where the owner, occupant,
agent or person in control of property does not comply with abatement notice.
If the Board directs the abatement of the violation a service fee shall be
imposed against the owner of the subject property for services provided. The
fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be reasonably related to, but shall
not exceed, the actual cost of the service being rendered. The Board shall
cause the fee to be collected in the following manner:
      A.    Recovery Of Abatement Service Fee: DSD shall send to the owner,
occupier, and/or person in control of the subject property, by regular mail, a
billing statement requiring payment to cover the costs of abating the nuisance
and the administrative services as established by fee schedule. Unless paid as
voluntarily, as provided below, such charge shall be collected in the same
manner provided by law for the collection of real and personal Property Taxes.
      B.    Automatic Lien Of Abatement Service Fee: Upon abatement, an
automatic lien in the amount of the abatement service fee shall attach to the
subject property, and a notice of lien shall be recorded within seventy two
(72) hours. Upon payment of the charges in full the lien shall be released.
      C.    Certification Of Abatement Costs: If full payment is not made
within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the billing statement requiring
payment of abatement service fee, the Board shall certify such charge to be
placed on the Property Tax roll.
   (7)   Certificate Of Noncompliance: In lieu of abatement, the Board may
record a Certificate of Noncompliance detailing the violations existing on the
property. Such certificate shall be removed upon remedy of the enumerated
violation.
   (8)   Injunction And Other Remedy At Law: The County may also take civil
action to obtain an order enjoining the ongoing maintenance of such property
free from violations of this chapter, and/or to recover any and all costs
enforcement and/or litigation including, but not limited to attorney fees and
court costs. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019)
07-19-03: CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the preceding
sections, or any part or provision, of this chapter. Upon conviction violations
shall be punishable according to section
01-01-07 of the County's Ordinance, General Penalty. Criminal enforcement shall
not foreclose use of other remedies in this chapter. The Canyon County Sheriff
and/or designated Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall have the authority to issue
citations to violators of this chapter. (Ord. 19-038, 8-30-2019; amd. Ord. 21-
030, 10-14-2021)
CHAPTER 8
CAFO REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 01
CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS
SECTION:
08-01-01: Title
08-01-02: Authority
08-01-03: Purpose
08-01-04: Repealer
08-01-05: General
08-01-06: Definitions
08-01-07: Registration Process For Existing CAFOs
08-01-08: CAFO Siting Permit Required
08-01-09: Contents Of Application For CAFO Siting Permit
08-01-10: Process Of Notice And Application For Hearing For CAFO Siting Permit
Approval
08-01-11: Criteria For Approval And Development Standards For New Facilities
08-01-12: Criteria For Approval Of Expanding CAFOs
08-01-13: Variance Process
08-01-14: Grant Or Denial Of CAFO Siting Permit
08-01-15: Process For CAFO Siting Permit
08-01-16: General Appeal Procedures
08-01-17: Penalties, Enforcement And Permit Revocation
08-01-18: Lawfully Conducted Operations
08-01-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO)
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-02: AUTHORITY:
This article is authorized by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution
and Idaho Code sections 31-801, 31-828 and 67-6529. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-03: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the orderly placement and
regulation of CAFOs in Canyon County, and to require all CAFOs operating in
Canyon County to obtain all required permits and be in compliance with all
applicable federal and state environmental standards, and to be sited, where
appropriate, within the A (agricultural), IP (industrial park), M-1 (light
industrial), or M-2 (heavy industrial) zones, and meet certain development
standards. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-04: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article or
inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. However, those
portions of Canyon County zoning ordinance 05-002, as amended, which regulate
livestock confinement operations shall remain in full force and effect for any
livestock confinement operation that is not regulated by this article. (Ord.
07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-05: GENERAL:
   (1)   Nothing in this article, or any action by the county pursuant to this
article shall release the applicant from compliance with or other provisions of
applicable local, state, and/or federal laws, permit requirements, rules, and/
or regulations.
   (2)   The provisions of this article are minimum standards, and any more
restrictive standards required by county or other applicable local, state, and/
or federal laws, rules, and/or regulations must be followed. (Ord. 07-002, 1-
18-2007)
08-01-06: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, certain terms are defined as set forth below.
All words in the present tense include the future tense, the plural includes
the singular, and words in the singular include the plural, unless the nature
of construction of the sentence indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory. For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ADJOINING: To be in, or nearly in, contact.
ANIMAL: All vertebrates, except humans.
ANIMAL NUMBERS: The minimum number of animals at the facility for the facility
to be defined as a CAFO:
   (1)   Seven hundred (700) mature dairy cows, whether milked or dry;
   (2)   One thousand (1,000) veal calves;
   (3)   One thousand (1,000) cattle or other mature dairy cows or veal calves.
Cattle includes, but is not limited to, heifers, steers, bulls and cow/calf
pairs;
   (4)   Two thousand five hundred (2,500) swine, each weighing fifty five (55)
pounds or more;
   (5)   Ten thousand (10,000) swine, each weighing less than fifty five (55)
pounds;
   (6)   Five hundred (500) horses;
   (7)   Ten thousand (10,000) sheep or lambs;
   (8)   Fifty five thousand (55,000) turkeys;
   (9)   Thirty thousand (30,000) laying hens or broilers, if the CAFO uses a
liquid manure handling system;
   (10)   One hundred twenty five thousand (125,000) chickens (other than
laying hens), if the CAFO uses a liquid manure handling system;
   (11)   Eighty two thousand (82,000) laying hens, if the CAFO uses a system
other than a liquid manure handling system;
   (12)   Thirty thousand (30,000) ducks, if the CAFO uses a system other than
a liquid manure handling system;
   (13)   Five thousand (5,000) ducks, if the CAFO uses a liquid manure
handling system.
ANIMAL WASTE: Animal excrement, feed wastes, process wastewater, or any other
waste associated with the confinement of animals.
ANIMAL WASTE SYSTEM: Any structure or system that provides for the collection,
treatment, or storage of animal waste, including composting.
APPLICANT: Any person initiating any application for any action or provision
authorized under this article.
APPLICATION: The document and accompanying information required of a person
seeking a CAFO siting permit.
BOARD: The board of Canyon County, Idaho, commissioners.
BURDEN OF PERSUASION: The requirement that the party seeking relief from the
board or commission must provide evidence showing the party has met this
article's requirements.
CAFO:
   (1)   Confined animal feeding operation, also referred to as "concentrated
animal feeding operation", means a facility where all the following conditions
are met:
      A.   Animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of ninety (90) consecutive days, or more in any twelve
(12) month period; and
      B.   Crops, vegetation, forage growth or postharvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the facility; and
      C.   The facility is designed to confine or actually does confine the
minimum of animal numbers as listed in the "animal numbers" definition provided
herein.
   (2)   Two (2) or more concentrated animal feeding operations under common
ownership are considered, for the purposes of this definition, to be a single
animal feeding operation if they adjoin each other or if they use a common area
or system for the disposal of wastes.
CAFO FACILITY AREA: A contiguous area or parcel of land or the use of a
contiguous area or parcel of land upon which are confined or fed animals in
enclosures or ponds, and which does not sustain crops, vegetation, forage
growth in the normal growing season or postharvest residues, and which consists
of:
   (1)   Any combination of "animal numbers" or more, as defined herein, that
have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a
total of ninety (90) consecutive days or more in a twelve (12) month period.
   (2)   A CAFO facility area does not include land application sites. Areas or
parcels of land are deemed contiguous when separated by public or private roads
as defined by the CCZO. Areas or parcels of land also are deemed contiguous if
they are not adjacent, but are owned or operated by a CAFO operator and a
pipeline exists which is capable of conveying process wastewater to the
nonadjacent land. A CAFO facility area only pertains to the area containing
CAFO improvements.
CAFO IMPROVEMENTS: Enhancements to the CAFO real property that would
accommodate expanding the number of animals allowed in the siting permit or
upgrades to the animal waste system. CAFO improvements do not include land
application sites or the piping or method of conveyance used to convey process
wastewater to the land application area.
CAFO SITE ADVISORY TEAM: Team authorized by Idaho Code sections 67-6529C and
67-6529G consisting of representatives of Idaho state agencies that review a
site and information regarding a proposed CAFO and issue an opinion regarding
that site's suitability for a CAFO.
CAFO SITING PERMIT: The conditional use permit required for a person to operate
a new or expanding facility.
CCZO: Canyon County zoning ordinance 05-002, as amended.
COMMENCE OR START OF CONSTRUCTION: Date zoning compliance or building permit is
issued or notice of agriculture construction is submitted to Canyon County.
Where no building permit or notice is required, then the date when work
actually began.
COMMISSION: Planning and zoning commission of Canyon County appointed by the
board.
COUNTY: Canyon County, Idaho.
DSD: Canyon County development services department.
DEAD ANIMAL: Carcasses, parts of carcasses, or tissues from deceased animals.
DEPARTMENT: Canyon County development services department.
DIRECT GLARE: Intense light resulting from a high luminance or insufficiently
shielded light source in the field of view. This type of light often causes
annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
DIRECTOR: Director of Canyon County development services department.
ENSILAGE: Fermentation process for animal feeds that include harvested forage
products and other feed commodities.
EXISTING CAFO: A CAFO built and in operation and properly registered within six
(6) months of the effective date hereof.
EXPANDING OR NONCONFORMING CAFO: An existing CAFO that: 1) cumulatively
increases its onetime animal capacity by four hundred (400) or more animal
numbers; or 2) cumulatively increases its onetime animal capacity by twenty
percent (20%) or more, whichever increase is less; or 3) an existing CAFO that
increases the capacity of its animal waste system.
IDAPA: Idaho administrative procedures act.
ISDA: Idaho state department of agriculture.
LAND APPLICATION: The spreading on or incorporation of liquid or solid waste
into the soil mantle primarily for beneficial purposes.
MATERIAL CHANGE: An alteration in the CAFO that meets at least one of the
following criteria:
   (1)   Change in the size and/or location of the animal waste system.
   (2)   Relocation of CAFO improvements outside of the CAFO facility area for
which they were approved.
   (3)   Relocation of any CAFO improvement so it no longer meets a setback
required by this article.
   (4)   Change in type of animal housed.
   (5)   Cumulative increase of the permitted onetime animal capacity of twenty
percent (20%) or four hundred (400) animals, whichever is less.
   (6)   Change in location of existing dead animal storage area that could
affect neighboring property owners.
NEW CAFO: A CAFO commenced after the effective date hereof, which contains upon
it a CAFO facility area.
NONCONFORMING CAFO: A CAFO which lawfully existed prior to the enactment hereof
and which is not registered and is operated after the effective date hereof.
Nonconforming CAFOs may not be expanded or materially improved except as
provided for in this article.
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN: A plan approved by the appropriate authorizing agency
or his/her designee for managing the amount, source, placement, form and timing
of the land application of nutrients and soil amendments for plant production
and to minimize potential for environment degradation, particularly impairment
of water quality.
ODOR MANAGEMENT PLAN: A site specific plan approved by the responsible
government agency with regulatory authority to manage odor generated by a CAFO.
ONETIME ANIMAL CAPACITY: The maximum number of animals that a CAFO facility
area is permitted to house at any given point in time.
PERSON: Includes, but is not limited to, an individual, association, joint
venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary,
corporation, limited liability company, agency, department, or division, and
all other or any other similar entities.
PROCESS WASTEWATER: Any water on the CAFO facility area that comes into contact
with any manure, litter, bedding, raw, intermediate, or final material or
product used in or resulting from the production of animals and any products
directly or indirectly used in the operation of a CAFO facility area, such as
spillage from animal watering systems; washing, cleaning or flushing pens,
barns, manure pits, or spray cooling of animals; and dust control and any
precipitation which comes into contact with animal waste.
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: All public rights of way intended for road purposes under
the jurisdiction of local, state, and/or federal agencies.
REGISTRANT: Owner or operator of an existing CAFO who files a registration
notice with the DSD office and provides the information required under this
article.
REGISTRATION NOTICE: The document and accompanying information that an existing
or nonconforming CAFO shall file with the director in order to register the
CAFO.
RESIDENCE: Buildings or structures used for human occupancy such as residences,
dwellings, churches, schools, subdivisions and planned unit developments.
SETBACK: The mandatory and/or minimum separation distance between the specified
uses herein and/or structures.
SITE PLAN: A scaled drawing which includes the elements as set forth in section
08-01-07: or 08-01-09 of this article.
STRUCTURE: Any building used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy as defined in the Canyon County building code, as amended.
USDA: United States department of agriculture.
USGS: United States geological survey.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this article which uses the
notification procedures set forth in section
07-08-01: of this code. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-07: REGISTRATION PROCESS FOR EXISTING CAFOs:
   (1)   Within six (6) months from the effective date hereof, any person or
entity ("registrant") operating an existing or nonconforming CAFO shall file a
registration notice with the director. An existing or nonconforming CAFO that
fails to file a registration notice within six (6) months of the effective date
hereof shall pay a fee as set by the board by resolution, which fee shall be
submitted with the registration notice. CAFOs that have previously received a
conditional use permit, or have registered as an existing facility, need not
register or reregister under this section. The registration notice shall be
submitted on a form provided by the department and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following applicable information:
      A.    Name, address and telephone number of registrant.
      B.    Type of animals.
      C.    Onetime total animal capacity.
      D.    A site plan, drawn to scale, or a scalable aerial photograph taken
within the last six (6) months, showing and labeling the following:
         1.    Size including CAFO facility area dimensions and location of
existing improvements within the CAFO, so that the CAFO facility area may be
determined.
         2.    Property lines and acreage.
         3.    Feed storage area.
         4.    Confinement areas.
         5.    Animal waste management system.
         6.    Wells.
         7.    Dead animal storage.
   (2)   The department shall provide the applicant written notification of
receipt within twenty (20) days of receipt of the registration notice and may
request additional information for clarification. Upon receipt of the
registration notice if no clarification information is requested by the
department, and if the clarification information has been received by the
department and is complete to the department's satisfaction, the department
shall issue a certificate of registration to the applicant.
   (3)   Registration notices which have been filed with the department shall
allow the continued operation of an existing or nonconforming CAFO, as
described in the registration notice, and shall be transferable in the same
manner as a CAFO siting permit for so long as the CAFO remains in operation
without a material change. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-08: CAFO SITING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   The following require a CAFO siting permit prior to the operation or
commencement of a CAFO:
      A.    Expanding an existing CAFO; or
      B.    Material change to an existing CAFO; or
      C.    A new CAFO.
   (2)   The CAFO siting permit may be transferred. The department shall be
given twenty (20) working days' notice by the CAFO transferring party prior to
the transfer of a CAFO siting permit, setting forth the date of the transfer
and the name, mailing address and telephone number of the party to whom the
permit is being transferred. CAFO siting permits are appurtenant to the
location for which they are granted, shall not be transferred to any other
location, and are binding on transferees.
   (3)   An existing or nonconforming CAFO that has registered with the
department or has obtained a CAFO siting permit may make changes without
applying for another siting permit, if such changes do not meet this article's
definitions of "material change" or expanding CAFO. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-09: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR CAFO SITING PERMIT:
   (1)   The application shall contain all information reasonably required by
the department, including, but not limited to:
      A.    Information required by the CAFO siting advisory team as set forth
in Idaho administrative code section 02.04.18.300, as amended, a copy of which
is available on request from the department.
      B.    A complete legible site plan shall be as required for clarity. The
site plan size shall be at least eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x
24"). The site plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following
information:
         1.    Building locations.
         2.    Animal waste system.
         3.    Dead animal storage.
         4.    Feed storage area.
         5.    Animal confinement areas.
         6.    Perimeter dimensions of the CAFO facility area and distances to
determine compliance with setback requirements.
         7.    A map, or maps, including surface contours, soil depths and
types, size and location of natural drainage points of the CAFO site, obtained
from the natural resource conservation service of the United States department
of agriculture or other source. Proposed changes to the existing contours shall
be shown on a separate contour map prepared by an engineer or surveyor licensed
in the state of Idaho.
      C.    The site plan shall clearly delineate a line enclosing all CAFO
improvements. Proposed expanding or new facility information shall be included
in the maps. The above information may be provided on more than one map, where
distances and scale make using one map impractical.
      D.    An animal waste system design plan for animal waste that meets all
state and federal requirements and is approved by the responsible regulatory
agency. If a waste system is not required, the applicant shall provide
satisfactory proof to the department of the lack of need for such a system.
      E.    Written certification from the applicable regulatory agency that a
nutrient management plan, if such a plan is required by any regulatory agency
with authority over the proposed CAFO, has been approved.
      F.    Written certification from the applicable regulatory agency that an
odor management plan, if such a plan is required by any regulatory agency with
authority over the proposed CAFO, has been approved.
      G.    Written comment on and approval of the filed site plan from the
applicable highway district showing that the site is served by roads of
capacity sufficient to carry the traffic generated by the CAFO.
      H.    All land, whether owned or leased by a CAFO operator, or on which a
CAFO is operated, and on which animal waste will be applied shall have a
nutrient management plan.
      I.    Composting under the supervision of the ISDA shall be an acceptable
alternative to land application.
   (2)   The applicant shall submit one additional copy of the above
information for the CAFO site advisory team, or any other similar entity
approved and required by the department. The department shall take any steps
necessary to transmit the information. The CAFO advisory team report will be
part of the application, if such a report is requested, and may be used in
determining the suitability of the proposed site.
   (3)   A fee shall be submitted with the application in an amount set by the
board by resolution. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-10: PROCESS OF NOTICE AND APPLICATION FOR HEARING FOR CAFO SITING PERMIT
APPROVAL:
The department shall review the CAFO permit application for completeness. Upon
determining that the same is complete, the commission shall conduct a minimum
of one public hearing. Hearings shall be advertised and conducted according to
the requirements of conditional use permits contained in the CCZO and Idaho
Code section 67-6509, as amended. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-11: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR NEW FACILITIES:
   (1)   Prior to approval of a CAFO siting permit for a new CAFO, and after
public hearing, the commission shall find that the proposed new CAFO meets the
following requirements:
      A.    General Requirements:
         1.    The new CAFO shall be within an area zoned A (agricultural), M-
1 (light industrial), M-2 (heavy industrial) or IP (industrial park), where
appropriate.
         2.    The new CAFO shall comply with and not be in violation of any
federal, state or local laws or regulatory requirements.
         3.    An applicant shall not begin construction of a new CAFO prior to
approval of the CAFO siting permit.
         4.    A new CAFO shall comply with IDAPA rules governing dead animal
disposal.
      B.    Animal Waste:
         1.    The new CAFO shall comply with the terms of its nutrient
management plan for land application.
         2.    The new CAFO shall be in compliance with all applicable
environmental regulations and requirements.
         3.    All new lagoons shall be constructed in accordance with state
and federal regulations.
      C.    Site Setbacks: An expansion of an existing CAFO, other than a
simple expansion of the number of animals, shall comply with the following site
setbacks. If the expansion requires a change in only one or more of the
following, the particular item shall comply with the particular setback listed
below. The site shall not be required to meet new setback requirements unless
the requested expansion requires a change in that particular item. For example,
if there is no change in the size or location of the ensilage process, an
operator need not bring that particular use into conformance with the
requirements of subsection C2 of this section regarding setback from an
existing residence.
         1.    The locating of animal waste systems, corrals, wells and septic
systems shall conform to all applicable rules, regulations and specifications
as required by those regulatory agencies with CAFO oversight.
         2.    Any feed product resulting from the ensilage process shall be
located at least three hundred fifty feet (350') from any existing residence
not belonging to the owner or operator of the CAFO, unless the other owner
gives written consent to a shorter distance.
         3.    All agricultural buildings, feed bunks, feed racks, corrals,
feed storage areas, or other improvements shall be set back a minimum of fifty
feet (50') from the public rights of way.
         4.    Lights shall be placed and shielded to direct the light source
down and inside the property lines of the new CAFO. All direct glare from the
CAFO lights shall be contained within the CAFO facility area.
         5.    No new CAFO shall be approved unless the following questions are
answered to the satisfaction of the commission or board:
            (A) Whether the proposed facility will be injurious to or
negatively change the essential character of the vicinity.
            (B) Whether the proposed facility would cause adverse damage,
hazard and nuisance to persons or property within the vicinity.
            (C) Whether studies should be ordered at the CAFO applicant's
expense to aid the commission/board in determining what additional conditions
should be imposed as a condition of approval to mitigate adverse damage, hazard
and nuisance effects.
         6.    The animal waste system shall not be located or operated closer
than five hundred feet (500') from an existing residence belonging to someone
other than the applicant, or be located and/or operated closer than one hundred
feet (100') from the property lines, unless the other owner gives written
consent to a shorter distance.
         7.    No animal waste system shall be located and/or operated closer
than one hundred feet (100') from a domestic or irrigation well.
         8.    No animal waste system shall be located closer than one hundred
feet (100') from a public right of way.
         9.    The setbacks contained herein shall not apply to land
application.
      D.    Exemption To Subsection (1)C Site Setbacks: Certain land parcels
may not be conducive to setback requirements due to unique locations,
demographics and technology. Where appropriate, the commission may grant an
applicant a variance to setback requirements pursuant to section
07-08-01 (variance) of this code. If this setback includes animal waste
systems, the systems shall meet all state and federal regulations and be
approved by the regulatory agency exercising authority. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-
2007)
08-01-12: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF EXPANDING CAFOs:
   (1)   Prior to approval of a CAFO siting permit for an expanding CAFO, the
commission shall find that the expanding CAFO meets the following requirements:
      A.    General Requirements:
         1.    The expanding CAFO shall be within an area zoned A
(agricultural), M-1 (light industrial), M-2 (heavy industrial) or IP
(industrial park), where appropriate.
         2.    The expanding CAFO shall comply with and not be in violation of
any federal, state or local law or regulatory requirements.
         3.    An applicant shall not begin construction of an expanding CAFO
prior to approval of the CAFO siting permit.
         4.    An expanding CAFO shall comply with IDAPA rules governing dead
animal disposal.
      B.    Animal Waste:
         1.    The expanding CAFO shall comply with the terms of its nutrient
management plan for land application.
         2.    The expanding CAFO shall be in compliance with all applicable
environmental regulations and requirements.
         3.    All new lagoons shall be constructed in accordance with state
and federal regulations.
      C.    Site Setbacks:
         1.    The locating of animal waste systems, corrals, wells, and septic
systems shall conform to all applicable rules, regulations and specifications
as required by those regulatory agencies with CAFO oversight.
         2.    Any feed product resulting from the ensilage process shall be
located at least three hundred fifty feet (350') from any existing residence
not belonging to the owner or operator of the CAFO, unless the other owner
gives written consent to a shorter distance.
         3.    All agricultural buildings, feed bunks, feed racks, corrals,
feed storage areas, or other improvements shall be set back a minimum of fifty
feet (50') from the public rights of way.
         4.    Lights shall be placed and shielded to direct the light source
down and inside the property lines of the expanding CAFO. All direct glare from
the CAFO lights shall be contained within the CAFO facility area.
         5.    The animal waste system shall not be located closer than five
hundred feet (500') from an existing residence belonging to someone other than
the applicant, or be located and/or operated closer than one hundred feet
(100') from the property lines, unless the other owner gives written consent to
a shorter distance.
         6.    No animal waste system shall be located closer than one hundred
feet (100') from a domestic or irrigation well.
         7.    No animal waste system shall be located closer than one hundred
feet (100') from a public right of way.
         8.    The setbacks contained herein shall not apply to land
application.
      D.    Exemption To Subsection (1)C Site Setbacks: Existing agricultural
buildings, feed bunks, feed racks, corrals and feed storage areas, including
feed products resulting from the ensilage process, are exempt from the setback
requirements provided they are not being expanded. Certain land parcels may not
be conducive to setback requirements due to unique locations and circumstances.
Where appropriate, the commission may grant applicants a reduction in setback
requirements. If this setback includes an animal waste system, the system shall
meet all state and federal regulations and be approved by the regulatory agency
with authority over the animal waste system. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-13: VARIANCE PROCESS:
   (1)   A variance may be sought relating to the requirements contained in
this article by making a written request for a variance at the time of filing
the CAFO siting permit application. The commission may authorize a variance
from the requirements contained in this article not in conflict with the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this article would result in undue hardship to the applicant. The
applicant for a variance bears the burden of persuasion.
   (2)   Variance procedures are governed by CCZO. The applicant shall pay the
required variance fee as set by the board by resolution at the time of
submitting his or her application. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-14: GRANT OR DENIAL OF CAFO SITING PERMIT:
   (1)   If the commission finds that the applicant has carried the burden of
persuasion that the proposed expanding or new CAFO complies with the criteria
set forth in this article, the commission shall grant the CAFO siting permit
requested. The CAFO siting permit shall be in the form of findings of fact,
conclusions of law and order. If the commission does not find that the
applicant has shown that the proposed expanding or new CAFO meets the criteria
set forth herein, the commission shall deny the CAFO siting permit in writing
setting forth reasons for the denial and the relevant law relied upon and
action that may be taken by the applicant to attempt to obtain a conditional
use permit. In making such decision, the commission may use information and
consider recommendations received from the state of Idaho CAFO advisory team or
any other similar group.
   (2)   Construction of the new or expanding CAFO must commence within three
(3) years of the issuance of the CAFO siting permit and be completed within
five (5) years of the same date. If construction has not commenced within three
(3) years and/or completed within five (5) years from the date the CAFO siting
permit was approved, the permit holder may request an extension. Application
for extension must be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of
the three (3) year or five (5) year period. A renewal extension, if granted,
may be limited to three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days, which shall
commence at the expiration of either period. The applicant bears the burden of
persuasion on an extension request. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-15: PROCESS FOR CAFO SITING PERMIT:
   (1)   If the CAFO siting permit holder desires to make changes to the
conditions of the CAFO siting permit that result in material changes to the
project, an amended conditional use permit is required. The commission, after
notice and hearing as required for an original application, and if necessary
after submission of additional information, shall apply the same criteria as
for granting an original application. If the change request is granted by the
commission, an amended CAFO siting permit shall be issued within ten (10) days
of commission approval.
   (2)   If the change request is denied by the commission, the CAFO siting
permit holder may appeal the denial to the board. The appeals shall be governed
and processed in accordance with the provisions of the CCZO 05-002, as amended.
   (3)   Inspection of the construction progress of the CAFO facility
authorized by the CAFO siting permit shall occur as governed by the current
international building code adopted by the board. For those sections for which
a building code inspection is not required, inspections, if requested by the
department, shall be performed by the appropriate agency having jurisdiction
and reported to the director.
   (4)   The director shall have the authority to issue a "stop work" order for
that portion of the new or expanding facility in violation of the CAFO siting
permit if an inspection reveals a material violation of the terms of the CAFO
siting permit or construction that does not comply with the CAFO plans as
presented. All work specified in the order shall stop after posting the order.
The CAFO siting permit holder owner may appeal such an order to the commission
by filing an application approved by the department and paying the filing fee
approved by the board by resolution.
   (5)   A CAFO operator may initiate operation of a new or expanded facility
prior to completion of the project, provided that they have the necessary
operation and nutrient management plan in place and provided that their waste
management facility has passed final inspection by ISDA, or the appropriate
state/federal agency having jurisdiction.
   (6)   After completion of the construction of the new or expanding CAFO
authorized by the CAFO siting permit and completion of any approved change
requests or department required compliance corrections, the applicant shall
provide written proof to the director that all required permits have been
obtained and the nutrient management plan approved where a responsible
regulatory agency requires approval of that plan. The applicant shall provide
copies of all permits and the nutrient management plan for the CAFO to the
director. The director shall certify that the new or expanding CAFO has been
inspected and conforms to the terms of the CAFO siting permit, with approved
changes, and the CAFO siting permit holder is fully authorized to operate the
new or expanded CAFO.
   (7)   The board may also, at any time, take immediate action to protect the
public from immediate danger in accordance with the process set forth in CCZO
and the local land use planning act, as amended. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-16: GENERAL APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Commission decisions shall be reduced to writing. Those decisions may
be appealed to the board by filing a written notice of appeal with DSD within
fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the commission chair signed the
findings, conclusions and order or recommendation. The notice of appeal should
include a statement of the reasons for the appeal and must be accompanied by a
filing fee as provided by section
08-01-09: of this article.
   (2)   The board chairperson shall preside over all appeal hearings, and
shall serve as presiding officer in applying the procedures set forth in
chapter 1, article 17 of this code and section
08-01-10: of this article.
   (3)   The board considers the appeal as a brand new hearing on the issues as
if it were a hearing originating before the board. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-17: PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT AND PERMIT REVOCATION:
   (1)   Penalties: Each violation of this article is a misdemeanor. Each day
that work or land use continues after notification of violation shall
constitute a separate offense, and each violation shall be punishable as
provided in Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended.
   (2)   Enforcement Procedures:
      A.    Whenever DSD shall determine that a probable violation of this
article has occurred or is about to occur, it shall notify the board of such
probable violation and recommend action that should be taken. Upon knowledge of
probable violation, whether or not a recommendation has been received from the
director or the commission, the board may request that the Canyon County
prosecuting attorney investigate, and if appropriate, commence action, criminal
or civil, to correct the violation and to punish the same.
      B.    In the event any use of land or any construction commences in
violation of the provisions of this article, the proper authorities of the
county, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful use of land or construction, to restrain,
correct or abate such violation or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
construction, business or use of land in or about such premises.
   (3)   CAFO Permit Revocation Procedures: Violation of this article, or any
conditions of an approved CAFO siting permit, will cause the owner/operator to
be in violation of this article and will cause the CAFO siting permit to be
revoked. The violation may cause the revocation of the CAFO siting permit by
the county in accordance with the following notice and hearing procedures:
      A.    If any person, including staff or a member of the commission, files
a written notice presenting sufficient evidence, as determined by the director,
alleging that the conditions of the conditional use permit have been violated,
the final presiding party, the board or the commission, whichever made the
final decision, shall set the matter for a public hearing noticed in accordance
with subsection (3)B of this section.
      B.    The commission or the board shall conduct at least one public
hearing on the proposed revocation of an approved CAFO siting permit for a new
CAFO or a CAFO siting permit for an expanding CAFO in which interested persons
shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) calendar days
prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a summary of the
proposal shall be published in the official newspaper or newspaper of general
circulation within the county. Notice may also be made available to other
newspapers, radio and television stations serving the county for use as a
public service announcement. Notice shall also be posted on the premises not
less than one week prior to the hearing. At least fifteen (15) calendar days
prior to the public hearing, notice shall also be provided to property owners
or purchasers of record, within the land being considered, three hundred feet
(300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered, and any
additional area determined by the commission or board. (Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
08-01-18: LAWFULLY CONDUCTED OPERATIONS:
It is the policy of Canyon County that no person shall be allowed to challenge
lawfully conducted agricultural operations whether such operations result in
inconvenience to other nonagricultural residences or users in an agricultural
zone. Therefore, no person shall challenge such lawfully conducted agricultural
operations, including, but not limited to, the operation of dairies, feedlots,
CAFOs, aerial spraying, nighttime activities associated with planting, harvest,
or cultivation, and whether such activities result in noise, dust, insects,
slow traffic, or otherwise cause inconvenience to surrounding property owners
where such agricultural activities are being conducted or approved when such
person takes occupancy of such other nonagricultural use, including residence.
(Ord. 07-002, 1-18-2007)
CHAPTER 9
AREAS OF CITY IMPACT
ARTICLE 1
CALDWELL
SECTION:
09-01-01: Title
09-01-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
09-01-05: Repealer
09-01-07: Saving Clause
09-01-09: Area Of City Impact Defined
09-01-11: Geographic Area Of City Impact Established
09-01-13: Area Of City Impact Map
09-01-15: Annexation Limited
09-01-17: Applicable Comprehensive Plan And Policies
09-01-19: Applicable Ordinances And Standards
09-01-21: Zoning Ordinance Amendment Proposals
09-01-23: Amendment Of County And City Ordinances Relating To Area Of City
Impact And Notice
09-01-25: Application Procedures
09-01-27: Amendment Of Caldwell Area Of City Impact (Plans And Ordinances)
Ordinance
09-01-29: Severability
09-01-31: Effective Date
09-01-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the CALDWELL AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES/MAP) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure, and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
Canyon County and the inhabitants thereof by establishing regulations for the
Caldwell area of city impact, and further, to:
      A.    Facilitate Legal Duties Or Parties: To facilitate the legal duties,
responsibilities, and authority of Canyon County, Idaho and city of Caldwell,
Idaho as is prescribed and provided by the Idaho legislature regarding impact
areas; and
      B.    Processing Of Land Use And Land Division Applications: To provide
steps and procedures required for processing zoning applications, comprehensive
plan and zoning amendments and subdivision plats and land division within the
Caldwell area of city impact in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526; and
      C.    Economical And Compatible Infrastructure: To identify an urban
fringe in the unincorporated area surrounding the city of Caldwell within which
there is potential for development or changes in land use that must be planned,
designed and constructed in an orderly manner compatible with the city of
Caldwell for the city of Caldwell to assure timely and/or economical provision
of public services, such as: water supply, sewage and storm water collection
and treatment, public safety services, airport, parks, and other community
service facilities.
      D.    Compatible Land Use And Roads: To promote land use compatibility,
maintain consistent and continuous street alignment, and support traffic flow
objectives.
   (3)   Duration: This article shall be in effect unless amended or otherwise
changed in accordance with section
09-01-17: of this article.
   (4)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-801,
31-828 and 67-6526.
   (5)   No Separate Entity: This article does not create a separate legal
entity.
   (6)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this article only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing agency personnel.
   (7)   Real And Personal Property: It is not contemplated, due to the nature
of this article, that there will be a need to acquire, hold, and/or dispose of
any real or personal property under this article.
   (8)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this agreement only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing personnel of Canyon County and the city of Caldwell.
   (9)   Financing/Budget: Unless otherwise agreed to in writing there shall be
no joint financing of activities under this article. No compensation shall be
due and owing for services to either party from the other party. Each party
agrees to establish its own fees and to be responsible for the collection of
said fees from the public and for payment of compensation and benefits for its
employees. Each party shall independently budget for expected expenses under
this article. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-05: REPEALER:
This article repeals the joint exercise of power agreement for the area of city
impact between the city of Caldwell and Canyon County (dated March 3, 1997),
Canyon County ordinance re: city of Caldwell, Idaho impact area map (ordinance
00-005, adopted June 14, 2000), and all ordinances, regulations, or parts
thereof, in conflict herewith. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-07: SAVING CLAUSE:
Any actions, civil, criminal or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this article, may be pursued as if this article had not
been enacted. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-09: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DEFINED:
The Caldwell area of city impact consists of an area in unincorporated Canyon
County where development or use of land affects, or may affect, the city of
Caldwell in consideration of trade areas, geographic factors and areas that can
reasonably be expected to be annexed to the city of Caldwell in the future.
(Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-11: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT ESTABLISHED:
   (1)   The Caldwell area of city impact is hereby established as described in
exhibit A attached to ordinance 16-011, a map entitled "Caldwell area of city
impact", which map is officially made a part hereof by reference. The Caldwell
area of city impact being established and map being specifically adopted by
city of Caldwell municipal ordinance 3053.
   (2)   The Caldwell area of city impact may be reevaluated by the city and
Canyon County at such times as they may agree upon, in accordance with Idaho
Code section 67-6526, as amended, to consider possible changes in the
geographic area affected and/or other provisions of this article. (Ord. 16-011,
9-2-2016)
09-01-13: AREA OF CITY IMPACT MAP:
The Caldwell area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Canyon
County adopted herein shall be in effect until amended or modified as allowed
by law. (Ord. 16-011, 9-2-2016)
09-01-15: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of impact: Annexation by the city of Caldwell shall
be limited to lands lying within the area of impact, unless the owner of the
land requests that the tract of land be annexed by the city of Caldwell
pursuant to Idaho Code, section 50-222 et seq., and the land is contiguous or
adjacent to the boundaries of the city of Caldwell.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this article shall no longer apply to the annexed area.
   (3)   Annexation Notification: The city of Caldwell shall notify the
director of the county's development services department ("director") in
writing ten (10) calendar days in advance of the first city public hearing at
which each annexation is considered by the city of Caldwell. The city of
Caldwell shall notify Canyon County, in writing, within ten (10) calendar days
following the effective date of the annexation ordinance. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-
2005)
09-01-17: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND POLICIES:
   (1)   Comprehensive Plan: The Canyon County comprehensive plan, as amended,
shall apply to the Caldwell area of city impact. Canyon County recognizes that
the city of Caldwell has also developed a comprehensive plan and accompanying
map for the Caldwell area of city impact. Canyon County shall give
consideration to the city's comprehensive plan map designations when evaluating
development requests with the Caldwell area of city impact.
   (2)   Hearing Participation: The city of Caldwell may apply at any time to
amend Canyon County's comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance, as the city
of Caldwell deems necessary and appropriate, and shall fully participate in the
hearing process. Input from the city of Caldwell will not be binding or
controlling on Canyon County, but shall be treated as documentary evidence. The
city of Caldwell shall have affected party status pursuant to Idaho Code
section 67-6521 of the local land use planning act, and the county shall review
and consider the city of Caldwell's planning goals for growth and development
in the Caldwell area of city impact when the county considers comprehensive
planning and zoning changes affecting the Caldwell area of city impact.
   (3)   Comprehensive Plan Amendment Proposals: Notice of all proposals to
amend the county comprehensive plan, which may pertain to the Caldwell area of
city impact but which do not originate from the city of Caldwell, shall be
given to the city of Caldwell community development director at least thirty
(30) calendar days prior to the first county public hearing at which such
proposal is considered by the county, and the city of Caldwell may make a
recommendation before or at said public hearing. After the city receives its
initial thirty (30) days' notice, any further notice of proposed changes to the
proposal will be provided to the city of Caldwell at least seven (7) days prior
to the public hearing. If a recommendation is received by the county from the
city of Caldwell, the recommendation shall be given consideration by the
county, provided it is factually supported. Such recommendation shall not be
binding on the county. If no recommendation is received, Canyon County may
proceed without the recommendation of the city of Caldwell.
   (4)   Final Document Forwarding: After final action has been taken on any
proposed amendments to the county's comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance
or subdivision regulations, Canyon County shall notify the city of Caldwell of
said final action by forwarding a copy to the city of Caldwell of all final
documents reflecting the action taken by Canyon County. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-19: APPLICABLE ORDINANCES AND STANDARDS:
Within the Caldwell area of city impact, the following ordinances apply, but
the city of Caldwell ordinances are subject to the waiver provisions in
subsection (6) of this section:
   (1)   Canyon County zoning ordinance, as lawfully amended.
   (2)   City of Caldwell's subdivision ordinance, ordinance 1758, in the form
existing as of April 1, 2005, except for simple division (lot split) provisions
and except for hearing procedures. The county's hearing procedures shall apply.
   (3)   The following city of Caldwell ordinances apply, even when in conflict
with otherwise applicable county provisions:
      A.    City road widths and profiles found in subsections 11-03-03(2),
(3), (4), and (5) of the city of Caldwell municipal code, in the form existing
as of April 1, 2005;
      B.    Caldwell city ordinance 2541, and all standards and specifications
adopted thereby, in the form existing as of April 1, 2005.
      C.    Caldwell city ordinance 2548, in the form existing as of April 1,
2005.
      D.    Municipal code of the city of Caldwell, chapter 10, article 7,
"Caldwell Landscape Ordinance", in the form existing as of April 1, 2005.
      E.    Municipal code of the city of Caldwell, chapter 10, article 8,
"Caldwell Tree Ordinance", in the form existing as of April 1, 2005.
      F.    Municipal code of the city of Caldwell, chapter 10, article 10,
"Transportation Policies And Practices", in the form existing as of April 1,
2005.
      G.    Municipal code of the city of Caldwell, chapter 4, article 17,
"Caldwell Irrigation Utility Ordinance", in the form existing as of April 1,
2005.
   (4)   Except as set forth above, all other standards of applicable Canyon
County codes and ordinances; and
   (5)   For subdivisions and planned unit developments applied for in the
Caldwell area of city impact, Canyon County will require on the face of each
final plat a certification line for execution by the city of Caldwell engineer
attesting to the plat's conformance with the city standards set forth above.
Also, Canyon County will not sign a final plat, or authorize the plat to be
recorded, prior to the city engineer's signing the plat.
   (6)   Waiver Of City Of Caldwell Ordinance Provisions: The requirements
listed in the Caldwell ordinances, identified in subsections (2) and (3) of
this section, may be waived by the Canyon County board of commissioners in its
discretion. An applicant for such waiver bears the burden of persuasion and
must specifically state the reasons why a waiver is necessary and prove said
waiver will not cause an adverse effect to the health, safety and welfare of
the community and that the requirements sought to be waived constitute an undue
hardship. For the purpose of this section, increased financial expense
associated with a requirement, by itself, does not constitute an undue
hardship. Notice of the requested waiver must be given to the city of Caldwell
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on the waiver application.
Any further notice on the proposed waiver will be provided to the city of
Caldwell at least seven (7) days prior to any public hearing. Written
objections from the city of Caldwell will be considered by the Canyon County
commissioners. The application for waiver must show that prior to filing the
application, the applicant first sought consent from the city of Caldwell to
the waiver, indicating the date of the request and the response, if any, from
the city of Caldwell. In granting any waiver, the county may impose any
conditions the county deems necessary to help mitigate any adverse effect to
the health, safety and welfare of the community. The application for waiver
will first be considered by the Canyon County planning and zoning commission at
a public hearing, which shall make recommendations to the Canyon County board
of commissioners for their consideration at a public hearing. The public
hearings held before the Canyon County planning and zoning commission and the
Canyon County board of commissioners will be conducted in accordance with the
notice and hearing procedures provided by subsections 07-17-09(4) and (5) of
this code. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-21: ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
All proposed amendments to the text and/or map of the Canyon County zoning
ordinance or subdivision regulations, which may relate to the Caldwell area of
city impact, shall be referred by the county to the city of Caldwell in the
same manner as provided for in subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article. Any recommendation of the city of Caldwell shall
be considered in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-23: AMENDMENT OF COUNTY AND CITY ORDINANCES RELATING TO AREA OF CITY
IMPACT AND NOTICE:
   (1)   Subject to subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article, prior to amendment by the county of any Canyon
County ordinance applicable in the Caldwell area of city impact as set forth in
section
09-01-19: of this article, Canyon County shall forward the proposed change(s)
to the city of Caldwell for review and comment at least thirty (30) calendar
days prior to the first Canyon County public hearing at which such amendment(s)
will be considered. Any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will
be provided to the city of Caldwell at least seven (7) days prior to the public
hearing.
   (2)   Prior to amendment by the city of any city of Caldwell ordinance
applicable in the Caldwell area of city impact as set forth in section
09-01-19: of this article, the city of Caldwell shall forward the proposed
change(s) to Canyon County for review and comment at least thirty (30) days
prior to the first city of Caldwell public hearing at which such amendment(s)
will be considered. Any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will
be provided to Canyon County at least seven (7) days prior to the public
hearing. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-25: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be adhered to in processing applications within
the Caldwell area of city impact:
   (1)   Land Use Applications: All land use applications submitted to Canyon
County including, but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances and
land divisions requiring notification of a public hearing, shall be referred to
the city of Caldwell in the manner as provided for in subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article.
   (2)   Planned Unit Developments: All planned unit developments shall be
processed as provided for in this code, and as provided for in subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article.
   (3)   Subdivision Plat Applications: All subdivision plat applications shall
be processed as provided for in this code, and as provided for in subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article.
   (4)   Building Permit Applications: All building permit applications shall
be processed as provided for in this code. Owners of properties connecting to
city of Caldwell water and/or sewer must obtain a certificate of acceptance
from the authorized city of Caldwell official as a condition precedent to
obtaining the building permit.
   (5)   Notice Contents: The county's notice to the city of Caldwell, as
provided for by subsection
09-01-17(3) of this article, shall include with the notice a copy of the
application and concept plan or plat and irrigation plan, and any other
relevant information submitted by the applicant.
   (6)   City Impact Area Representation: Recommendations for city impact area
representation on the county planning and zoning commission may be made by the
city of Caldwell to the board of county commissioners at any time and will be
acted upon by said board as the need arises and as the board of county
commissioners deems appropriate.
   (7)   City/County Internal Procedures: Each party shall determine its own
internal procedures as may be deemed appropriate and adequate for making
recommendations to the other party on proposed actions and on its handling of
proposed amendments to its own plan and/or ordinances. An appeal made by the
city of Caldwell, or by the county to the city, shall be processed by the
nonappealing party in accordance with the internal procedures of the
nonappealing party. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-27: AMENDMENT OF CALDWELL AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND ORDINANCES)
ORDINANCE:
   (1)   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), the city of Caldwell
or the board of county commissioners may request, in writing, the renegotiation
of any provision of this article at any time. Within thirty (30) days of
receipt of such written request by either party, an initial meeting between the
two (2) jurisdictions should occur. If the parties agree to amend this article,
hearings to enact such amendments shall be scheduled before the parties'
respective planning and zoning commissioners or the hearing examiners with
ultimate approval resting with the board of county commissioners and the
Caldwell city council. If the parties are unable to agree to amend this
article, either party may elect to submit the issues to a committee of nine (9)
as described in the local land use planning act, Idaho Code section 67-6526(b).
   (2)   During renegotiation, all provisions of this article shall remain in
effect until this article is amended or a substitute ordinance is adopted by
both the city of Caldwell and Canyon County, in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, or until a
declaratory judgment from district court is final.
   (3)   Amendments to this article shall be processed using the notice and
hearing requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6509. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-29: SEVERABILITY:
Should any action or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
09-01-31: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication. (Ord. 05-013, 6-1-2005)
ARTICLE 3
GREENLEAF
SECTION:
09-03-01: Title
09-03-03: Scope
09-03-05: Annexation Limited
09-03-07: Application Of Comprehensive Plan And Zoning Ordinance
09-03-09: Application Of Greenleaf Subdivision Ordinance
09-03-11: Impact Area Map
09-03-13: Availability Of Ordinances
09-03-01: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the GREENLEAF AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 94-013, 12-23-94)
09-03-03: SCOPE:
   (1)   The Idaho Legislature duly enacted Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) which
provides that by separate ordinance the County of Canyon and City of Greenleaf
shall provide for application of plans and ordinances for the area of city
impact; and
   (2)   The City of Greenleaf and the County have adopted a map identifying
the City of Greenleaf impact area within the unincorporated area of the County
by the adoption of Ordinance No. 99 duly passed by the City of Greenleaf on
October 26, 1994, and by Ordinance No. 94-005 duly passed by Canyon County on
October 27, 1994 1 ; and
   (3)   Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) requires that the City of Greenleaf and
the County of Canyon provide by ordinance for the application of plans and
ordinances for the area of city impact of the City of Greenleaf within the
unincorporated area of the County no later than January 1, 1995; and
   (4)   The City of Greenleaf and the County shall enter into a joint exercise
of power agreement for the impact area of the City of Greenleaf, which
agreement shall provide for and facilitate the legal duties of the parties and
their responsibilities and authority as required under the Local Planning Act
of 1975, and including any duties appertaining to the area of City impact
subsequently required by the Idaho Legislature. (Ord. 94-013, 12-23-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  09-03-11: of this Article.
09-03-05: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Effective January 1, 1995, annexation by
the City of Greenleaf shall be limited to lands lying within the area of
impact, unless the owner of the land requests the tract of land be annexed by
the City, and the land is contiguous to the boundaries of the City of
Greenleaf.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this Article shall no longer apply to the annexed area. (Ord. 94-
013, 12-23-94)
09-03-07: APPLICATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE:
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of complying with Idaho Code section
67-6526(a) the Ordinance codified in this Article, which provides for the
application of the latest edition of the Canyon County Comprehensive Plan as
duly enacted and adopted and amended by the County Commissioners, and Chapter 7
of this Code, to the area of impact of the City of Greenleaf within the
unincorporated area of the County, until a new comprehensive plan and/or zoning
ordinance has been duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of a joint
exercise of power agreement impact area City of Greenleaf/County of Canyon.
Until the joint exercise of power agreement is adopted and operational, the
County shall direct copies of all applications coming before it, pursuant to
the Local Planning Act of 1975 and Chapter 7 of this Code concerning property
located in the area of City impact of Greenleaf, for the City of Greenleaf's
input on the application and shall give such input due consideration; and after
the adoption of the joint exercise of power agreement and the same becomes
operational, then the provisions of that agreement shall govern this process.
(Ord. 94-013, 12-23-94)
09-03-09: APPLICATION OF GREENLEAF SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
   (1)   Adoption Of Subdivision Ordinance: There is hereby adopted for the
purposes of complying with Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) the ordinance codified
in this article, which provides for, except as provided in subsection (2) of
this section, the application of City of Greenleaf's Subdivision Ordinance, as
amended, as codified at title 14, chapters 1 through 9, Municipal Code of the
City of Greenleaf, to the Area of Impact of the City of Greenleaf within the
unincorporated area of the County, until a new Subdivision Ordinance has been
duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of a joint exercise of power
agreement impact area City of Greenleaf/County of Canyon.
   (2)   Exceptions And Conflict Procedure: In the event a conflict in the
application of the provisions of chapter 7 of this Code and the provisions of
the City of Greenleaf's Subdivision Ordinance to the Area of Impact of the City
of Greenleaf, the provisions of the City of Greenleaf's Subdivision Ordinance
shall control, but shall not control over the application of chapter 7, article
10A, "Flood Hazard Overlay Zone", and/or chapter 6, article 5, "Addressing", of
this Code. The City of Greenleaf's Subdivision Ordinance shall be subject to
the applicable Golden Gate Highway District's standards and regulations solely
enforceable by said highway district. It is further provided that only those
portions of the Subdivision Ordinance adopted which are not repugnant to
Federal or State law shall be adopted by the County and there shall be no
approval and reviewing of protective or restrictive covenants as part of the
process described in this article.
   (3)   One Mile Approval By City: By the passage of the ordinance codified in
this article, and by the city's passage of a like ordinance, there is mutual
agreement that within one mile of the City of Greenleaf's boundary, the
Greenleaf City Subdivision Ordinance shall prevail over chapter 7, article 17
of this Code as is provided for in Idaho Code section 50-1306 in those
circumstances where the one mile limit exceeds the boundaries of the impact
area, except in those instances where there is an overlap with another city
that is larger, in which event the jurisdiction of the larger city shall be
assumed. (Ord. 94-013, 12-23-1994)
09-03-11: IMPACT AREA MAP:
The Greenleaf, Idaho, Canyon County approved impact area map is hereby adopted
as the official map identifying the Area of City Impact within the
unincorporated area of the County for the City of Greenleaf. A true and correct
copy of said map is affixed as attachment 1 to the ordinance codified herein
and is fully incorporated by reference herein. (Ord. 08-007, 4-16-2008)
09-03-13: AVAILABILITY OF ORDINANCES:
True and correct copies of the ordinances herein referred to shall be on file
with the Clerk of the City of Greenleaf, the Clerk of the Canyon County
Commissioners, the Office of Planning and Zoning Department of the City of
Greenleaf, and the Planning and Zoning Department of the County and are
available for public inspection and reference. (Ord. 94-013, 12-23-1994)
ARTICLE 5
HOMEDALE
SECTION:
09-05-01: Title
09-05-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
09-05-05: Repealer
09-05-07: Savings
09-05-09: Area Of City Impact Defined
09-05-11: Geographic Area Of City Impact Established
09-05-13: Area Of City Impact Map
09-05-15: Annexation Limited
09-05-17: Applicable Comprehensive Plan And Policies
09-05-19: Applicable Ordinances And Standards
09-05-21: Zoning/Subdivision Ordinance Amendment Proposals
09-05-23: Amendment Of County And City Ordinances Relating To Area Of City
Impact And Notice
09-05-25: Application Procedures
09-05-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the HOMEDALE AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES/MAP) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Sections and subsections of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
Canyon County and the inhabitants thereof by establishing regulations for the
Homedale area of city impact, and further, to:
      A.    Facilitate Legal Duties Or Parties: To facilitate the legal duties
of, responsibilities, and authority of Canyon County, Idaho, and city of
Homedale, Idaho, as prescribed and provided by the Idaho legislature regarding
impact areas; and
      B.    Processing Of Land Use And Land Division Applications: To provide
steps and procedures required for processing zoning applications, comprehensive
plan and zoning amendments and subdivision plats and land division within the
Homedale area of city impact in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526; and
      C.    Economical And Compatible Infrastructure: To identify an urban
fringe in the unincorporated area surrounding the city within which there is
potential for development or changes in land use that must be planned, designed
and constructed in an orderly manner compatible with the city of Homedale for
the city of Homedale to assure timely and/or economical provision of public
services, such as: water supply, sewage and stormwater collection and
treatment, public safety services, airport, parks, and other community service
facilities; and
      D.    Compatible Land Use And Roads: To promote land use compatibility,
maintain consistent and continuous street alignment, and support traffic flow
objectives.
   (3)   Duration: This article shall be in effect unless amended or otherwise
changed in accordance with section
09-05-07: of this article.
   (4)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-801,
31-828 and 67-6526.
   (5)   No Separate Entity: This article does not create a separate legal
entity.
   (6)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this article only provided for cooperation between the parties using
existing agency personnel.
   (7)   Real And Personal Property: It is not contemplated, due to the nature
of this article, that there will be a need to acquire, hold, and/or dispose of
any real or personal property under this article.
   (8)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this agreement only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing personnel of Canyon County and the city of Homedale.
   (9)   Financing/Budget: Unless otherwise agreed to in writing there shall be
no joint financing of activities under this article. No compensation shall be
due and owing for services to either party from the other party. Each party
agrees to establish its only fees and to be responsible for the collection of
said fees from the public and for payment of compensation and benefits for its
employees. Each party shall independently budget for expectant expenses under
this article. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-05: REPEALER:
This article repeals the joint exercise of powers agreement for the area of
city impact between the city of Homedale and Canyon County ordinance regarding
the city of Homedale, Idaho, impact area map (ordinance 08-006 adopted 4-21-
2008), and ordinance 94-016, adopted December 23, 1994, regulations, or parts
thereof, in conflict herewith. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-07: SAVINGS:
Any actions, civil, criminal or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this article, may be pursued as if this article had not
been enacted. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-09: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DEFINED:
The Homedale area of city impact consists of an area where development or use
of land affects or may affect, the city of Homedale in regards to its trade
areas, geographic factors and areas that can reasonably be expected to be
annexed into the city in the future. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-11: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT ESTABLISHED:
   (1)   The Homedale area of city impact is hereby established as described in
exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, and incorporated by
reference. The Homedale area of city impact being established and map being
specifically adopted, by city of Homedale municipal ordinance 3452.
   (2)   The Homedale area of city impact may be reevaluated by the city and
Canyon County at such times as they may agree upon, in accordance with Idaho
Code section 67-6526, as amended, to consider possible changes in the
geographic area affected and/or other provisions of this article. (Ord. 10-012,
10-29-2010)
09-05-13: AREA OF CITY IMPACT MAP:
The Homedale area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Canyon
County is particularly described in section
09-05-11: of this article and also set forth on the map referred to in section
09-05-11: of this article, which map shall be in effect until amended or
modified as allowed by law. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-15: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Annexation by the city of Homedale shall
be limited to lands lying within the Homedale area of city impact unless the
owner of the land requests that the tract of land be annexed by the city of
Homedale pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-222 et seq., and the land is
contiguous or adjacent to the boundaries of the city of Homedale.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this article shall no longer apply to the annexed area.
   (3)   Annexation Notification: The city of Homedale must notify the director
of the county's development services department ("director") in writing ten
(10) calendar days in advance of the first public hearing at which each
annexation is considered by the city of Homedale. The city of Homedale shall
notify Canyon County in writing within ten (10) calendar days following the
effective date of the adoption of each annexation ordinance. (Ord. 10-012, 10-
29-2010)
09-05-17: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND POLICIES:
   (1)   Comprehensive Plan: The Canyon County comprehensive plan, as amended,
shall apply to the Homedale area of city impact. Canyon County recognizes that
the city of Homedale has also developed a comprehensive plan which addresses
the Homedale area of city impact. Canyon County shall give consideration to the
city's comprehensive plan when evaluating development requests within the
Homedale area of city impact.
   (2)   Hearing Participation: The city of Homedale may apply at any time to
amend Canyon County's comprehensive plan and may fully participate in the
hearing process. Hearing input from the city of Homedale will not be binding or
controlling on the county, but shall be treated as documentary evidence. The
city of Homedale shall have affected party status pursuant to Idaho Code
section 67-6521 of the local land use planning act, as amended.
   (3)   Comprehensive Plan Amendment Proposals: All proposals to amend Canyon
County's comprehensive plan, which may pertain to the Homedale area of city
impact, but which do not originate from the city of Homedale, shall be referred
to the city of Homedale's planning and zoning director at least thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the first county public hearing on the matter and the
city of Homedale may make a recommendation before or at said public hearing.
After the city receives its initial thirty (30) calendar days' notice, any
further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be provided to the city
of Homedale at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the public hearing. If a
recommendation is received by the county from the city of Homedale, it shall be
given consideration by the county, provided it is factually supported, but such
recommendation shall not be binding on the county. If no recommendation is
received, Canyon County may proceed without the recommendation of the city of
Homedale.
   (4)   Final Document Forwarding: After the county's final action has been
taken on any proposed amendments to the county's comprehensive plan, the county
shall notify the city of Homedale's planning and zoning administrator of said
final action by forwarding, to the city of Homedale, a copy of all final
documents reflecting the action taken by the county. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-19: APPLICABLE ORDINANCES AND STANDARDS:
Within the Homedale area of city impact, the following ordinances are
applicable:
   (1)   Canyon County zoning ordinance, as lawfully amended.
   (2)   Canyon County subdivision ordinance, as lawfully amended. (Ord. 10-
012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-21: ZONING/SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
   (1)   All proposed amendments to the text and/or map of the Canyon County
zoning or subdivision ordinance, which may relate to the Homedale area of city
impact, shall be referred by the county to the city of Homedale in the same
manner as provided for in subsection
09-05-17(3) of this article. Any recommendation of the city of Homedale shall
be considered in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-05-17(3) of this article. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-23: AMENDMENT OF COUNTY AND CITY ORDINANCES RELATING TO AREA OF CITY
IMPACT AND NOTICE:
   (1)   Subject to subsection
09-05-17(3) of this article, prior to amendment by the county for any county
ordinance applicable in the Homedale area of city impact as set forth in
section
09-05-19: of this article, the county shall forward the proposed change(s) to
the city of Homedale for review and comment at least thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the first county public hearing at which such amendment(s) will be
considered. Any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be
provided to the city of Homedale at least seven (7) days prior to the public
hearing. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
09-05-25: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be adhered to in processing applications within
the Homedale area of city impact.
   (1)   Land Use Applications: All land use applications submitted to Canyon
County requiring notification of a public hearing, shall be referred to the
city of Homedale in the manner as provided for in subsection
09-05-17(3) of this article.
   (2)   Planned Unit Development: All planned unit developments shall be
processed as provided for in this code, and as provided for in section
09-05-19: of this article.
   (3)   Subdivision Plat Applications: All subdivision plat and irrigation
plan applications shall be processed procedurally as provided for in this code,
and as provided for in section
09-05-19: of this article.
      A.    In addition, all developers within the Homedale area of city impact
shall disclose and file as part of the preliminary plat submitted to the county
their proposal as to curbs and gutters. If the developer proposes no or minimal
curbs and gutters, the city of Homedale shall be entitled to review the curb
and gutter proposal and submit their recommendation to the county. If the city
of Homedale recommends that the developer have more extensive curb and gutters,
the burden of proof shall be upon the developer to establish that more
extensive curb and gutters are not necessary for the subdivision.
      B.    In addition, all developers within the Homedale area of city impact
shall disclose and file as part of the preliminary plat submitted to the county
evidence that adequate fire protection in the form of fire hydrants, water
mains and/or other methods of protecting property from fire loss will be
provided.
   (4)   Building Permit Applications: All building permit applications shall
be processed as provided for in this code. Owners of properties connecting to
city of Homedale water and/or sewer must obtain a certificate of acceptance
from the authorized city official as a condition precedent to obtaining the
building permit.
   (5)   Notice Contents: The county's notice to the city of Homedale, as
provided for by subsection
09-05-17(3) of this article, shall include with the notice a copy of the
application and concept plan or plat and irrigation plan, and any other
relevant information submitted by the applicant.
   (6)   City Impact Area Representation: Recommendations for city impact area
representation on the county planning and zoning commission may be made by the
city of Homedale to the board of county commissioners at any time and will be
acted upon by said board as the need arises and as the board deems appropriate.
   (7)   City/County Internal Procedures: Each party shall determine its own
internal procedures as may be deemed appropriate and adequate for making
recommendations to the other party on proposed actions and on its handling of
proposed amendments to its own plan and/or ordinances. An appeal made by the
city to the county, or by the county to the city, shall be processed by the
nonappealing party in accordance with the internal procedures of the
nonappealing party. (Ord. 10-012, 10-29-2010)
ARTICLE 7
MELBA
SECTION:
09-07-01: Title
09-07-03: Scope
09-07-05: Annexation Limited
09-07-07: Application Of Comprehensive Plan And Zoning Ordinance
09-07-09: Application Of Melba Subdivision Ordinance
09-07-11: Impact Area Map
09-07-13: Availability Of Ordinances
09-07-01: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the MELBA AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 94-014, 12-23-94)
09-07-03: SCOPE:
   (1)   The Idaho Legislature duly enacted Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) which
provides that by separate ordinance the County of Canyon and City of Melba
shall provide for application of plans and ordinances for the area of city
impact; and
   (2)   The City of Melba and the County have adopted a map identifying the
City of Melba impact area within the unincorporated area of the County by the
adoption of Ordinance No. 154 duly passed by the City of Melba on October 11,
1994, and by Ordinance No. 94-004 duly passed by Canyon County on October 27,
1994 1 ; and
   (3)   Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) requires that the City of Melba and the
County of Canyon provide by ordinance for the application of plans and
ordinances for the area of city impact of the City of Melba within the
unincorporated area of the County no later than January 1, 1995; and
   (4)   The City of Melba and the County shall enter into a joint exercise of
power agreement for the impact area of the City of Melba, which agreement shall
provide for and facilitate the legal duties of the parties and their
responsibilities and authority as required under the Local Planning Act of
1975, and including any duties appertaining to the area of City impact
subsequently required by the Idaho Legislature. (Ord. 94-014, 12-23-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  09-07-11: of this Article.
09-07-05: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Effective January 1, 1995, annexation by
the City of Melba shall be limited to lands lying within the area of impact,
unless the owner of the land requests the tract of land be annexed by the City,
and the land is contiguous to the boundaries of the City of Melba.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this Article shall no longer apply to the annexed area. (Ord. 94-
014, 12-23-94)
09-07-07: APPLICATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE:
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of complying with Idaho Code 67-6526
(a) the Ordinance codified in this Article, which provides for the application
of the latest edition of the Canyon County Comprehensive Plan as duly enacted
and adopted and amended by the County Commissioners, and Chapter 7 of this
Code, to the area of impact of the City of Melba within the unincorporated area
of the County, until a new comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance has been
duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of a joint exercise of power
agreement impact area City of Melba/County of Canyon. Until the joint exercise
of power agreement is adopted and operational, the County shall direct copies
of all applications coming before it, pursuant to the Local Planning Act of
1975 and Chapter 7 of this Code concerning property located in the area of City
impact of Melba, for the City of Melba's input on the application and shall
give such input due consideration; and after the adoption of the joint exercise
of power agreement and the same becomes operational, then the provisions of
that agreement shall govern this process. (Ord. 94-014, 12-23-94)
09-07-09: APPLICATION OF MELBA SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
   (1)   Adoption Of Subdivision Ordinance: There is hereby adopted for the
purposes of complying with Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) the ordinance codified
in this article, which provides for, except as provided in subsection (2) of
this section, the application of City of Melba's Subdivision Ordinance 151, as
amended, to the Area of Impact of the City of Melba within the unincorporated
area of the County, until a new Subdivision Ordinance has been duly adopted in
accordance with the provisions of a joint exercise of power agreement impact
area City of Melba/County of Canyon.
   (2)   Exceptions And Conflict Procedure: In the event of a conflict in the
application of the provisions of chapter 7 of this Code and the provisions of
the City of Melba's Subdivision Ordinance to the Area of Impact of the City of
Melba, the provisions of the City of Melba's Subdivision Ordinance shall
control, but shall not control over the application of chapter 7, article 10A,
"Flood Hazard Overlay Zone", of this Code and/or chapter 6, article 5,
"Addressing", of this Code. The City of Melba's Subdivision Ordinance shall be
subject to the applicable Nampa highway district's standards and regulations
solely enforceable by said highway district. It is further provided that only
those portions of the Subdivision Ordinance adopted which are not repugnant to
Federal or State law shall be adopted by the County and there shall be no
approval and reviewing of protective or restrictive covenants as part of the
process described in this article.
   (3)   One Mile Approval By City: By the passage of the ordinance codified in
this article, and by the city's passage of a like ordinance, there is mutual
agreement that within one mile of the City of Melba's boundary, the Melba City
Subdivision Ordinance shall prevail over chapter 7, article 17 of this Code as
is provided for in Idaho Code section 50-1306 in those circumstances where the
one mile limit exceeds the boundaries of the impact area, except in those
instances where there is an overlay with another city that is larger, in which
event the jurisdiction of the larger city shall be assumed. (Ord. 94-014, 12-
23-1994)
09-07-11: IMPACT AREA MAP:
   (1)   Title: This section shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY ORDINANCE RE:
CITY OF MELBA IMPACT AREA MAP.
   (2)   Authority: This section is enacted pursuant to section 67-6526(a),
Idaho Code, of the Local Planning Act of 1975, 31-714, 31-801, and 31-828,
Idaho Code and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution, as amended or
subsequently modified.
   (3)   Purpose: The Local Planning Act of 1975 requires that each county and
each city in the State of Idaho shall identify by ordinance an Area of City
Impact within the unincorporated area of the County and shall, in accordance
with the notice and hearing procedures provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code,
adopt by ordinance a map identifying that Area of City Impact.
   (4)   City Impact Area Map: The City of Melba impact area map adopted by
Melba City Ordinance 154 duly passed by the city on October 11, 1994, is hereby
adopted as the official map identifying the area of the City of Melba impact
within the unincorporated area of the County. A true and correct copy of said
map is as follows:
(Ord. 94-004, 10-27-94)
09-07-13: AVAILABILITY OF ORDINANCES:
True and correct copies of the ordinances herein referred to shall be on file
with the Clerk of the City of Melba, the Clerk of the Canyon County
Commissioners, the office of Planning and Zoning Department of the City of
Melba, and the Planning and Zoning Department of the County and are available
for public inspection and reference. (Ord. 94-014, 12-23-94)
ARTICLE 9
MIDDLETON
SECTION:
09-09-01: Title
09-09-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
09-09-05: Repealer
09-09-07: Savings
09-09-09: Annexation
09-09-11: Applicable Comprehensive Plan And Policies
09-09-13: Applicable Ordinances
09-09-15: Zoning Ordinance Amendment Proposals
09-09-17: Application Procedures
09-09-19: Amendment
09-09-21: Severability
09-09-23: Impact Area Map
09-09-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the MIDDLETON AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
the county and the inhabitants thereof by establishing regulations for the
Middleton area of city impact.
   (3)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code 31-801, 31-828 and
67-6526. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-05: REPEALER:
This article repeals the joint exercise of powers for the area of city impact
between the city of Middleton and Canyon County (1-14-98), and all other
ordinances, regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict herewith. (Ord. 01-006,
7-6-2001)
09-09-07: SAVINGS:
Any actions, civil, criminal or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this article, may be pursued as if this article had not
been enacted. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-09: ANNEXATION:
   (1)   Annexation by the city of Middleton shall be limited to those lands
lying within the Middleton area of city impact and being contiguous to the
boundaries of the city of Middleton, except for those properties outside the
Middleton area of city impact and being contiguous to the boundary of the city
of Middleton where the owner has requested annexation as provided for in Idaho
Code 50-222 et seq.
   (2)   Upon annexation, the provisions of this article shall no longer apply
to the annexed area. The city of Middleton shall notify the county development
services director in writing both when annexations are being considered and
when annexations are completed. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-11: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND POLICIES:
   (1)   Comprehensive Plan: Canyon County and the city of Middleton shall work
cooperatively to develop a joint amendment to the county's comprehensive plan
for the Middleton area of city impact. The county's comprehensive plan shall
apply in the impact area.
   (2)   Hearing Participation: The city may apply at any time to amend the
county's comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance, as it deems necessary and
appropriate, and shall fully participate in the hearing process. Such input
will not be binding or controlling, but shall be treated as documentary
evidence. The city shall have affected party status pursuant to Idaho Code 67-
6521 of the local land use planning act.
   (3)   Plan Amendment Proposals: All proposals for amendments to the county
comprehensive plan which may appertain to the Middleton area of city impact but
which do not originate from the city shall be referred to the city at least
thirty (30) calendar days prior to any hearing on such matter and a
recommendation may be made before or at said public hearing. If a
recommendation is received it shall be given great weight by the county,
provided it is factually supported, but such recommendation shall not be
binding on the county. If no response is received the county may proceed
without the recommendation of the city. A copy of the final decision issued by
the county shall be forwarded to the city. If the city does not agree with the
request, because it involves a major change in the county's comprehensive plan,
the city may request renegotiation of this article as provided in Idaho Code
67-6526(d). A major change is one that is fundamental to the county's
comprehensive plan, as determined by the parties.
   (4)   Final Document Forwarding: After recommendations have been made and
final action has been taken on amendments to the county's comprehensive plan
and/or zoning ordinance, the county shall notify the city of said final action
by forwarding a copy to the city of all final documents reflecting the action
taken by the county. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-13: APPLICABLE ORDINANCES:
The Canyon County zoning ordinance 1  and the Canyon County subdivision
ordinance 2  shall apply in the Middleton area of city impact. (Ord. 01-006, 7-
6-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7 of this code.
2 2. See chapter 7, article 17 of this code.
09-09-15: ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
All proposed county ordinance amendments to the text and/or map which may
relate to the Middleton area of city impact shall be referred to the city in
the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-09-11(3) of this article, except that recommendations received from the city
by the county are nonbinding but any factually supported recommendations shall
be seriously considered by the county. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-17: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Processing Applications: The following procedures shall be adhered to
in processing applications within the area of city impact:
      A.    Land Use Applications: All land use applications submitted to the
county including, but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances and
land divisions requiring notification of a public hearing, shall be referred to
the city in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-09-11(3) of this article.
      B.    Substandard Setup; Mobile/Manufactured Homes: Mobile/manufactured
homes not set up pursuant to manufacturers' recommendations shall not be
allowed in any zone in which the county's zoning ordinance excludes mobile/
manufactured homes.
      C.    Temporary Residence; Mobile/Manufactured Home: The county shall
receive input from the city on applications for county temporary mobile/
manufactured homes. The city's comments shall be given great weight by the
county's development services director and the planning and zoning commission,
provided they are factually supported. Those comments shall not be binding on
the county. The county appellate procedures apply. County approval of a
temporary residence described above does not afford the permit holder any
nonconforming use or structure grandfather rights status prior to or upon the
city's annexation of the parcel.
      D.    Planned Unit Developments: A "planned unit development" shall be
defined as it is defined in section
07-02-03: of this code, as amended. Such definition is incorporated by
reference herein.
      E.    Subdivision Plat Applications: All subdivision plat applications
shall first be directed to the county's development services director. The
director shall make a determination whether the planned use conforms to the
county's comprehensive plan, zoning designation, and zoning ordinances. If it
does conform as an allowed use, the director shall send a letter to the city
confirming the same, and for residential developments indicate a minimum lot
size. The city shall then review the plat applications and shall render an
opinion and recommendation to the county's development services director.
Thereafter, the applications shall be reviewed for approval in accordance with
the hearing procedures set forth in chapter 7, article 5 of this code in order
to determine whether the applications comply with the requirements of the
Canyon County subdivision ordinance 1 .
      F.    Nonconforming Uses: If the application does not conform to the
county zoning designation as an "allowed use", the applicant may elect to
pursue amendments to the county's comprehensive plan and/or zoning map or make
application for a planned unit development, all in accordance with procedures
outlined in subsection
09-09-11(3) of this article and applicable sections of the county zoning
ordinance.
      G.    Subdivision Defined: All land divisions defined as "subdivisions"
by county ordinances shall be considered subdivision for the purposes of this
article.
   (2)   Planned Unit Developments: All planned unit development applications
for development within the area of city impact shall be directed first to the
county's development services director for consideration by the county's
planning and zoning commission. It shall be referred to the city in the same
manner as provided in subsection
09-09-11(3) of this article. When granting an application for a planned unit
development/conditional use permit, the commission may attach conditions of
approval which include, but are not limited to, the following:
      A.    The types and relative quantities of uses to be permitted;
      B.    The relative quantity and nature of all common areas to be provided
as a condition of permit;
      C.    Minimum lot size, if applicable, as a condition of permit.
   (3)   Referral Process: If the planned unit development/conditional use
permit is approved, the application shall be forwarded to the city with
approval documents indicating the conditions of approval enumerated above. The
application shall then be processed as a subdivision plat application pursuant
to the procedures outlined in subsection (1)E of this section. All planned unit
developments in the city impact area shall be platted.
   (4)   City Impact Area Representation: Recommendations for city impact area
representation on the county planning and zoning commission may be made by the
city to the board of county commissioners at any time and will be acted upon by
said board as the need arises and as they deem appropriate.
   (5)   City/County Internal Procedures: Each party to this referral process
shall determine its own internal procedure as may be deemed appropriate and
adequate for making recommendations to the other party on proposed actions and
on its handling of proposed amendments to its own plan and/or ordinances.
Appeals of decisions by each party shall be processed by the party responsible
for the decision and in accordance with the internal procedures of that party.
(Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7, article 17 of this code.
09-09-19: AMENDMENT:
   (1)   In accordance with Idaho Code 67-6526(d), the city of Middleton or the
board of Canyon County commissioners may request, in writing, the renegotiation
of any provision of this article at any time. Within thirty (30) days of
receipt of such written request by either party, an initial meeting between the
two (2) jurisdictions should occur. If the parties agree to amend this article,
hearings to enact such amendments shall be scheduled before the parties'
respective planning and zoning commissions with ultimate approval resting with
the board of county commissioners and the city council. If the parties are
unable to agree to amend this article, either party may elect to submit the
issues to the committee of nine (9) persons pursuant to Idaho Code 67-6526(b).
   (2)   While renegotiation is occurring, all provisions of this article shall
remain in effect until this article is amended or a substitute ordinance is
adopted by both Middleton and Canyon County, in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, or until a
declaratory judgment from district court is final.
   (3)   Amendments to this article shall be processed using the notice and
hearing requirements of Idaho Code 67-6509. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-21: SEVERABILITY:
Should any action or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 01-006, 7-6-2001)
09-09-23: IMPACT AREA MAP:
   (1)   Title: This section shall be known as the CANYON COUNTY ORDINANCE RE:
CITY OF MIDDLETON IMPACT AREA MAP.
   (2)   Authority: This section is enacted pursuant to Idaho Code 67-6526, of
the local planning act of 1975, Idaho Code 31-714, 31-801, and 31-828 and
article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, as amended or subsequently
modified.
   (3)   Purpose: The local planning act of 1975 requires that each county and
each city in the state of Idaho shall identify by ordinance an area of city
impact within the unincorporated area of the county and shall, in accordance
with the notice and hearing procedures provided in Idaho Code 67-6509, adopt by
ordinance a map identifying that area of city impact.
   (4)   Repealer: The Middleton area of city impact map ordinance repeals the
Middleton area of city impact map adopted in ordinance 05-010 and all other
ordinances, regulations, or parts thereof in conflict herewith.
   (5)   Savings: Any actions, civil, criminal, or administrative, which are
pending at the time of the enactment hereof, may be pursued as if this section
had not been enacted.
   (6)   City Impact Area Map:
      A.    Area Designated: The Middleton area of city impact is the area
designated on the Middleton area of city impact boundary map (attached as
exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein), hereby fully incorporated by
reference, copies of which are available for inspection at the office of the
clerk of the city of Middleton and at the Canyon County development services
department.
      B.    Jurisdiction: In case a property under single ownership is divided
by the boundary line of the Middleton area of city impact and any other area of
city impact boundary, if such line divides such property so that one or both of
the parts has a depth of three hundred feet (300') or less, such part may be
included in the jurisdiction within which the remainder and larger portion of
the property is located.
      C.    Exception: In the case where a property under a single ownership is
divided by the boundary line of the Middleton area of city impact only, the
smaller portion of such property may, without the three hundred foot (300')
limitation stated above, be included in the jurisdiction within which the
larger portion of the property is located.
   (7)   Severability: Should any action or provision of this section be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of this section as a whole or a part thereof other than
the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 06-010, 8-17-2006)
ARTICLE 11
NAMPA
SECTION:
09-11-01: Title
09-11-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
09-11-05: Repealer
09-11-07: Saving Clause
09-11-09: Area Of City Impact Defined
09-11-11: Geographic Area Of City Impact Established
09-11-13: Area Of City Impact Map
09-11-15: Annexation Limited
09-11-17: Applicable Comprehensive Plan And Comprehensive Plan
09-11-19: Applicable Ordinances And Standards
09-11-21: Zoning/Subdivision Ordinance Amendment Proposals
09-11-23: Amendment Of County And City Ordinances Relating To Area Of City
Impact And Notice
09-11-25: Application Procedures
09-11-27: Amendment Of Nampa Area Of City Impact (Plans And Ordinances)
Ordinance
09-11-29: Severability
09-11-31: Effective Date
09-11-01: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the NAMPA AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES/MAP) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
Canyon County and the inhabitants thereof by establishing regulations for the
Nampa area of city impact, and further, to:
      A.    Facilitate Legal Duties Or Parties: To facilitate the legal duties,
responsibilities, and authority of Canyon County, Idaho, and city of Nampa,
Idaho, as is prescribed and provided by the Idaho legislature regarding impact
areas; and
      B.    Processing Of Land Use And Land Division Applications: To provide
steps and procedures required for processing zoning applications, comprehensive
plan and zoning amendments and subdivision plats and land division within the
Nampa area of city impact in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526; and
      C.    Economical And Compatible Infrastructure: To identify an urban
fringe in the unincorporated area surrounding the city within which there is
potential for development or changes in land use that must be planned. designed
and constructed in an orderly manner compatible with the city of Nampa for the
city of Nampa to assure timely and/or economical provision of public services,
such as: water supply, sewage and storm water collection and treatment, public
safety services, airport, parks, and other community service facilities.
      D.    Compatible Land Use And Roads: To promote land use compatibility,
maintain consistent and continuous street alignment, and support traffic flow
objectives.
   (3)   Duration: This article shall be in effect unless amended or otherwise
changed in accordance with section
09-11-17: of this article.
   (4)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-801,
31-828 and 67-6526.
   (5)   No Separate Entity: This article does not create a separate legal
entity.
   (6)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this article only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing agency personnel.
   (7)   Real And Personal Property: It is not contemplated, due to the nature
of this article, that there will be a need to acquire, hold, and/or dispose of
any real or personal property under this article.
   (8)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this agreement only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing personnel of Canyon County and the city of Nampa.
   (9)   Financing/Budget: Unless otherwise agreed to in writing there shall be
no joint financing of activities under this article. No compensation shall be
due and owing for services to either party from the other party. Each party
agrees to establish its own fees and to be responsible for the collection of
said fees from the public and for payment of compensation and benefits for its
employees. Each party shall independently budget for expected expenses under
this article. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-05: REPEALER:
This article repeals the joint exercise of powers agreement for the area of
city impact between the city of Nampa and Canyon County (dated March 27, 1998),
Canyon County ordinance re: city of Nampa, Idaho impact area map (ordinance 00-
011, adopted November 14, 2000), and all ordinances, regulations, or parts
thereof, in conflict herewith. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-07: SAVING CLAUSE:
Any actions, civil, criminal or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this article, may be pursued as if this article had not
been enacted. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-09: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DEFINED:
The Nampa area of city impact consists of an area where development or use of
land affects, or may affect, the city of Nampa in regard to its trade areas,
geographic factors and areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed to
the city in the future. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-11: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT ESTABLISHED:
   (1)   The Nampa area of city impact is hereby established as described in
exhibit A attached to ordinance 16-010, a map entitled "Nampa area of city
impact", which map is officially made a part hereof by reference. The Nampa
area of city impact being established and map being specifically adopted by
city of Nampa municipal ordinance 4278.
   (2)   The Nampa area of city impact may be reevaluated by the city and
Canyon County at such times as they may agree upon, in accordance with Idaho
Code section 67-6526, as amended, to consider possible changes in the
geographic area affected and/or other provisions of this article. (Ord. 16-010,
9-2-2016; amd. Ord. 24-005, 5-1-2024)
09-11-13: AREA OF CITY IMPACT MAP:
The Nampa area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Canyon County
adopted herein shall be in effect until amended or modified as allowed by law.
(Ord. 16-010, 9-2-2016)
09-11-15: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Annexation by the city of Nampa shall be
limited to lands lying within the Nampa area of city impact unless the owner of
the land requests that the tract of land be annexed by the city of Nampa
pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-222 et seq., and the land is contiguous or
adjacent to the boundaries of the city of Nampa.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this article shall no longer apply to the annexed area.
   (3)   Annexation Notification: The city of Nampa must notify the director of
the county's development services department ("director") in writing ten (10)
calendar days in advance of the first public hearing at which each annexation
is considered by the city of Nampa. The city of Nampa shall notify Canyon
County in writing within ten (10) calendar days following the effective date of
the adoption of each annexation ordinance. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-17: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   (1)   Comprehensive Plan: The Canyon County comprehensive plan, as amended,
shall apply to the Nampa area of city impact. Canyon County recognizes that the
city of Nampa has also developed a comprehensive plan and accompanying map for
the Nampa area of city impact. Canyon County shall give consideration to the
city's comprehensive plan map designations when evaluating development requests
with the Nampa area of city impact.
   (2)   Hearing Participation: The city of Nampa may apply at any time to
amend Canyon County's comprehensive plan and may fully participate in the
hearing process. Hearing input from the city of Nampa will not be binding or
controlling on the county, but shall be treated as documentary evidence. The
city of Nampa shall have affected party status pursuant to Idaho Code section
67-6521 of the local land use planning act, as amended.
   (3)   Comprehensive Plan Amendment Proposals: All proposals to amend Canyon
County's comprehensive plan, which may pertain to the Nampa area of city
impact, but which do not originate from the city of Nampa, shall be referred to
the city of Nampa's planning and community development director at least thirty
(30) calendar days prior to the first county public hearing on the matter and
the city of Nampa may make a recommendation before or at said public hearing.
After the city receives its initial thirty (30) days' notice, any further
notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be provided to the city of
Nampa at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. If a recommendation
is received by the county from the city of Nampa, it shall be given
consideration by the county, provided it is factually supported, but such
recommendation shall not be binding on the county. If no recommendation is
received, Canyon County may proceed without the recommendation of the city of
Nampa.
   (4)   Final Document Forwarding: After the county's final action has been
taken on any proposed amendments to the county's comprehensive plan, the county
shall notify the city of Nampa's planning and community development department
of said final action by forwarding, to the city of Nampa's planning and
community development department, a copy of all final documents reflecting the
action taken by the county. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-19: APPLICABLE ORDINANCES AND STANDARDS:
Within the Nampa area of city impact, the following ordinances apply but the
city of Nampa ordinances are subject to the waiver provisions in subsection (6)
of this section:
   (1)   Canyon County zoning ordinance, as lawfully amended.
   (2)   City of Nampa's subdivision ordinance, ordinance 3119 and dated June
1, 2002, except for simple divisions (lot split) provisions and except for
hearing procedures. The county's hearing procedures shall apply.
   (3)   The Nampa ordinances or sections from Nampa ordinances that apply by
ordinance number and adoption date, even when in conflict with otherwise
applicable county provisions, are as follows:
      A.    Nampa city ordinance 3119, chapter 27, subdivision ordinance, and
all standards and specifications adopted thereby, in the form existing as of
May 20, 2002.
      B.    Nampa city ordinance 3151, subsections 10-27-6(J) and (K), and all
standards and specifications adopted thereby, in the form existing as of
September 3, 2002.
      C.    Nampa city ordinance 3211, sections 10-27-1 and 10-27-6, and all
standards and specifications adopted thereby, in the form existing as of July
4, 2002.
      D.    Nampa city ordinance 3247, subsections 10-27-2(G) and (H) and
section 10-27-15, and all standards and specifications adopted thereby, in the
form existing as of August 4, 2003.
      E.    Nampa city ordinance 3250, subsections 10-27-2(F), 10-27-4(E),
section 10-27-5: and subsections 10-27-6(C)2 and 10-27-6(F) and all standards
and specifications adopted thereby, in the form existing as of August 18, 2003.
      F.    Nampa city ordinance 3354, sections 10-27-4, 10-27-10, 10-27-11,
and 10-27-12 and all standards and specifications adopted thereby, in the form
existing as of June 7, 2004.
      G.    Nampa city ordinance 3383, section 10-27-15, and all standards and
specifications adopted thereby, in the form existing as of October 4, 2004.
      H.    Nampa city ordinance 3451, subsection 10-27-6(A), and all standards
and specifications adopted thereby, in the form existing as of May 30, 2005.
   (4)   Except as set forth above, all other standards of applicable Canyon
County codes and ordinances apply; and
   (5)   For subdivisions applied for in the Nampa area of city impact, the
county will require on the face of each final plat a certification signature
line for execution by the city of Nampa engineer attesting to the plat's
conformance with the city standards set forth above. Also, the county will not
sign a final plat, or authorize the plat to be recorded, prior to the city
engineer's signature being on the plat.
   (6)   Waiver Of City Of Nampa Ordinance Provisions: The standards and
requirements listed in the Nampa ordinances, identified in subsections (2) and
(3) of this section, may be waived by the board of county commissioners in its
discretion. An applicant for such waiver bears the burden of persuasion and
must specifically state the reasons why a waiver is necessary and prove said
waiver will not cause an adverse effect to the health, safety and welfare of
the community and that the requirements sought to be waived constitute an undue
hardship. For the purpose of this section, increased financial expense
associated with a requirement, by itself, does not constitute an undue
hardship. Notice of the requested waiver must be given to the city of Nampa not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on the waiver application. Any
further notice on the proposed waiver will be provided to the city of Nampa at
least seven (7) days prior to any public hearing. Written objections from the
city of Nampa will be considered by the Canyon County commissioners. The
application for waiver must show that prior to filing the application, the
applicant first sought consent from the city of Nampa to the waiver, indicating
the date of the request and the response, if any, from the city of Nampa. In
granting any waiver, the board may impose any conditions the county deems
necessary, to help mitigate any adverse effect to the health, safety and
welfare of the community. The application for waiver will first be considered
by the county planning and zoning commission at a public hearing, which shall
make recommendations to the board of county commissioners for their
consideration at a public hearing. The public hearings held before the Canyon
County planning and zoning commission and the Canyon County board of
commissioners will be conducted in accordance with the notice and hearing
procedures provided by subsections 07-17-09(4) and (5) of this code. (Ord. 05-
014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-21: ZONING/SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
   (1)   All proposed amendments to the text and/or map of the Canyon County
zoning ordinance or subdivision regulations, which may relate to the Nampa area
of city impact, shall be referred by the county to the city of Nampa in the
same manner as provided for in subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article. Any recommendation of the city of Nampa shall be
considered in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article.
   (2)   All proposed amendments to the city of Nampa's subdivision ordinance,
which may relate to the Nampa area of city impact, shall be referred by the
city of Nampa to the county in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article. Any recommendation of the city of Nampa shall be
considered in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-23: AMENDMENT OF COUNTY AND CITY ORDINANCES RELATING TO AREA OF CITY
IMPACT AND NOTICE:
   (1)   Subject to subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article, prior to amendment by the county of any county
ordinance applicable in the Nampa area of city impact as set forth in section
09-11-19: of this article, the county shall forward the proposed change(s) to
the city of Nampa for review and comment at least thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the first county public hearing at which such amendment(s) will be
considered. Any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be
provided to the city of Nampa at least seven (7) days prior to the public
hearing.
   (2)   Prior to amendment by the city of Nampa of any city ordinance
applicable in the Nampa area of city impact as set forth in section
09-11-19: of this article, the city shall forward the proposed change(s) to the
county for review and comment at least thirty (30) days prior to the first
Nampa public hearing at which such amendment(s) will be considered. Any further
notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be provided to Canyon County at
least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-25: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be adhered to in processing applications within
the Nampa area of city impact:
   (1)   Land Use Applications: All land use applications submitted to Canyon
County including, but not limited to, rezones, conditional rezones, conditional
use permits, variances and land divisions requiring notification of a public
hearing, shall be referred to the city of Nampa in the manner as provided for
in subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article.
   (2)   Planned Unit Developments: All planned unit developments shall be
processed as provided for in this code, and as provided for in subsection
09-11-19: of this article.
   (3)   Subdivision Plat Applications: All subdivision plat and irrigation
plan applications shall be processed procedurally as provided for in this code,
and as provided for in subsection
09-11-19: of this article.
   (4)   Building Permit Applications: All building permit applications shall
be processed as provided for in this code. Owners of properties connecting to
city of Nampa water and/or, sewer must obtain a certificate of acceptance from
the authorized city official as a condition precedent to obtaining the building
permit.
   (5)   Notice Contents: The county's notice to the city of Nampa, as provided
for by subsection
09-11-17(3) of this article, shall include with the notice a copy of the
application and concept plan or plat and irrigation plan, and any other
relevant information submitted by the applicant.
   (6)   City Impact Area Representation: Recommendations for city impact area
representation on the county planning and zoning commission may be made by the
city of Nampa to the board of county commissioners at any time and will be
acted upon by said board as the need arises and as the board deems appropriate.
   (7)   City/County Internal Procedures: Each party shall determine its own
internal procedures as may be deemed appropriate and adequate for making
recommendations to the other party on proposed actions and on its handling of
proposed amendments to its own plan and/or ordinances. An appeal made by the
city to the county, or by the county to the city, shall be processed by the
nonappealing party in accordance with the internal procedures of the
nonappealing party. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-27: AMENDMENT OF NAMPA AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND ORDINANCES)
ORDINANCE:
   (1)   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), the city of Nampa or
the board of Canyon County commissioners may request, in writing, the
renegotiation of any provision of this article at any time. Within thirty (30)
days of receipt of such written request by either party, an initial meeting
between the two (2) jurisdictions should occur. If the parties agree to amend
this article, hearings to enact such amendments shall be scheduled before the
parties' respective planning and zoning commissions with ultimate approval
resting with the board of county commissioners and the city council. If the
city and county are unable to agree to amend this article, either may elect to
submit the issues to a committee of nine (9) as described in the local land use
planning act, Idaho Code section 67-6526(b).
   (2)   During renegotiation, all provisions of this article shall remain in
effect until this article is amended or a substitute ordinance is adopted by
both the city of Nampa and Canyon County, in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, or until a
declaratory judgment from district court is final.
   (3)   Amendments to this article shall be processed using the notice and
hearing requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6509. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-29: SEVERABILITY:
Should any action or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
09-11-31: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication. (Ord. 05-014, 6-1-2005)
ARTICLE 13
NOTUS
SECTION:
09-13-01: Title
09-13-03: Scope
09-13-05: Annexation Limited
09-13-07: Application Of Comprehensive Plan And Zoning Ordinance
09-13-09: Application Of Notus Subdivision Ordinance
09-13-11: Impact Area Map
09-13-13: Availability Of Ordinances
09-13-01: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the NOTUS AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 94-018, 12-23-94)
09-13-03: SCOPE:
   (1)   The Idaho Legislature duly enacted Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) which
provides that by separate ordinance the County of Canyon and City of Notus
shall provide for application of plans and ordinances for the area of city
impact; and
   (2)   The City of Notus and the County have adopted a map identifying the
City of Notus impact area within the unincorporated area of the County by the
adoption of Ordinance No. 94-010 duly passed by Canyon County on December 23,
1994 1 ; and
   (3)   Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) requires that the City of Notus and the
County of Canyon provide by ordinance for the application of plans and
ordinances for the area of city impact of the City of Notus within the
unincorporated area of the County no later than January 1, 1995; and
   (4)   The City of Notus and the County shall enter into a joint exercise of
power agreement for the impact area of the City of Notus, which agreement shall
provide for and facilitate the legal duties of the parties and their
responsibilities and authority as required under the Local Planning Act of
1975, and including any duties appertaining to the area of City impact
subsequently required by the Idaho Legislature. (Ord. 94-018, 12-23-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  09-13-11: of this Article.
09-13-05: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Effective January 1, 1995, annexation by
the City of Notus shall be limited to lands lying within the area of impact,
unless the owner of the land requests the tract of land be annexed by the City,
and the land is contiguous to the boundaries of the City of Notus.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this Article shall no longer apply to the annexed area. (Ord. 94-
018, 12-23-94)
09-13-07: APPLICATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE:
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of complying with Idaho Code section
67-6526(a) the Ordinance codified in this Article, which provides for the
application of the latest edition of the Canyon County Comprehensive Plan as
duly enacted and adopted and amended by the County Commissioners, and Chapter 7
of this Code, to the area of impact of the City of Notus within the
unincorporated area of the County, until a new comprehensive plan and/or zoning
ordinance has been duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of a joint
exercise of power agreement impact area City of Notus/County of Canyon. Until
the joint exercise of power agreement is adopted and operational, the County
shall direct copies of all applications coming before it, pursuant to the Local
Planning Act of 1975 and Chapter 7 of this Code concerning property located in
the area of City impact of Notus, for the City of Notus' input on the
application and shall give such input due consideration; and after the adoption
of the joint exercise of power agreement and the same becomes operational, then
the provisions of that agreement shall govern this process. (Ord. 94-018, 12-
23-94)
09-13-09: APPLICATION OF NOTUS SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
   (1)   Adoption Of Subdivision Ordinance: There is hereby adopted for the
purposes of complying with Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) the ordinance codified
in this article, which provides for, except as provided in subsection (2) of
this section, the application of City of Notus' Subdivision Ordinance, as
amended, to the Area of Impact of the City of Notus within the unincorporated
area of the County, until a new Subdivision Ordinance has been duly adopted in
accordance with the provisions of a joint exercise of power agreement impact
area City of Notus/County of Canyon.
   (2)   Exceptions And Conflict Procedure: In the event a conflict in the
application of the provisions of chapter 7 of this Code and the provisions of
the City of Notus' Subdivision Ordinance to the Area of Impact of the City of
Notus, the provisions of the City of Notus' Subdivision Ordinance shall
control, but shall not control over the application of chapter 7, article 10A,
"Flood Hazard Overlay Zone", and/or chapter 6, article 5, "Addressing", of this
Code. The City of Notus' Subdivision Ordinance shall be subject to the
applicable Notus highway district's standards and regulations solely
enforceable by said highway district. It is further provided that only those
portions of the Subdivision Ordinance adopted which are not repugnant to
Federal or State law shall be adopted by the County and there shall be no
approval and reviewing of protective or restrictive covenants as part of the
process described in this article. (Ord. 94-018, 12-23-1994)
09-13-11: IMPACT AREA MAP:
The Notus, Idaho, Canyon County approved impact area map is hereby adopted as
the official map identifying the Area of City Impact within the unincorporated
area of the County for the City of Notus. A true and correct copy of said map
is affixed as attachment 1 to the ordinance codified herein and is fully
incorporated by reference herein. (Ord. 08-008, 4-16-2008)
09-13-13: AVAILABILITY OF ORDINANCES:
True and correct copies of the ordinances herein referred to shall be on file
with the Clerk of the City of Notus, the Clerk of the Canyon County
Commissioners, the Office of Planning and Zoning Department of the City of
Notus, and the Planning and Zoning Department of the County and are available
for public inspection and reference. (Ord. 94-018, 12-23-1994)
ARTICLE 15
PARMA
SECTION:
09-15-01: Title
09-15-03: Scope
09-15-05: Annexation Limited
09-15-07: Application Of Comprehensive Plan And Zoning Ordinance
09-15-09: Application Of Parma Subdivision Ordinance
09-15-11: Impact Area Map
09-15-13: Availability Of Ordinances
09-15-01: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the PARMA AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 94-019, 12-23-94)
09-15-03: SCOPE:
   (1)   The Idaho Legislature duly enacted Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) which
provides that by separate ordinance the County of Canyon and City of Parma
shall provide for application of plans and ordinances for the area of city
impact; and
   (2)   The County has adopted a map identifying the City of Parma impact area
within the unincorporated area of the County by the adoption of Ordinance No.
94-011 duly passed by Canyon County on December 23, 1994 1 ; and
   (3)   Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) requires that the City of Parma and the
County of Canyon provide by ordinance for the application of plans and
ordinances for the area of city impact of the City of Parma within the
unincorporated area of the County no later than January 1, 1995; and
   (4)   The City of Parma and the County shall enter into a joint exercise of
power agreement for the impact area of the City of Parma, which agreement shall
provide for and facilitate the legal duties of the parties and their
responsibilities and authority as required under the Local Planning Act of
1975, and including any duties appertaining to the area of City impact
subsequently required by the Idaho Legislature. (Ord. 94-019, 12-23-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  09-15-11: of this Article.
09-15-05: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Effective January 1, 1995, annexation by
the City of Parma shall be limited to lands lying within the area of impact,
unless the owner of the land requests the tract of land be annexed by the City,
and the land is contiguous to the boundaries of the City of Parma.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this Article shall no longer apply to the annexed area. (Ord. 94-
019, 12-23-94)
09-15-07: APPLICATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING ORDINANCE:
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of complying with Idaho Code 67-6526
(a) the ordinance codified in this Article, which provides for the application
of the latest edition of the Canyon County Comprehensive Plan as duly enacted
and adopted and amended by the County Commissioners, and Chapter 7 of this
Code, to the area of impact of the City of Parma within the unincorporated area
of the County, until a new comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance has been
duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of a joint exercise of power
agreement impact area City of Parma/County of Canyon. Until the joint exercise
of power agreement is adopted and operational, the County shall direct copies
of all applications coming before it, pursuant to the Local Planning Act of
1975 and Chapter 7 of this Code concerning property located in the area of City
impact of Parma, for the City of Parma's input on the application and shall
give such input due consideration; and after the adoption of the joint exercise
of power agreement and the same becomes operational, then the provisions of
that agreement shall govern this process. (Ord. 94-019, 12-23-94)
09-15-09: APPLICATION OF PARMA SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
   (1)   Adoption Of Subdivision Ordinance: There is hereby adopted for the
purposes of complying with Idaho Code section 67-6526(a) the ordinance codified
in this article, which provides for, except as provided in subsection (2) of
this section, the application of City of Parma's Subdivision Ordinance, as
amended, as codified at title 6, chapters 1 through 6, Municipal Code of the
City of Parma, to the Area of Impact of the City of Parma within the
unincorporated area of the County, until a new Subdivision Ordinance has been
duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of a joint exercise of power
agreement impact area City of Parma/County of Canyon.
   (2)   Exceptions And Conflict Procedure: In the event a conflict in the
application of the provisions of chapter 7 of this Code and the provisions of
the City of Parma's Subdivision Ordinance to the Area of Impact of the City of
Parma, the provisions of the City of Parma's Subdivision Ordinance shall
control, but shall not control over the application of chapter 7, article 10A,
"Flood Hazard Overlay Zone", and/or chapter 6, article 5, "Addressing", of this
Code. The City of Parma's Subdivision Ordinance shall be subject to the
applicable Notus/Parma highway district 2's standards and regulations solely
enforceable by said highway district. It is further provided that only those
portions of the Subdivision Ordinance adopted which are not repugnant to
Federal or State law shall be adopted by the County and there shall be no
approval and reviewing of protective or restrictive covenants as part of the
process described in this article.
   (3)   One Mile Approval By City: By the passage of the ordinance codified in
this article, and by the city's passage of a like ordinance, there is mutual
agreement that within one mile of the City of Parma's boundary only, the Parma
City Subdivision Ordinance shall prevail over chapter 7, article 17 of this
Code as is provided for in Idaho Code section 50-1306 in those circumstances
where the one mile limit exceeds the boundaries of the impact area, except in
those instances where there is an overlap with another city that is larger, in
which event the jurisdiction of the larger city shall be assumed. (Ord. 94-019,
12-23-1994)
09-15-11: IMPACT AREA MAP:
The Parma, Idaho, Canyon County approved impact area map is hereby adopted as
the official map identifying the Area of City Impact within the unincorporated
area of the County for the City of Parma. A true and correct copy of said map
is affixed as attachment 1 to the ordinance codified herein and is fully
incorporated by reference herein. (Ord. 08-009, 4-16-2008)
09-15-13: AVAILABILITY OF ORDINANCES:
True and correct copies of the ordinances herein referred to shall be on file
with the Clerk of the City of Parma, the Clerk of the Canyon County
Commissioners, the Office of Planning and Zoning Department of the City of
Parma, and the Planning and Zoning Department of the County and are available
for public inspection and reference. (Ord. 94-019, 12-23-1994)
ARTICLE 17
WILDER
SECTION:
09-17-01: Title
09-17-03: Structure, Purpose And Authority
09-17-05: Repealer
09-17-07: Saving Clause
09-17-09: Area Of City Impact Defined
09-17-11: Geographic Area Of City Impact Established
09-17-13: Annexation Limited
09-17-15: Applicable Comprehensive Plan And Policies
09-17-17: Applicable Ordinances And Standards
09-17-19: Zoning/Subdivision Ordinance Amendment Proposals
09-17-21: Amendment Of County And City Ordinances Relating To Area Of City
Impact And Notice
09-17-23: Application Procedures
09-17-25: Amendment Of Wilder Area Of City Impact (Plans And Ordinances/Map)
Ordinance
09-17-27: Severability
09-17-29: Effective Date
09-17-01: TITLE:
This article shall be know as the WILDER AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND
ORDINANCES/MAP) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-03: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
Canyon County and the inhabitants thereof by establishing regulations for the
Wilder area of city impact, and further, to:
      A.    Facilitate Legal Duties Of Parties: Facilitate the legal duties of,
responsibilities, and authority of Canyon County, Idaho and city of Wilder,
Idaho as is prescribed and provided by the Idaho legislature regarding impact
areas; and
      B.    Processing Of Land Use And Land Division Applications: To provide
steps and procedures required for processing zoning applications, comprehensive
plan and zoning amendments and subdivision plats and land division within the
Wilder area of city impact in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526, as
amended; and
      C.    Economical And Compatible Infrastructure: To identify an urban
fringe in the unincorporated area surrounding the city of Wilder within which
there is potential for development or changes in land use that must be planned,
designed and constructed in an orderly manner compatible with the city of
Wilder for the city of Wilder to assure timely and/or economical provision of
public services, such as: water supply, sewage and storm water collection and
treatment, public safety services, airport, parks, and other community service
facilities.
      D.    Compatible Land Use And Roads: To promote land use compatibility,
maintain consistent and continuous street alignment, and support traffic flow
objectives.
   (3)   Duration: This article shall be in effect unless amended or otherwise
changed in accordance with section
09-17-25: of this article.
   (4)   Authority: This article is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-801,
31-828 and 67-6526.
   (5)   No Separate Entity: This article does not create a separate legal
entity.
   (6)   No administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this article only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing agency personnel.
   (7)   Real And Personal Property: It is not contemplated, due to the nature
of this article, that there will be a need to acquire, hold, and/or dispose of
any real or personal property under this article.
   (8)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this agreement only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing personnel of Canyon County and the city of Wilder.
   (9)   Financing/Budget: Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, there shall
be no joint financing or activities under this article. No compensation shall
be due and owing for services to either party from the other party. Each party
agrees to establish its own fees and to be responsible for the collection of
said fees from the public and for payment of compensation and benefits for its
employees. Each party shall independently budget for their own expenses under
this article. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-05: REPEALER:
This article repeals the joint exercise of power agreement between city of
Wilder and county of Canyon (dated January 14, 1998), and all other ordinances,
regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict herewith. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-07: SAVING CLAUSE:
Any actions, civil, criminal or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this article, may be pursued as if this article had not
been enacted. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-09: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DEFINED:
The Wilder area of city impact consists of an area where development or use of
land affects, or may affect, the city of Wilder in regard to its trade areas,
geographic factors and areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed to
the city of Wilder in the future. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-11: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT ESTABLISHED:
   (1)   The Wilder, Idaho, Canyon County approved impact area map is hereby
adopted as the official map identifying the area of city impact within the
unincorporated area of the county for the city of Wilder. A true and correct
copy of said map is affixed as attachment 1 to the ordinance codified herein
and is fully incorporated by reference herein. (Ord. 08-005, 4-16-2008)
   (2)   The Wilder area of city impact may be reevaluated by the city and
Canyon County at such times as they may agree upon, in accordance with Idaho
Code section 67-6526, as amended, to consider possible changes in the
geographic area affected and/or other provisions of this article. (Ord. 05-015,
10-7-2005)
09-17-13: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of Impact: Annexation by the city of Wilder shall be
limited to lands lying within the Wilder area of city impact unless the owner
of the land consents that the tract of land be annexed by the city of Wilder
pursuant to Idaho Code, section 50-222 et seq., and the land is contiguous or
adjacent to the boundaries of the city of Wilder.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this article shall no longer apply to the annexed area.
   (3)   Annexation Notification: The city of Wilder must notify the director
of the county's development services department ("director") in writing ten
(10) calendar days in advance of the first public hearing at which each
annexation is considered by the city of Wilder. The city of Wilder shall notify
Canyon County in writing within ten (10) calendar days following the effective
date of the adoption of each annexation ordinance. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-15: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND POLICIES:
   (1)   Comprehensive Plan: The Canyon County comprehensive plan, as amended,
shall apply to the Wilder area of city impact. Canyon County recognizes that
the city of Wilder has also developed a comprehensive plan and accompanying map
for the Wilder area of city impact. Canyon County shall give consideration to
the city's comprehensive plan map designations when evaluating development
requests within the Wilder area of city impact.
   (2)   Hearing Participation: The city of Wilder may apply at any time to
amend Canyon County's comprehensive plan and may fully participate in the
hearing process. Hearing input from the city of Wilder will not be binding or
controlling on the county, but shall be treated as documentary evidence. The
city of Wilder shall have affected party status pursuant to Idaho Code section
67-6521 of the local land use planning act, as amended.
   (3)   Comprehensive Plan Amendment Proposals: All proposals to amend Canyon
County's comprehensive plan, which may pertain to the Wilder area of city
impact, but which do not originate from the city of Wilder, shall be referred
to the city clerk at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the first county
public hearing on the matter and the city of Wilder may make a recommendation
before or at said public hearing. After the city receives its initial thirty
(30) days' notice, any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will
be provided to the city of Wilder at least seven (7) days prior to the public
hearing. If a recommendation is received by Canyon County from the city of
Wilder, it shall be given consideration by the county, provided it is factually
supported but such recommendation shall not be binding on the county. If no
recommendation is received, Canyon County may proceed without the
recommendation of the city of Wilder.
   (4)   Final Document Forwarding: After Canyon County's final action has been
taken on any proposed amendments to the county's comprehensive plan, the county
shall notify the city clerk of said final action by forwarding, to the city
clerk, a copy of all final documents reflecting the action taken by the county.
(Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-17: APPLICABLE ORDINANCES AND STANDARDS:
Within the Wilder area of city impact, the following ordinances apply which are
subject to the city of Wilder ordinance waiver provisions in subsection (6) of
this section:
   (1)   Canyon County zoning ordinance 05-002 as amended.
   (2)   City of Wilder's subdivision ordinances, codified at title 10 of the
Wilder city code, except for simple divisions (lot split) provisions and except
for hearing procedures. The county's lot split provisions and hearing
procedures shall apply.
   (3)   City council resolution 401, dated January 11, 2005, adopting the
"city of Wilder street standards and development procedures" shall apply, even
when in conflict with otherwise applicable county provisions.
   (4)   Except as set forth above, all other standards of applicable Canyon
County codes and ordinances apply; and
   (5)   For subdivisions applied for in the Wilder area of city impact, the
county will require on the face of each final plat a certification signature
line for execution by the city engineer of the city of Wilder attesting to the
plat's conformance with the city standards set forth above. Also, the county
will not sign a final plat, or authorize the plat to be recorded, prior to the
city engineer's signature being on the plat.
   (6)   The standards and requirements listed in title 10 of the Wilder city
code and resolution 401, identified in subsections (2) and (3) of this section,
may be waived by the board of county commissioners in its discretion. An
applicant for such waiver bears the burden of persuasion and must specifically
state the reasons why a waiver is necessary and prove said waiver will not
cause an adverse effect to the health, safety and welfare of the community and
that the requirements sought to be waived constitute an undue hardship. For the
purpose of this section, increased financial expense associated with a
requirement, by itself, does not constitute an undue hardship. Notice of the
requested waiver must be given to the city of Wilder not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing on the waiver application. Any further notice on the
proposed waiver will be provided to the city of Wilder at least seven (7) days
prior to any public hearing. Written objections from the city of Wilder will be
considered by the Canyon County commissioners. The application for waiver must
show that prior to filing the application, the applicant first sought consent
from the city of Wilder to the waiver, indicating the date of the request and
the response, if any, from the city of Wilder. In granting any waiver, the
board may impose any conditions the county deems necessary, to help mitigate
any adverse effect to the health, safety and welfare of the community. The
application for waiver will first be considered by the county planning and
zoning commission at a public hearing, which shall make recommendations to the
board of county commissioners for their consideration at a public hearing. The
public hearings held before the Canyon County planning and zoning commission
and the Canyon County board of commissioners will be conducted in accordance
with the notice and hearing procedures provided by Canyon County zoning
ordinance, subsections 07-17-09(4) and (5) of this code, as amended. (Ord. 05-
015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-19: ZONING/SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
   (1)   All proposed amendments to the text and/or map of the Canyon County
zoning or subdivision ordinance, which may related to the Wilder area of city
impact, shall be referred by the county to the city of Wilder in the same
manner as provided for in subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article. Any recommendation of the city of Wilder shall be
considered in the same manner as provided in subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article.
   (2)   All proposed amendments to the city of Wilder's subdivision ordinance,
which may relate to the Wilder area of city impact, shall be referred by the
city of Wilder to the county in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article. Any recommendation of the county shall be
considered in the same manner as provided for in subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-21: AMENDMENT OF COUNTY AND CITY ORDINANCES RELATING TO AREA OF CITY
IMPACT AND NOTICE:
   (1)   Subject to subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article, prior to amendment by the county of any county
ordinance applicable in the Wilder area of city impact, as set forth in
subsection
09-17-17: of this article, the county shall forward the proposed change(s) to
the city of Wilder for review and comment at least thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the first county public hearing at which such amendment(s) will be
considered.
   (2)   Subject to subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article, prior to amendment by the city of Wilder of any
city of Wilder ordinance applicable in the Wilder area of city impact, as set
forth in subsection
09-17-17: of this article, the city shall forward the proposed change(s) to the
county for review and comment at least thirty (30) days prior to the first city
of Wilder public hearing at which such amendment(s) will be considered. (Ord.
05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-23: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be adhered to in processing applications within
the Wilder area of city impact:
   (1)   Land Use Applications: All land use applications submitted to Canyon
County including, but not limited to, rezones, conditional rezones, conditional
use permits, variances, planned unit developments, subdivision plat
applications and land divisions requiring notification of a public hearing,
shall be referred to the city of Wilder in the manner as provided for in
subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article.
   (2)   Planned Unit Developments: All planned unit developments shall be
processed as provided for in this code, and as provided for in subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article.
   (3)   Subdivision Plat Applications: All subdivision plat and irrigation
plan applications shall be processed procedurally as provided for in this code,
and as provided for subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article.
   (4)   Building Permit Applications: All building permit applications shall
be processed as provided for in this code.
   (5)   Notice Contents: The county's notice to the city of Wilder, as
provided for by subsection
09-17-15(3) of this article, shall include with the notice a copy of the
application and concept plan or plat and irrigation plan, and any other
relevant information submitted by the applicant.
   (6)   City Impact Area Representation: Recommendations for city impact area
representation on the county planning and zoning commission may be made by the
city of Wilder to the board of county commissioners at any time and will be
acted upon by said board as the need arises and as the board deems appropriate.
   (7)   City/County Internal Procedures: Each party shall determine its own
internal procedures as maybe deemed appropriate and adequate for making
recommendations to the other party on proposed actions and on its handling of
proposed amendments to its own plan and/or ordinances. An appeal made by the
city of Wilder to Canyon County, or by Canyon County to the city of Wider,
shall be processed by the nonappealing party in accordance with the internal
procedures of the nonappealing party. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-25: AMENDMENT OF WILDER AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND ORDINANCES/MAP)
ORDINANCE:
   (1)   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), as amended, the city
of Wilder or the board of Canyon County commissioners may request, in writing,
the renegotiation of any provision of this article at any time. Within thirty
(30) days of receipt of such written request by either party, an initial
meeting between the two (2) jurisdictions should occur. If the parties agree to
amend this article, hearings to enact such amendments shall be scheduled before
the parties' respective planning and zoning commissions with ultimate approval
resting with the board of county commissioners and the Wilder city council. If
the city and county are unable to agree to amend this article, either may elect
to submit the issues to a committee of nine (9) as described in the local land
use planning act, Idaho Code section 67-6523(b), as amended.
   (2)   During renegotiation, all provisions of this article shall remain in
effect until this article is amended or a substitute ordinance is adopted by
both the city of Wilder and Canyon County, in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, as amended,
or until a declaratory judgment from district court is final.
   (3)   Amendments to this article shall be processed using the notice and
hearing requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6509, as amended. (Ord. 05-015,
10-7-2005)
09-17-27: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
09-17-29: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication. (Ord. 05-015, 10-7-2005)
ARTICLE 19
STAR
SECTION:
09-19-01: Title
09-19-02: Structure, Purpose And Authority
09-19-03: Saving Clause
09-19-04: Area Of City Impact Defined
09-19-05: Geographic Area Of City Impact Established
09-19-06: Area Of City Impact Map
09-19-07: Annexation Limited
09-19-08: Applicable Comprehensive Plan And Policies
09-19-09: Applicable Ordinances And Standards
09-19-10: Zoning Ordinance Amendment Proposals
09-19-11: Amendment Of County And City Ordinances Relating To Area Of City
Impact And Notice
09-19-12: Application Procedures
09-19-13: Amendment Of Star Area Of City Impact (Plans And Ordinances)
Ordinance
09-19-14: Severability
09-19-15: Effective Date
09-19-01: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the STAR/CANYON COUNTY AREA OF CITY IMPACT
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-02: STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this chapter are only used for
organization and structure, and the language in each paragraph of this chapter
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the board of county commissioners.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to promote the public
health, safety, general welfare, peace, good order, comfort and convenience of
Canyon County and the inhabitants thereof by establishing regulations for the
Star area of city impact, and further, to:
      A.   Facilitate the legal duties, responsibilities, and authority of
Canyon County, Idaho and City of Star, Idaho as is prescribed and provided by
the Idaho legislature regarding impact areas; and
      B.   Provide steps and procedures required for processing zoning
applications, comprehensive plan and zoning amendments and subdivision plats
and land division within the Star area of city impact in accordance with Idaho
Code section 67-6526; and
      C.   Identify an urban fringe in the unincorporated area surrounding the
City of Star within which there is potential for development or changes in land
use that must be planned, designed and constructed in an orderly manner
compatible with the City of Star for the City of Star to assure timely and/or
economical provision of public services, such as: water supply, sewage and
storm water collection and treatment, public safety services, parks, and other
community service facilities.
      D.   Promote land use compatibility, maintain consistent and continuous
street alignment, and support traffic flow objectives.
   (3)   Duration: This chapter shall be in effect unless amended or otherwise
changed in accordance with section 09-01-08.
   (4)   Authority: This chapter is authorized by Idaho Code sections 31-801,
31-828 and 67-6526.
   (5)   No Separate Entity: This chapter does not create a separate legal
entity.
   (6)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this chapter only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing agency personnel.
   (7)   Real And Personal Property: It is not contemplated, due to the nature
of this chapter, that there will be a need to acquire, hold, and/or dispose of
any real or personal property under this chapter.
   (8)   No Administrative Entity Created: No administrative entity is created
as this agreement only provides for cooperation between the parties using
existing personnel of Canyon County and the city of Star.
   (9)   Financing/Budget: Unless otherwise agreed to in writing there shall be
no joint financing of activities under this chapter. No compensation shall be
due and owing for services to either party from the other party. Each party
agrees to establish its own fees and to be responsible for the collection of
said fees from the public and for payment of compensation and benefits for its
employees. Each party shall independently budget for expected expenses under
this chapter. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-03: SAVING CLAUSE:
Any actions, civil, criminal or administrative, which are pending at the time
of the enactment of this chapter, may be pursued as if this chapter had not
been enacted. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-04: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DEFINED:
The Star area of city impact consists of an area in unincorporated Canyon
County where development or use of land affects, or may affect, the City of
Star in consideration of trade areas, geographic factors and areas that can
reasonably be expected to be annexed to the City of Star in the future. (Ord.
22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-05: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT ESTABLISHED:
   (1)   The Star area of city impact is hereby established as described in
exhibit A attached to ordinance 22-003, a map entitled "Star area of city
impact", which map is officially made a part hereof by reference. The Star area
of city impact being established and map being specifically adopted by City of
Star.
   (2)   The Star area of city impact may be reevaluated by the city and Canyon
County at such times as they may agree upon, in accordance with Idaho Code
section 67-6526, as amended, to consider possible changes in the geographic
area affected and/or other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-06: AREA OF CITY IMPACT MAP:
The Star area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Canyon County
adopted herein shall be in effect until amended or modified as allowed by law.
(Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-07: ANNEXATION LIMITED:
   (1)   Lands Within Area Of impact: Annexation by the City of Star shall be
limited to lands lying within the area of impact, unless the owner of the land
requests that the tract of land be annexed by the City of Star pursuant to
Idaho Code, section 50-222 et seq., and the land is contiguous or adjacent to
the boundaries of the City of Star and the Star comprehensive plan includes the
area of annexation.
   (2)   Application Of Provisions Upon Annexation: Upon annexation, the
provisions of this chapter shall no longer apply to the annexed area.
   (3)   Annexation Notification: The City of Star shall notify the director of
the county's development services department ("director") in writing at least
ten (10) calendar days in advance of the first city public hearing at which
each annexation is considered by the city of Star. The City of Star shall
notify Canyon County, in writing, within ten (10) calendar days following the
effective date of the annexation ordinance. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-08: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND POLICIES:
   (1)   Comprehensive Plan: The Canyon County comprehensive plan, as amended,
shall apply to the Star area of city impact. Canyon County recognizes that the
city of Star has also developed a comprehensive plan and accompanying map for
the Star area of city impact. Canyon County shall give consideration to the
city's comprehensive plan map designations when evaluating development requests
within the Star area of city impact.
   (2)   Hearing Participation: Star may fully participate in the hearing
process. Input from Star will not be binding or controlling on Canyon County,
but shall be treated as documentary evidence.
(3)   Comprehensive Plan Amendment Proposals: Notice of all proposals to amend
the city or county comprehensive plans, which may pertain to area of impact,
shall be given to the community development director at least thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the first public hearing at which such proposal is
considered by the city or county, and Star or Canyon County may make a
recommendation before or at said public hearing. After initial thirty (30)
days' notice is received, any further notice of proposed changes to the
proposal will be provided to the city or county at least seven (7) days prior
to the public hearing. If a recommendation is received, the recommendation
shall be given consideration, provided it is factually supported. Such
recommendation shall not be binding. If no recommendation is received, the
proceedings may continue without the recommendation.
   (4)   Final Document Forwarding: After final action has been taken on any
proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance or
subdivision regulations, a copy of said final action shall be provided to the
city or county. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-09: APPLICABLE ORDINANCES AND STANDARDS:
Within the Star area of city impact, the following ordinances apply, but the
City of Star ordinances are subject to the waiver provisions in subsection (6)
of this section:
   (1)   Canyon County zoning ordinance, as lawfully amended.
   (2)   City of Star's subdivision ordinance, Title 8, Chapter 6, of the
Unified Development Code, in the form existing as of January 1, 2022, or as may
be amended, except for simple division (lot split) provisions and except for
hearing procedures. The county's hearing procedures shall apply.
   (3)   The following City of Star ordinances apply, even when in conflict
with otherwise applicable county provisions:
      A.   City road widths and profiles found in Title 8, Chapter 6, Article B
of the City of Star Unified Development Code, in the form existing as of
January 1, 2022, or as may be amended;
      B.   Unified Development Code of the City of Star, Title 8, Chapter 8,
Article D, "Star Landscape Ordinance", in the form existing as of January 1,
2022, or as may be amended.
      C.   City of Star adopted Economic Corridors Access and Roadway
Connection Management Plan ("ECMAP"), in the form existing as of January 1,
2022, or as may be amended. The ECAMP shall be given the same consideration as
the adopted Canyon County functional classification map.
   (4)   Except as set forth above, all other standards of applicable Canyon
County codes and ordinances; and
   (5)   For subdivisions and planned unit developments applied for in the Star
area of city impact, Canyon County will require on the face of each final plat
a certification line for execution by the City of Star engineer attesting to
the plat's conformance with the city standards set forth above. Also, Canyon
County will not sign a final plat, or authorize the plat to be recorded, prior
to the city engineer's signing the plat.
   (6)   Waiver of City of Star Ordinance Provisions: The requirements listed
in the Star ordinances, identified in subsections (2) and (3) of this section,
may be waived by the Canyon County board of commissioners in its discretion. An
applicant for such waiver bears the burden of persuasion and must specifically
state the reasons why a waiver is necessary and prove said waiver will not
cause an adverse effect to the health, safety and welfare of the community and
that the requirements sought to be waived constitute an undue hardship. For the
purpose of this section, increased financial expense associated with a
requirement, by itself, does not constitute an undue hardship. Notice of the
requested waiver must be given to the City of Star not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing on the waiver application. Any further notice on the
proposed waiver will be provided to the City of Star at least seven (7) days
prior to any public hearing. Written objections from the City of Star will be
considered by the Canyon County commissioners. The application for waiver must
show that prior to filing the application, the applicant first sought consent
from the City of Star to the waiver, indicating the date of the request and the
response, if any, from the city of Star. In granting any waiver, the county may
impose any conditions the county deems necessary to help mitigate any adverse
effect to the health, safety and welfare of the community. The application for
waiver will first be considered by the Canyon County planning and zoning
commission at a public hearing, which shall make recommendations to the Canyon
County board of commissioners for their consideration at a public hearing. The
public hearings held before the Canyon County planning and zoning commission
and the Canyon County board of commissioners will be conducted in accordance
with the notice and hearing procedures provided by subsections
07-17-09(4) and (5) of this code. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-10: ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT PROPOSALS:
All proposed amendments to the text and/or map of the Canyon County zoning
ordinance or subdivision regulations, which may relate to the Star area of city
impact, shall be referred by the county to the City of Star in the same manner
as provided for in subsection 09-01-08(3) of this chapter. Any recommendation
of the City of Star shall be considered in the same manner as provided for in
subsection 09-01-08(3) of this chapter. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-11: AMENDMENT OF COUNTY AND CITY ORDINANCES RELATING TO AREA OF CITY
IMPACT AND NOTICE:
   (1)   Prior to amendment by the county of any Canyon County ordinance
applicable in the Star area of city impact as set forth in section
09-01-09 of this chapter, Canyon County shall forward the proposed change(s) to
the City of Star for review and comment at least thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the first Canyon County public hearing at which such amendment(s) will
be considered. Any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be
provided to the City of Star at least seven (7) days prior to the public
hearing.
   (2)   Prior to amendment by the city of any City of Star ordinance
applicable in the Star area of city impact as set forth in section
09-01-09 of this chapter, the City of Star shall forward the proposed change(s)
to Canyon County for review and comment at least thirty (30) days prior to the
first City of Star public hearing at which such amendment(s) will be
considered. Any further notice of proposed changes to the proposal will be
provided to Canyon County at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-12: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be adhered to in processing applications within
the Star area of city impact:
   (1)   Land Use Applications: All land use applications submitted to Canyon
County including, but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances and
land divisions requiring notification of a public hearing, shall be referred to
the City of Star in the manner as provided for in subsection 09-01-08(3) of
this chapter.
   (2)   Subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments And Rezones: Applications for
subdivisions, planned unit developments, and rezones within the Star area of
city impact shall occur as a result of a request for annexation to Star;
however, Canyon County may consider such applications in those exceptions where
annexation is not approved by Star or where the parcel on which such
application is filed is not contiguous to the Star, and therefore cannot be
annexed.
   (3)   Notice Contents: The county's notice to the City of Star, as provided
for by subsection 09-01-08(3) of this chapter, shall include with the notice a
copy of the application and concept plan or plat and irrigation plan, and any
other relevant information submitted by the applicant.
   (4)   City Impact Area Representation: Recommendations for city impact area
representation on the county planning and zoning commission may be made by the
City of Star to the board of county commissioners at any time and will be acted
upon by said board as the need arises and as the board of county commissioners
deems appropriate.
   (5)   City/County Internal Procedures: Each party shall determine its own
internal procedures as may be deemed appropriate and adequate for making
recommendations to the other party on proposed actions and on its handling of
proposed amendments to its own plan and/or ordinances. An appeal made by the
City of Star, or by the county to the city, shall be processed by the
nonappealing party in accordance with the internal procedures of the
nonappealing party. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-13: AMENDMENT OF STAR AREA OF CITY IMPACT (PLANS AND ORDINANCES)
ORDINANCE:
   (1)   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), the City of Star or
the board of county commissioners may request, in writing, the renegotiation of
any provision of this chapter at any time. Within thirty (30) days of receipt
of such written request by either party, an initial meeting between the two (2)
jurisdictions should occur.
   (2)   During renegotiation, all provisions of this chapter shall remain in
effect until this chapter is amended or a substitute ordinance is adopted by
both the City of Star and Canyon County, in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, or until a
declaratory judgment from district court is final.
   (3)   Amendments to this chapter shall be processed using the notice and
hearing requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6509. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-14: SEVERABILITY:
Should any action or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or a part thereof other than the part declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
09-19-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval, and
publication. (Ord. 22-003, 3-15-2022)
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
ARTICLE 1
CANYON URBAN RENEWAL AREA
SECTION:
10-01-01: Plan Adopted
10-01-01: PLAN ADOPTED:
The Canyon Urban Renewal Plan, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance 99-008
and marked as Exhibit F and made a part thereof by attachment, be and the same
hereby is approved. Said Ordinance and Plan are available for inspection in the
office of the County Clerk. (Ord. 99-008, 11-8-1999, eff. retroactive to 1-1-
1999)
CHAPTER 11
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
ARTICLE 1
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
11-01-01: Short Title
11-01-03: Rules Of Construction
11-01-05: Definitions
11-01-07: Advisory Committees
11-01-09: Fee Schedule; Exemptions
11-01-11: Collection Of Impact Fees; Enforcement
11-01-13: Certification Of Assessment
11-01-15: Individual Assessment
11-01-17: Developer Credits And Reimbursement
11-01-19: Methodology For The Calculation Of Development Impact Fees
11-01-21: Extraordinary Impact
11-01-23: Fee Payer Refunds
11-01-25: Expenditure Of Impact Fees
11-01-27: Appeals, Protest And Mediation
11-01-01: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Canyon County development
impact fee chapter. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-03: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION: 
Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined herein or in the Idaho
development impact fee act (Act) at Idaho Code §§ 67-8201, et seq., shall have
their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-05: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
                          A designee by the board to administer specific
                          portions of this chapter. A designee may be an
                          official of a separate governmental entity where the
                          board has entered into an intergovernmental agreement
IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR: with such entity for the administration and
                          imposition of development impact fees pursuant to the
                          act. Where no designation is made the County's
                          development services director shall be the default
                          designee.
                          The government entity authorized to make expenditures
                          of impact fees collected in accordance with the
                          chapter. The impact fee recipient shall be either the
IMPACT FEE RECIPIENT:     County or a separate governmental entity where the
                          board has entered into an intergovernmental agreement
                          with such entity for the administration and
                          imposition of development impact fees pursuant to the
                          Act. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
 
11-01-07: ADVISORY COMMITTEES:
   (1)   Establishment And Purpose: Pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8205, the board
shall establish by resolution a development impact fee advisory committee
(committee), whose purpose is to carry out the duties as set forth in Idaho
Code § 67-8205(3), as it may be amended.
   (2)   Membership: Each committee shall be composed of not fewer than five
(5) members. Two (2) members or more shall be active in the business of
development, building or real estate.
   (3)   Meetings: Meetings may be called by each committee by giving
reasonable notice of the time and place of the meeting in accordance with the
open meetings law, Idaho §§ 74-201, et seq., as may be amended.
   (4)   When another governmental entity anticipates it will request that the
board enter an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to § 8204A of the act for
the administration and imposition of development impact fees pursuant to the
act such entity shall establish a joint development impact fee advisory
committee, which shall operate in collaboration with the board's advisory
committee to fulfill the committee's duties under the act. A joint development
impact fee advisory committee shall comply with the membership and meeting
requirements in this section.
   (5)   Review Of Committee's Reports And Recommendations: The board and the
impact fee recipients, as the case may be, shall each consider the advisory
committee's recommended revision(s) at least once every twelve (12) months.
   (6)   Review And Modification Of Capital Improvements Plan: Unless the board
deems some other period is appropriate, at least once every five (5) years,
commencing from the date of the original adoption of the capital improvements
plan, the board and the impact fee recipients shall review and update the
capital improvements plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho
Code § 67-8206, as amended. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-09: FEE SCHEDULE; EXEMPTIONS:
   (1)   Fee Schedule: Each development impact fee shall be calculated in
accordance with the fee schedule set forth in this chapter providing for
standard fees based on the total number of dwelling units or square feet of
nonresidential space in the development, unless (a) the fee payer requests an
individual assessment pursuant to this chapter; or (b) the impact fee
administrator finds the development will have an extraordinary impact pursuant
to this chapter. The methodology for determining the costs per service unit
provided for in the fee schedule is set forth in each capital improvements plan
as adopted by the County pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8208, as it may be
amended.
   (2)   Developer’s Election: A developer shall have the right to elect to pay
a project's proportionate share of system improvements costs by payment of
impact fee according to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the
development project's proportionate share of system improvements costs, except
as provided in Idaho Code § 67-8214(3), as it may be amended.
   (3)   Procedures:
      A.   Building Permit: Upon submittal of complete building permit plans or
manufactured home installation permit for the development to the County, the
impact fee administrator shall calculate the impact fee for the development
within thirty (30) days of submittal unless:
         1.   The fee payer had previously requested and been granted an
individual assessment pursuant to this chapter; or
         2.   The impact fee administrator has previously determined the
development may have an extraordinary impact pursuant to this chapter.
   (4)   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
      A.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which is
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
      B.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the
number of service units;
      C.   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured/mobile home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that the number of
service units does not increase;
      D.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
      E.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of service units;
      F.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such
as tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements; or
      G.   The installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle if the fee payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either: (a) a modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle was legally in place on the
lot or space prior to the effective date of this chapter; or (b) an impact fee
has been paid previously for the modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle on that same lot or space.
   (5)   Exemption Claim Process: A fee payer shall claim an exempt development
activity upon application of a building permit or manufactured/mobile home
installation permit, or if no building permit or manufactured/mobile home
installation permit required, prior to the time construction commences. Any
exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee payer. Claims for
exemption shall be determined by the County within fifteen (15) days of receipt
of the claim for exemption. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-11: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES; ENFORCEMENT:
   (1)   Payment Of Fees: An impact fee shall be paid to the County at the
following times:
      A.   If a building permit or manufactured/mobile home installation permit
is required, then before or at the time the permit is issued;
      B.   If no building permit or manufactured/mobile home installation
permit is required, then at the time that construction commences; or
      C.   At such other time as the fee payer or developer and the County have
agreed upon in writing.
   (2)   Enforcement: When any impact fee is due pursuant to this chapter, or
pursuant to the terms of any written agreement between a fee payer and the
County, and such impact fee has not been paid in a timely manner, the County
may exercise any or all of the following powers as applicable to its authority,
in any combination, to enforce the collection of the impact fee:
      A.   Withhold building permits, manufactured home installation permits,
or other County development approval related to the development for which the
impact fee is due until all impact fees due have been paid, and issue stop work
orders, and revoke or suspend a building permit;
      B.   Add interest to the impact fee not paid in full at the legal rate
provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104, as it may be amended, plus five percent
(5%) beginning on the date at which the payment of the impact fee was due until
paid in full;
      C.   Impose a penalty of five percent (5%) of the total impact fee (not
merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per month beginning on
the date at which the payment of the impact fee was due until paid in full; and
      D.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code § 67-8213 (4)
for failure to timely pay an impact fee following the procedures contained in
Idaho Code title 45, chapter 5. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-13: CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT:
   (1)   A fee payer may request a written certification of the impact fee
schedule or individual assessment which shall establish the impact fee for that
development. Such certification shall establish the impact fee so long as there
is no material change to the particular development as identified in the
individual assessment application, or the impact fee schedule. A certification
may be applied for in the following manner:
      A.   Requests for certification shall be in writing and made to the
County and impact fee administrator. Within thirty (30) days after receiving
such request, the impact fee administrator shall issue a written certification
of the amount of the impact fee due for the proposed development. The
certification shall include an explanation of the calculation of the impact fee
including an explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code § 67-8207 and
shall also specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is
intended to be used. The impact fee administrator shall provide the
certification to the fee payer and the County. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-15: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT:
   (1)   In lieu of calculating the amount of the development impact fee using
the impact fee schedules in this chapter, an individual assessment of impact
fees is permitted.
      A.   Individual Assessment Process: A fee payer may file a written
request for an individual assessment of the development prior to the receipt of
a building permit or other necessary approvals or entitlements from Canyon
County. A request for an individual assessment process shall involve
consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant information submitted by
the fee payer to adjust the amount of the impact fee.
         1.   Each individual assessment request and supporting documentation
submitted by the fee payer shall be based on the same level of service
standards and unit costs for system improvements used in the applicable capital
improvements plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology,
and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions used.
         2.   Each individual assessment request delivered to the County may
then be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications as the basis for
calculating the impact fee. The criteria for acceptance, rejection or
acceptance with modifications shall be whether the individual assessment is a
more accurate measure of demand for system improvements element(s) created by
the proposed development, or the costs of those facilities, than the applicable
fee shown in the fee schedule, based on the standards in § 67-8207, Idaho Code.
         3.   The impact fee administrator shall issue a written decision
within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed request for individual
assessment together with all supporting information from the fee payer, so as
not to unreasonably delay the developer's (fee payer's) subsequent applications
to the County for building permits.
         4.   The decision on an application for an individual assessment shall
include an explanation of the calculation of the impact fee, shall specify the
system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used, and
shall include an explanation of those factors identified in Idaho Code § 67-
8207. The impact fee administrator shall provide notice of final determination
of an individual assessment to the fee payer and County.
         5.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with
modifications by the County then the impact fee due under this chapter for such
development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment. (Ord.
20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-17: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
Credits or reimbursements due to a fee payer pursuant to this section must be
based upon a written agreement with the County and impact fee recipient
negotiated in good faith, prior to the construction, funding or contribution
made by the fee payer which written agreement shall provide for the amount of
credit or the amount, time and form of reimbursement. Subject to this written
agreement, a fee payer shall receive credit or reimbursement for the present
value of any system improvement, the value of dedication of real property to
the impact fee recipient, or other contribution required by the County and
impact fee recipient from the developer for system improvements of the category
for which the impact fee is being collected, including system improvements paid
for pursuant to a local improvement district.
   (1)   Limitations: All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be
subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this
chapter:
      A.   No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or
construction of project improvements or site related facilities.
      B.   A fee payer shall not receive an offset or credit in excess of that
amount to be collected from the assessed impact fee.
      C.   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets or credits shall not
exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the CIP(s) for
the category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee is
imposed.
      D.   An offset or credit shall lapse ten (10) years after receipt of the
first building permit issued after the effective date of this chapter or within
such period as may be otherwise agreed to by written agreement.
      E.   The County will not reimburse the property owner or fee payer for an
offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected
pursuant to this chapter or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due
for the new development for the category of capital improvement.
      F.   The amount of any offset or credit shall not include the amount
attributable to participation by the County in the development.
   (2)   Application: An offset or credit associated with a plat shall be
applied to an impact fee at the time of application for the first building
permit for the subject property and will continue to be applied until the
offset or credit is exhausted for that development. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-19: METHODOLOGY FOR THE CALCULATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
   (1)   General Provisions:
      A.   Accounting Principles: The calculation of a development impact fee
shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
development impact fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee
may result in an incidental benefit to owners or developers within the service
area other than the fee payer.
      B.   Levels Of Service: The impact fee shall be calculated on the basis
of levels of service for public facilities in the applicable adopted capital
improvement plan that are applicable to existing development as well as new
growth and development. The construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement
of new or existing public facilities for which the impact fee is imposed shall
be attributable to the capacity demands generated by the new development.
   (2)   Methodology; Proportionate Methodology: The impact fee shall not
exceed a proportionate share of the cost of the system improvements determined
in accordance with Idaho Code § 67-8207, as it may be amended. Impact fees
shall be based on actual system improvements costs or reasonable estimates of
such costs. The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated using the
methodology contained in the adopted capital improvements plan.
   (3)   Proportionate Share Determination:
      A.   The impact fee shall be based on a reasonable and fair formula or
method under which the impact fee imposed does not exceed a proportionate share
of the costs incurred or to be incurred in the provision of system improvements
to serve the new development. The proportionate share is the costs attributable
to the new development after considering the following:
         1.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money,
dedication of land or construction of system improvements;
         2.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
         3.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated to system
improvements; and
         4.   All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
      B.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements to be paid by the fee payer, the following factors shall be
considered and accounted for in the calculation of the impact fee:
         1.   The costs of existing system improvements within the service
area;
         2.   The means by which existing system improvements have been
financed;
         3.   The extent to which the new development will contribute to system
improvements costs through taxation, assessments, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to system improvements costs
through fee payer contributions;
         4.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute
to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
         5.   The extent to which the new development should be credited for
providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area;
         6.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
development;
         7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
         8.   The availability of other sources of funding system improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers and special taxation. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-21: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT:
   (1)   Board's development service director may make a preliminary
determination of extraordinary impact during local land use planning act
proceedings, chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, or prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The County shall notify the impact fee administrator of such
determination and the impact fee administrator shall review and determine
whether or not a development application will impose extraordinary impact.
   (2)   Within thirty (30) days after impact fee administrator's receipt from
the County of the development application, the impact fee administrator will
notify the fee payer and the County of the impact fee administrator's initial
determination that the development may impose an extraordinary impact. Such
notice shall include that a supplemental study, at the fee payer's expense will
be required.
   (3)   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a development
with extraordinary impact, the impact fee administrator shall meet with the fee
payer to discuss whether the fee payer wants to: (a) pay for the supplemental
study necessary to determine the system improvements costs related to the
proposed development; (b) modify the proposal to avoid generating extraordinary
impact; or (c) withdraw the application for certification, or development
approval.
   (4)   If the fee payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to
document the proposed development's proportionate share of system improvements
costs, then the impact fee administrator and the fee payer shall jointly select
an individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such study. The fee
payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization
to pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental
study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless
the fee payer agrees to a longer time.
   (5)   Once the study has been completed, the fee payer may choose to: (a)
pay the proportionate share of system improvements costs documented by the
supplemental study; or (b) modify the proposed development to reduce such
costs; or (c) withdraw the application. The impact fee administrator shall
notify the County of the fee payer's choice within fifteen (15) days of the fee
payer's decision.
   (6)   If the fee payer agrees to pay the system improvements costs
documented in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to
writing between the County, impact fee recipient, and the fee payer prior to
review and consideration of any application for any development approval or
building permit related to the proposed development.
   (7)   Notwithstanding any agreement by the fee payer to pay the
proportionate share of system improvements costs documented by the supplemental
study, nothing in this chapter shall obligate the County to approve development
that results in an extraordinary impact. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-23: FEE PAYER REFUNDS:
   (1)   Duty To Refund:
      A.   An impact fee shall be refunded to a fee payer, or successor in
interest, in the following circumstances:
         1.   Service is available but never provided;
         2.   A building permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured
home, is denied or abandoned;
         3.   The fee payer pays an impact fee under protest and a subsequent
review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment determines
that the fee paid exceeded the fee payer's proportionate share;
         4.   The impact fee is collected and the impact fee was not
appropriated or expended pursuant to the act.
      B.   Any impact fee paid shall be refunded if the system improvements in
accordance with this chapter have not commenced construction, or funds
appropriated for such construction, within eight (8) years after the date on
which such fee was collected. Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of
record of the parcel for which the impact fee was paid. Impact fees may be held
for longer than eight (8) years but in no event longer than eleven (11) years
from the date collected if it is identified in writing: (a) a reasonable cause
why the fees should be held longer than eight (8) years; and (b) an anticipated
date by which the fees will be expended. In this event the impact fees so
identified shall be refunded in accordance with the written statement if
construction has not commenced, or funds are not appropriated for such
construction, on or before the date identified in such writing.
      C.   After an impact fee has been paid pursuant to this chapter and after
a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the County, no refund of any part
of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid is later
demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to
reduce the size of the project or the number of units in the project.
      D.   Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half (½) the
legal rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the
fee was originally paid.
   (2)   Process: The impact fee administrator shall make a determination of
whether a refund is due within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written
request for a refund from the fee payer, successor in interest, or an owner of
record of the property for which the fee was paid. When the right to a refund
exists, the refund shall be made within ninety (90) days after the
determination that a refund is due. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-25: EXPENDITURE OF IMPACT FEES:
Expenditures of impact fees collected under this chapter, including interest
earned, shall be made only for system improvements and either within or for the
benefit of the service area for which the impact fee was collected in
accordance with the capital improvements plan and as authorized by the Idaho
development impact fee act. Impact fees shall not be used for any purpose other
than system improvement costs to create additional improvements to serve new
growth. A portion of each impact fee collected may be designated as a surcharge
for reimbursement for the cost of preparing the capital improvements plan in
accordance with Idaho Code § 67-8208. The surcharge shall not exceed the
development's proportionate share of the cost of preparing the capital
improvements plan. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-01-27: APPEALS, PROTEST AND MEDIATION:
Appeal Of Administrative Decisions By Fee Payer: Except for the determination
of an individual assessment, a fee payer may appeal a final decision of the
impact fee administrator by filing a written notice of administrative appeal
with the board of county commissioners within thirty (30) days of: 1) a written
decision by the impact fee administrator; or 2) the acceptance of payment of
the impact fee under protest. The appeal shall contain a written explanation of
the appeal and documentation to be considered by the board. A fee payer may pay
an impact fee under protest in order to obtain a building permit and shall not
be precluded from exercising the right of appeal as provided herein.
   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a decision of the impact
fee administrator may be appealed by the developer or fee payer to the board
for the following reasons:
      A.   The applicability of an impact fee to the new development;
      B.   The method of calculating the amount of the impact fee;
      C.   The availability or the amount of the offset or credit;
      D.   The application of the offset or credit against the impact fee due;
or
      E.   The amount of a refund due.
   (2)   The burden of proof shall be on the fee payer to demonstrate that the
impact fee administrator's decision is in error. Following a hearing on the
appeal, the board shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the
conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the board shall constitute
the final decision.
   (3)   The board shall schedule the appeal hearing as soon as practical. The
board may affirm, reject, or revise the decision of the impact fee
administrator and shall issue a written decision providing findings of fact and
conclusions of law supporting the decision. The written decision of the board
shall be mailed to the impact fee administrator and the fee payer.
   (4)   Mediation: At any time during the appeal process, the fee payer and
the board may voluntarily enter into mediation with respect to any disagreement
related to the impact fee for a proposed development. Mediation shall be
conducted by a qualified independent party selected by mutual agreement. The
cost of such mediation will be shared equally by the fee payer and board. (Ord.
20-018, 6-22-2020)
ARTICLE 2
FIRE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
11-02-01: Fire District Intergovernmental Agreements
11-02-03: Establishment Of Fire District Service Areas
11-02-05: Establishment Of Fire District Fee Schedule
11-02-07: Establishment Of Fire District Trust Funds; Trust Accounts
11-02-09: Caldwell Rural Fire Protection District Impact Fee
11-02-11: Kuna Rural Fire District Impact Fee
11-02-13: Marsing Rural Fire District Impact Fee
11-02-15: Middleton Rural Fire District Impact Fee
11-02-17: Nampa Fire Protection District Impact Fee
11-02-19: Star Fire Protection District Impact Fee
11-02-21: Wilder Rural Fire Protection District Impact Fee
11-02-01: FIRE DISTRICT INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
Each fire district, identified in this chapter, has entered into an
intergovernmental agreement with the County pursuant to I.C. § 67-8204A for the
purpose of agreeing to collect and expend development impact fees for the fire
district's systems improvements in compliance with the Idaho development impact
fee act and this chapter. Each fire district, identified in this chapter shall
annually adopt a capital budget. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-03: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT SERVICE AREAS:
The adopted capital improvements plan for each of the fire districts identified
in this chapter defines each fire district's service area, which service areas
include the land, in unincorporated Canyon County that is within the boundaries
of each identified fire district. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-05: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT FEE SCHEDULE:
Impact fees for each fire district as established in this chapter are hereby
imposed on all new developments located within the boundaries of the fire
district in unincorporated Canyon County. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-07: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT TRUST FUNDS; TRUST ACCOUNTS:
   (1)   Trust Funds Established: A trust fund established by each identified
fire district will be maintained by the fire district for the purpose of
ensuring that all impact fees collected, pursuant to this chapter, are used to
address impacts reasonably attributable to new development for which the impact
fees are paid. The trust fund shall be divided into the trust accounts. All
funds in all trust accounts in the trust fund shall be maintained in an
interest bearing account. The interests earned on each trust account pursuant
to Idaho Code § 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by Idaho Code § 57-127, as it
may be amended, but shall be considered funds of the trust accounts and shall
be subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the impact fees on
which the interest is generated.
   (2)   Deposit Of Fire District Impact Fees: All monies paid by a fee payer,
pursuant to this chapter, shall be identified as fire district impact fees and
upon receipt by the fire district shall be promptly deposited by the fire
district in the appropriate trust accounts of the trust fund.
      A.   Monies in each trust account shall be spent in the order collected,
on a first-in/first-out basis.
      B.   A fire district shall maintain and keep accurate financial records
for each of their trust accounts which records shall:
         1.   Show the source and disbursement of all revenues;
         2.   Account for all monies received;
         3.   Ensure that the disbursement of funds from each trust account
shall be used solely and exclusively for the provisions of projects specified
in the capital improvements plan; and
         4.   Provide an annual accounting for each impact fee trust account
showing the source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were
funded, which annual accounting shall be provided to the County as part of the
annual audit process of this chapter. (Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-09: CALDWELL RURAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Caldwell rural fire protection
district is as follows:
         Residential (per dwelling unit)         $665.00
         Non-residential (per square foot)         $0.33
(Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-11: KUNA RURAL FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Kuna rural fire district is as
follows:
            Residential (per dwelling unit)      $825.00
            Non-residential (per square foot)      $0.41
(Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-13: MARSING RURAL FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Marsing rural fire district is as
follows:
            Residential (per dwelling unit)      $1,238.00
            Non-residential (per square foot)      $0.62
(Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-15: MIDDLETON RURAL FIRE DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Middleton rural fire district is
as follows:
            Residential (per dwelling unit)      $849.00
            Non-residential (per square foot)      $0.42
(Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-17: NAMPA FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Nampa fire protection district is
as follows:
            Residential (per dwelling unit)      $560.00
            Non-residential (per square foot)      $0.28
(Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-19: STAR FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Star fire protection district is
as follows:
            Residential (per dwelling unit)      $809.00
            Non-residential (per square foot)      $0.38
(Ord. 20-018, 6-22-2020)
11-02-21: WILDER RURAL FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT IMPACT FEE:
The impact fee costs per service unit for the Wilder rural fire protection
district is as follows:
            Residential (per dwelling unit)      $825.00
            Non-residential (per square foot)      $0.41
ARTICLE 3
CANYON HIGHWAY DISTRICT NO. 4 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
SECTION
11-03-01: Short Title
11-03-03: Rules Of Construction
11-03-05: Definitions
11-03-07: Advisory Committees
11-03-09:Fee Schedule; Exemptions
11-03-11: Collection Of Impact Fees; Enforcement
11-03-13: Certification Of Assessment
11-03-15: Individual Assessment
11-03-17: Developer Credits And Reimbursement
11-03-19: Methodology For The Calculation Of Development Impact Fees
11-03-21: Extraordinary Impact
11-03-23: Fee Payer Refunds
11-03-25: Expenditure Of Impact Fees
11-03-27: Appeals, Protest And Mediation
11-03-01: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Canyon Highway District No.
4 Development Impact Fee Ordinance.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-03: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined herein or in the Idaho
Development Impact Fee Act (Act) at Idaho Code §§ 67-8201, et seq., shall have
their plain, ordinary, and common meaning.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-05: DEFINITIONS:
 
                          Canyon Highway District No. 4 Canyon Highway District
                          No. 4, a highway district organized and existing
CHD4:                     under Chapter 13 of Title 40 Idaho Code, whose
                          boundaries are within Canyon County and who is the
                          Impact Fee Recipient.
                          CHD4's Engineer or CHD4 Board of Commissioners
IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR: appointed Staff, who shall be the designee of the
                          Canyon County Board to administer specific portions
                          of this chapter.
IMPACT FEE RECIPIENT:     CHD4 who is authorized to make expenditures of Impact
                          Fees collected in accordance with this chapter.
 
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-07: ADVISORY COMMITTEES:
Establishment and Purpose. Pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8205, the Board shall
establish by resolution a Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee
(Committee), whose purpose is to carry out the duties as set forth in Idaho
Code § 67-8205(3), as it may be amended.
   (1)   Membership. The Committee shall be composed of not fewer than five (5)
members. Two (2) members or more shall be active in the business of
development, building or real estate and Two (2) members or more who are not
active in business of development, building or real estate and all members must
reside within the jurisdictional boundaries of the County.
   (2)   Meetings. Meetings may be called by the Committee by giving reasonable
notice of the time and place of the meeting in accordance with the Open
Meetings Law, Idaho § 74-201, et seq., as may be amended.
   (3)   CHD4 may establish a Preliminary Development Impact Fee Advisory
Committee, which shall operate in collaboration with the Board's Advisory
Committee to fulfill the Committee's duties under this Chapter and the Act.
   (4)   Review of Committee's Reports and Recommendations: The Board and the
Impact Fee Recipients, as the case may be, shall each consider the Advisory
Committee's recommended revision(s) at least once every twelve (12) months.
   (5)   Review and Modification of Capital Improvements Plan. At least once
every five (5) years, commencing from the date of the original adoption of the
Capital Improvements Plan, the Board and the Impact Fee Recipients shall review
update the Capital Improvements Plan in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Idaho Code Section 67-8206, as amended.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-09: FEE SCHEDULE; EXEMPTIONS:
   (1)   Impact Fee Schedule. Each Development Impact Fee shall be calculated
in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the Impact Fee Schedule of
each CHD4 Capital Improvements Plan as adopted by the County pursuant to Idaho
Code § 67-8208, and as it may be amended.
   (2)   Developer's Election. A Developer shall have the right to elect to pay
a project's proportionate share of System Improvements Costs by payment of
Impact Fee according to the Impact Fee Schedule as full and complete payment of
the Development project's proportionate share of System Improvements Costs,
except as provided in Idaho Code § 67-8214(3), as it may be amended.
   (3)   Procedures:
      A.   Building Permit. Upon submittal of complete building permit plans or
manufactured home installation permit for the Development to the County, the
County Building Official shall determine if the parcel for which the permit has
been submitted is located within a Service Area that requires assessment of
traffic impact fees under this ordinance.
         1.   If the parcel is not located within a Service Area with traffic
impact fees, the provisions of this ordinance do not apply.
         2.   If the parcel is located within a Service Area with traffic
impact fees, the County Building Official shall withhold final issuance of the
building permit until confirmation from CHD4 is received indicating that:
            a.   No impact fee assessment is due for the type or location of
the building permit; or
            b.   The appropriate impact fees have been paid to CHD4; or
            c.   An agreement has been reached to collect the impact fees at
another time; or
            d.   The Fee Payer had previously requested and been granted an
individual assessment pursuant to this chapter; or
            e.   The Impact Fee Administrator has previously determined the
Development may have an Extraordinary Impact pursuant to this chapter.
   (4)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
      A.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which is
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
      B.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the
number of Service Units;
      C.   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured/mobile home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that, the number of
Service Units does not increase;
      D.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
      E.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of Service Units;
      F.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such
as tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of System Improvements; or
      G.   The installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle if the Fee Payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either: (a) a modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle was legally in place on the
lot or space prior to the effective date of this chapter; or (b) an Impact Fee
has been paid previously for the modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle on that same lot or space.
   (5)   Exemption Claim Process. A Fee Payer shall claim an exempt development
activity upon application of a building permit or manufactured/mobile home
installation permit, or if no building permit or manufactured/mobile home
installation permit required, prior to the time construction commences. Any
exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the Fee Payer. Claims for
exemption shall be determined by the County within fifteen (15) days of receipt
of the claim for exemption.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-11: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES; ENFORCEMENT:
   (1)   Payment of Fees. An Impact Fee, as provided in Section 12-02-09 of
this Chapter, shall be paid to CHD4 pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement
by and between the County and CHD4 (see Section 12-02-02 of this chapter) at
the following times:
      A.   If a Building Permit or manufactured/mobile home installation permit
is required, then before or at the time an access permit is issued by CHD4;
      B.   If no Building Permit or manufactured/mobile home installation
permit is required, then at the time that construction commences; or
      C.   At such other time as the Fee Payer or Developer, the Impact Fee
Administrator, and CHD4 have agreed upon in writing.
   (2)   Determination of Fees: The amount of the Impact Fee imposed, pursuant
to this chapter, shall be determined by the Impact Fee Administrator in
accordance with the service area Impact Fee Schedule.
   (3)   Enforcement. When any Impact Fee is due pursuant to this chapter, or
pursuant to the terms of any written agreement between a Fee Payer, CHD4, and
the County, and such Impact Fee has not been paid in a timely manner, the
County may exercise any or all of the following powers as applicable to its
authority, in any combination, to enforce the collection of the Impact Fee:
      A.   Withhold Building Permits, manufactured home installation permits,
or other County Development Approval related to the Development for which the
Impact Fee is due until all Impact Fees due have been paid, and issue stop work
orders, and revoke or suspend a Building Permit;
      B.   Add interest to the Impact Fee not paid in full at the legal rate
provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104, as it may be amended, plus five percent
(5%) beginning on the date at which the payment of the Impact Fee was due until
paid in full;
      C.   Impose a penalty of five percent (5%) of the total Impact Fee (not
merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per month beginning on
the date at which the payment of the Impact Fee was due until paid in full; and
      D.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code § 67-8213(4)
for failure to timely pay an Impact Fee following the procedures contained in
Idaho Code Title 45, Chapter 5.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-13: CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT:
   (1)   Fee Payer may request a written certification of the Impact Fee
Schedule or individual assessment which shall establish the impact fee for that
Development. Such certification shall establish the Impact Fee so long as there
is no material change to the particular Development as identified in the
individual assessment application, or the impact fee schedule. A certification
may be applied for in the following manner:
      A.   Requests for certification shall be in writing and made to CHD4
Impact Fee Administrator. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such request,
the Impact Fee Administrator shall issue a written certification of the amount
of the Impact Fee due for the proposed Development. The certification shall
include an explanation of the calculation of the Impact Fee including an
explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code§ 67-8207 and shall also
specify the System Improvement(s) for which the Impact Fee is intended to be
used. The Impact Fee Administrator shall provide the certification to the Fee
Payer and the County.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-15: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT:
   (1)   In lieu of calculating the amount of the Development Impact Fee using
the impact fee schedules in this chapter, an individual assessment of Impact
Fees is permitted.
      A.   Individual Assessment Process. A Fee Payer may file a written
request for an individual assessment of the Development prior to the receipt of
a building permit or other necessary approvals or entitlements from Canyon
County. A request for an individual assessment process shall involve
consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant information submitted by
the Fee Payer to adjust the amount of the Impact Fee.
         1.   Each individual assessment request and supporting documentation
submitted by the Fee Payer shall be based on the same level of service
standards and unit costs for System Improvements used in the applicable Capital
Improvements Plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology,
and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions used.
         2.   Each individual assessment request delivered to CHD4 may then be
accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by the Impact Fee
Administrator as the basis for calculating the Impact Fee. The criteria for
acceptance, rejection or acceptance with modifications shall be whether the
individual assessment is a more accurate measure of demand for System
Improvements element(s) created by the proposed Development, or the costs of
those facilities, than the applicable fee shown in the fee schedule, based on
the standards in Section 67-8207, Idaho Code.
         3.   The Impact Fee Administrator shall issue a written decision
within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed request for individual
assessment together with all supporting information from the Fee Payer, so as
not to unreasonably delay the Developer's (Fee Payer's) subsequent applications
to the County for Building Permits.
         4.   The decision on an application for an individual assessment shall
include an explanation of the calculation of the Impact Fee, shall specify the
System Improvement(s) for which the Impact Fee is intended to be used, and
shall include an explanation of those factors identified in Idaho Code § 67-
8207. The Impact Fee Administrator shall provide notice of final determination
of an individual assessment to the Fee Payer and County.
         5.   If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with
modifications by CHD4 then the Impact Fee due under this chapter for such
Development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-17: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
Credits or reimbursements due to a Fee Payer pursuant to this section must be
based upon a written agreement with CHD4 and Impact Fee Recipient negotiated in
good faith with the Impact Fee Administrator, prior to the construction,
funding or contribution made by the Fee Payer which written agreement shall
provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and form of reimbursement.
Subject to this written agreement, a fee payer shall receive credit or
reimbursement for the present value of any system improvement, the value of
dedication of real property to the Impact Fee Recipient, or other contribution
required by CHD4 and Impact Fee Recipient from the developer for system
improvements of the category for which the impact fee is being collected,
including system improvements paid for pursuant to a local improvement
district.
   (1)   Limitations: All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be
subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this
chapter:
      A.   No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or
construction of project improvements or site related facilities.
      B.   A fee payer shall not receive an offset or credit in excess of that
amount to be collected from the assessed impact fee.
      C.   The unit costs used to calculate the offsets or credits shall not
exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the CIP(s) for
the category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee is
imposed.
      D.   An offset or credit shall lapse ten (10) years after receipt of the
first building permit issued after the effective date of this chapter or within
such period as may be otherwise agreed to by written agreement.
      E.   CHD4 will not reimburse the property owner or fee payer for an
offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected
pursuant to this chapter or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due
for the new development for the category of capital improvement.
      F.   The amount of any offset or credit shall not include the amount
attributable to participation by CHD4 in the development.
   (2)   Application: An offset or credit associated with a plat shall be
applied to an impact fee at the time of application for the first building
permit for the subject property and will continue to be applied until the
offset or credit is exhausted for that development.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-19: METHODOLOGY FOR THE CALCULATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
   (1)   General Provisions.
      A.   Accounting Principles. The calculation of a Development Impact Fee
shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
development impact fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee
may result in an incidental benefit to owners or Developers within the service
area other than the Fee Payer.
      B.   Levels of Service. The Impact Fee shall be calculated on the basis
of levels of service for Public Facilities in the applicable adopted Capital
Improvements Plan that are applicable to existing Development as well as new
growth and Development. The construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement
of new or existing Public Facilities for which the Impact Fee is imposed shall
be attributable to the capacity demands generated by the new Development.
   (2)   Methodology: Proportionate Methodology. The Impact Fee shall not
exceed a proportionate share of the cost of the System Improvements determined
in accordance with Idaho Code § 67-8207, as it may be amended. Impact Fees
shall be based on actual System Improvements Costs or reasonable estimates of
such costs. The amount of the Impact Fee shall be calculated using the
methodology contained in the adopted Capital Improvements Plan.
   (3)   Proportionate Share Determination.
      A.   The Impact Fee shall be based on a reasonable and fair formula or
method under which the Impact Fee imposed does not exceed a proportionate share
of the costs incurred or to be incurred in the provision of System Improvements
to serve the new Development. The proportionate share is the costs attributable
to the new Development after the considering the following:
         1.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money,
dedication of land or construction of System Improvements;
         2.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new Development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
         3.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated to System
Improvements; and
         4.   All other available sources of funding such System Improvements.
      B.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of System
Improvements to be paid by the Fee Payer, the following factors shall be
considered and accounted for in the calculation of the Impact Fee:
         1.   The costs of existing System Improvements within the Service
area;
         2.   The means by which existing System Improvements have been
financed;
         3.   The extent to which the new Development will contribute to System
Improvements Costs through taxation, assessments, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to System Improvements Costs
through Fee Payer contributions;
         4.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute
to the cost of existing System Improvements in the future;
         5.   The extent to which the new Development should be credited for
providing System Improvements, without charge to other properties within the
Service Area;
         6.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
Development;
         7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
         8.   The availability of other sources of funding System Improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers and special taxation.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-21: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT:
   (1)   Board's Development Service Director may make a preliminary
determination of Extraordinary Impact during Local Land Use Planning Act
proceedings, chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, or prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The County shall notify the Impact Fee Administrator of such
determination and the Impact Fee Administrator shall review and determine
whether or not a Development application will impose Extraordinary Impact.
   (2)   Within thirty (30) days after Impact Fee Administrator's receipt from
the County of the development application, the Impact Fee Administrator will
notify the Fee Payer and the County of the Impact Fee Administrator's initial
determination that the Development may impose an Extraordinary Impact. Such
notice shall include that a supplemental study, at the Fee Payer's expense will
be required.
   (3)   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a Development
with Extraordinary Impact, the Impact Fee Administrator shall meet with the Fee
Payer to discuss whether the Fee Payer wants to: (a) pay for the supplemental
study necessary to determine the System Improvements Costs related to the
proposed Development; (b) modify the proposal to avoid generating Extraordinary
Impact; or (c) withdraw the application for certification, or Development
approval.
   (4)   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to
document the proposed Development's proportionate share of System Improvements
Costs, then the Impact Fee Administrator and the Fee Payer shall jointly select
an individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such study. The Fee
Payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization
to pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental
study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless
the Fee Payer agrees to a longer time.
   (5)   Once the study has been completed, the Fee Payer may choose to: (a)
pay the proportionate share of System Improvements Costs documented by the
supplemental study; or (b) modify the proposed Development to reduce such
costs; or (c) withdraw the application. The Impact Fee Administrator shall
notify the County of the Fee Payer's choice within fifteen (15) days of the Fee
Payer's decision.
   (6)   If the Fee Payer agrees to pay the System Improvements Costs
documented in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to
writing between the County, CHD4, Impact Fee Recipient, and the Fee Payer prior
to review and consideration of any application for any Development approval or
Building Permit related to the proposed Development.
   (7)   Notwithstanding any agreement by the Fee Payer to pay the
proportionate share of System Improvements Costs documented by the supplemental
study, nothing in this ordinance shall obligate the County to approve
Development that results in an Extraordinary Impact.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-23: FEE PAYER REFUNDS:
   (1)   Duty to Refund:
      A.   An Impact Fee shall be refunded to a Fee Payer, or successor in
interest, in the circumstances: where the Service is available but never
provided.
      B.   A Building Permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured
home, is denied or abandoned.
      C.   The Fee Payer pays an Impact Fee under protest and the subsequent
review by the Administrator or appellate determination of the fee paid or the
completion of an individual assessment either grants or partially grants the
protest.
      D.   The Impact Fee is collected and the Impact Fee was not appropriated
or expended pursuant to the Act.
   (2)   Any Impact Fee paid shall be refunded if the System Improvements in
accordance with this chapter have not commenced construction, or funds
appropriated for such construction, within eight (8) years after the date on
which such fee was collected. Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of
record of the parcel for which the Impact Fee was paid. Impact Fees may be held
for longer than eight (8) years but in no event longer than eleven (11) years
from the date collected if it is identified in writing: (a) a reasonable cause
why the fees should be held longer than eight (8) years; and (b) an anticipated
date by which the fees will be expended. In this event the Impact Fees so
identified shall be refunded in accordance with the written statement if
construction has not commenced, or funds are not appropriated for such
construction, on or before the date identified in such writing.
   (3)   After an Impact Fee has been paid pursuant to this chapter and after a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the County, no refund of any part
of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid is later
demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to
reduce the size of the project or the number of units in the project.
   (4)   Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half the legal
rate provided for in Idaho Code § 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
originally paid.
   (5)   Process: The Impact Fee Administrator shall make a determination of
whether a refund is due within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written
request for a refund from the Fee Payer, successor in interest, or an owner of
record of the property for which the fee was paid. When the right to a refund
exists, the refund shall be made within ninety (90) days after the
determination that a refund is due.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-25: EXPENDITURE OF IMPACT FEES:
Expenditures of Impact Fees collected under this chapter, included interest
earned, shall be made only for System Improvements and either within or for the
benefit of the Service Area for which the Impact Fee was collected in
accordance with the Capital Improvements Plan and as authorized by the Idaho
Development Impact Fee Act. Impact Fees shall not be used for any purpose other
than System Improvement costs to create additional improvements to serve new
growth. A portion of each Impact Fee collected may be designated as a surcharge
for reimbursement for the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan in
accordance with Idaho Code Section 67-8208. The surcharge shall not exceed the
Development's proportionate share of the cost of preparing the Capital
Improvements Plan.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-03-27: APPEALS, PROTEST AND MEDIATION:
   (1)   Appeal of Administrative Decisions By Fee Payer: A Fee Payer may
appeal, within thirty (30) days of a final decision of the CHD4 Board of
Commissioners on the Fee Payer's appeal of a final decision of the Impact Fee
Administrator, by filing a written notice of appeal with the Board of County
Commissioners. The appeal shall contain a written explanation of the appeal and
documentation to be considered by the Board. A fee payer may pay an impact fee
under protest in order to obtain a building permit and shall not be precluded
from exercising the right of appeal as provided herein.
   (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a decision of the Impact
Fee Administrator may be appealed by the developer or fee payer to the Board
for the following reasons:
      A.   The applicability of an impact fee to the new development;
      B.   The method of calculating the amount of the impact fee;
      C.   The availability or the amount of the offset or credit;
      D.   The application of the offset or credit against the impact fee due;
or
      E.   The amount of a refund due.
   (3)   The burden of proof shall be on the Fee Payer to demonstrate that the
Impact Fee Administrator's decision is in error. Following a hearing on the
appeal, the Board shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the
conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the Board shall constitute
the final decision.
   (4)   The Board shall schedule the appeal hearing as soon as practical. The
Board may affirm, reject, or revise the decision of the Impact Fee
Administrator and shall issue a written decision providing findings of fact and
conclusions of law supporting the decision. The written decision of the Board
shall be mailed to the Impact Fee Administrator and the Fee Payer.
   (5)   Mediation: At any time during the appeal process, the Fee Payer and
the Board may voluntarily enter into mediation with respect to any disagreement
related to the impact fee for a proposed development. Mediation shall be
conducted by a qualified independent party selected by mutual agreement. The
cost of such mediation will be shared equally by the fee payer and Board.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
ARTICLE 4
CHD4 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
11-04-01: CHD4 Intergovernmental Agreement
11-04-03: Establishment Of CHD4 Service Areas
11-04-05: Establishment of CHD4 Fee Schedules
11-04-07: Establishment OF CHD4 Trust Funds; Trust Accounts
11-04-09: CHD4 Mid-Star Service Area Developmental Impact Fee
11-04-01: CHD4 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
CHD4 has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the County pursuant
to I.C. § 67-8204A for the purpose of agreeing to collect and expend
development impact fees for the CHD4's systems improvements in compliance with
the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act and this chapter. CHD4 shall annually
adopt a capital budget.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-04-03: ESTABLISHMENT OF CHD4 SERVICE AREAS:
The adopted Capital Improvements Plan(s) for CHD4 defines CHD4's Service Area
(s), which Service Areas include the land as described in each CHD4 Capital
Improvements Plan which lies within unincorporated Canyon County that is within
the boundaries of CHD4.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-04-05: ESTABLISHMENT OF CHD4 FEE SCHEDULES:
Impact Fees for CHD4 as established in this chapter are hereby imposed on all
new Development located within the boundaries of the Service Area(s) of CHD4 in
unincorporated Canyon County.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-04-07: ESTABLISHMENT OF CHD4 TRUST FUNDS; TRUST ACCOUNTS:
   (1)   Trust Funds Established. A Trust Fund shall be established and
maintained by CHD4 for each Service Area for the purpose of ensuring that all
Impact Fees collected, pursuant to this chapter, are used to address impacts
reasonably attributable to new Development within the Service Area for which
the Impact Fees are paid. Each Trust Fund shall be divided into the Trust
Accounts. All funds in all Trust Accounts in the Trust Fund shall be maintained
in an interest-bearing account. The interests earned on each Trust Account
pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by Idaho Code § 57-
127, as it may be amended, but shall be considered funds of the Trust Accounts
and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the Impact
Fees on which the interest is generated.
   (2)   Deposit of Highway District Impact Fees. All monies paid by a Fee
Payer within a Service Area, pursuant to this chapter, shall be identified as
CHD4 Impact Fees for that Service Area, and upon receipt by CHD4 shall be
promptly deposited by CHD4 in the appropriate Trust Accounts of the Trust Fund.
      A.   Monies in each Trust Account shall be spent in the order collected,
on a first- in/first-out basis.
      B.   CHD4 shall maintain and keep accurate financial records for each of
their Trust Accounts which records shall:
         1.   Show the source and disbursement of all revenues;
         2.   Account for all monies received;
         3.   Ensure that the disbursement of funds from each Trust Account
shall be used solely and exclusively for the provisions of projects specified
in the Capital Improvements Plan for the Service Area in which they were
collected; and
         4.   Provide an annual accounting for each Impact Fee Trust Account
showing the source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were
funded, which annual accounting shall be provided to the County as part of the
annual audit process of this chapter. (Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
11-04-09: CHD4 MID-STAR SERVICE AREA DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE:
   (1)   The Canyon Highway District No. 4 Mid-Star Service Area within CHD4 is
hereby defined as follows:
      Those lands within Canyon County, and within Canyon Highway District No.
4, lying east of Interstate 84 and north of the Boise River; and also, those
lands south of the Boise River within Section 7, 8, 17, and 18 of Township 4
North Range 2 West, and that portion of Section 20 Township 4 North Range 2
West lying north of the Lincoln Road centerline.
   (2)   The Impact Fee costs per service unit for the Canyon Highway District
No. 4 Mid-Star Service Area are as follows:
Land Use Category Cost per Unit Units ITE Code
Land Use Category              Cost per Unit Units                   ITE Code
Residential Uses
Single Family Housing          $5,050        per dwelling unit       210
Multifamily Housing, Low-Rise  $2,857        per dwelling unit       220
Multifamily Housing, Mid-Rise  $2,245        per dwelling unit       221
Mobile Home                    $2,347        per dwelling unit       240
Accessory Dwelling Unit        $1,581        per dwelling unit       See Note 1
Senior Adult Housing -         $1,326        per dwelling unit       252
Attached
Senior Adult Housing -         $1,530        per dwelling unit       251
Detached
Assisted Living                $1,326        per bed                 254
Commercial Uses
Hotel                          $3,061        per room                310
Motel                          $1,939        per room                320
Automobile Care Center/Repair  $2,856        per 1000 SF             942
Automobile Parts Sales         $3,569        per 1000 SF             843
Bank (No Drive-Thru)           $10,056       per 1000 SF             911
Bank (With Drive-Thru)         $16,953       per 1000 SF             912
Building Materials and Lumber  $10,509       per 1000 SF             812
Church                         $1,250        per 1000 SF             560
Coffee / Donut Shop No Drive-  $23,154       per 1000 SF             936
Thru
Coffee / Donut Shop with       $27,663       per 1000 SF             937
Drive-Thru
Coffee Shop with Drive-Thru No $11,690       per 1000 SF             938
Indoor Seats
Convenience Market (24hrs, No  $30,690       per 1000 SF             851
Gas)
Day Care                       $14,182       per 1000 SF             565
Discount Club                  $10,076       per 1000 SF             857
High-Cube Transload and Short- $510          per 1000 SF             154
Term Storage Warehouse
Drinking Place/Bar             $8,258        per 1000 SF             925
Free-standing Discount Store   $15,339       per 1000 SF             815
Free-standing Discount         $13,751       per 1000 SF             813
Superstore
Furniture Store                $935          per 1000 SF             890
Hardware/Paint Store           $7,588        per 1000 SF             816
Home Improvement Superstore    $5,171        per 1000 SF             862
Hospital                       $3,711        per 1000 SF             610
Light Industrial               $3,214        per 1000 SF             110
Manufacturing                  $3,418        per 1000 SF             140
Mini-Warehouse (Self Storage)  $265          per 1000 SF             See Note 1
Automobile Sales, New          $9,297        per 1000 SF             840
Automobile Sales, Used         $14,348       per 1000 SF             841
Pharmacy/Drug store (No Drive- $5,101        per 1000 SF             880
Thru)
Pharmacy/Drug store (With      $6,693        per 1000 SF             881
Drive-Thru)
Restaurant - Fast Food (No     $20,602       per 1000 SF             933
Drive-Thru)
Restaurant - Fast Food (With   $20,833       per 1000 SF             934
Drive-Thru)
Restaurant - High Turnover     $7,102        per 1000 SF             932
Shopping Center                $6,414        per 1000 SF             820
Supermarket (Free Standing)    $7,542        per 1000 SF             850
Tire Store                     $10,964       per 1000 SF             848
Variety Store (Dollar Store)   $17,273       per 1000 SF             814
Warehousing                    $969          per 1000 SF             150
Gas Station with Conv Mkt      $7,851        per fueling position    945
(Fueling Position)
Gas Station (Fueling Position) $10,378       per fueling position    944
Golf Course (Hole)             $14,845       per hole                430
Movie Theater                  $344          per seat                444
Public Park                    $281          per acre                411
Quick Lubrication              $3,588        per servicing positions 941
Self-Service Car Wash          $4,098        per stall               947
Sup Conv Mkt/Gas Station       $12,884       per fueling position    960
>3,000 sf and >10 FP
Other Uses                                                          
Dental/Vision                  $10,063       per 1000 SF             See Note 1
General Office                 $4,400        per 1000 SF             710
Medical                        $13,238       per 1000 SF             720
 
Notes:
   1.   Trip generation data based on local data. Collected by Ada County
Highway District (ACHD) through individual assessment process.          
   2.   Vehicle trips generated by commercial land uses typically have lower
lengths than trips generated by residential or office land-uses. The U.S.
Department of Transportation's Summary of Travel Trends: 2017 National
Household Travel Survey states that the average trip length of shopping trips
and other family/personal errands are approximately 32% shorter than the
average trip lengths for all trips. The COMPASS 2012 Regional Household Travel
Survey states that Home-Based-Shop trips are approximately 59% shorter than
Home-Based-Work trips. Trip reduction factors of 75% (correlates with 25%
decrease), 50%, and 25% were applied to land uses that are expected to have
average trip lengths lower than 11.2 miles. These reduction factors were
applied based on the guidance in the travel surveys and expected development
patterns in the Mid-Star service area. Commercial and office-related
development is expected to be centered on the SH 44 corridor and will result in
trip lengths significantly shorter than trips that require travel external to
the Mid-Star service area.
(Ord. 22-014, 7-20-2022)
 
