CITY CODE
OF
COUNCIL, IDAHO
Code current through:
Ord. 542, passed 8-12-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Council, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 542, passed August 12, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ORDINANCE NO. 545
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF COUNCIL, ADAMS COUNTY, IDAHO, AMENDING TITLE 7,
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY, OF THE COUNCIL CITY CODE BY THE ADDITION OF A NEW
CHAPTER 4, PROHIBITING PUBLIC SLEEPING OR CAMPING WITHIN CITY LIMITS; PROVIDING
FOR SEVERABILITY, CODIFICATION, PUBLICATION BY SUMMARY AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
COUNCIL, ADAMS COUNTY, IDAHO:
 
Section 1: That Title 3 of the Council City code be, and the same hereby is,
amended by the addition thereto of a NEW CHAPTER 4, to read as follows:
Chapter 4: Camping, Sleeping, and Occupying Public Ways and Property
   
7-4-1   : PUBLIC CAMPING OR SLEEPING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly camp or sleep on any public property, public parks, public
building grounds, or public roads or rights-of-way; provided, that this section
shall
not prohibit the operation of a sidewalk cafe pursuant to a permit issued by the City Clerk or licensed under this Code; nor shall it prohibit or prevent overnight camping for recreational or educational purposes
on property designated for such purpose, authorized specific temporary events
or activities, or authorized overnight parking at Idaho rest areas or private
businesses in
compliance with applicable established rules. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect policies, rules,
statutes, or leases regarding endowment lands, Idaho department of parks and
recreation lands, or Idaho department of fish and game lands. The prohibitions
against public camping
or sleeping provided for in this article shall not apply to drivers of commercial vehicles or commercial motor
vehicles as defined in section 49-123(2)(d), Idaho Code.
 
7-4-2    : PUBLIC CAMPING OR SLEEPING DEFINED
A.   For purposes of this Chapter, "public camping or sleeping" means lodging or residing in a temporary
outdoor habitation used as a dwelling, lodging, or living space, which
includes sitting, lying, or sleeping for a prolonged amount of time, and may be
evidenced by
the erection of a tent or other temporary shelter, including a motor vehicle as defined in section 39-
6501, Idaho Code, or a recreational vehicle as defined in section 49-119, Idaho
Code, and may include but is not limited to the presence of bedding, pillows, cooking appliances, heat
sources, the storage of personal belongings or food, or digging or earth
breaking.
B.   For purposes of this Section, public property includes any of the
roadways,
intersections, or other property belonging to the city, and sidewalks and rights of way open to the general public
though not owned by the city, which said property is within the corporate
limits of the city.
 
 
 
 
7-4-3    : PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any term or provision of this Chapter. Violations
hereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
Section 2: Severability:
 Provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of
any provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions.
Section 3: Codification. The City Clerk is instructed to immediately forward
this Ordinance to the codifier of the official municipal code for proper
revision of the code.
 
Section 4: Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.  From and after the effective date
of this Ordinance, all prior ordinances which conflict with the provisions of
this Ordinance are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 5: Publication. This Ordinance, or a summary thereof in compliance with
Section 50-901A, Idaho Code, shall be published once in the official newspaper
of the City.
Section 6: Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect
after its passage, approval and publication, including a summary thereof,
according to law.
 
APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 19 th day of November, 2025.
 
 
CITY OF COUNCIL
Adams County, Idaho
 
 
 
 
Mayor Bruce Gardner
 
ATTEST:
 
 
 
City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 546
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF COUNCIL, ADAMS COUNTY, IDAHO AMENDING SECTION
1.5.1, “OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER” OF THE COUNCIL CITY CODE BY DESIGNATING THE RECORD
REPORTER, A NEWSPAPER PUBLISHED IN THE CITY OF COUNCIL, ADAMS COUNTY, IDAHO, AS
THE OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER OF THE CITY FOR PUBLICATION OF NOTICES AND ORDINANCES;
PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION; PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING FOR REPEALER.
 
WHEREAS, The City is required by Idaho Code 50-213 to designate an official
newspaper of the City for publication of notices and ordinances; and
 
WHEREAS, The City’s current newspaper of Record, The Adams County Record, the
only newspaper in the City, changed ownership; and
 
WHEREAS, The Record Reporter is a newspaper of general circulation published in
the county of Adams, in which is situated in the City of Council.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Council:
 
Section 1 : That Section 1.5.1 of the City Code of the City of Council be, and
the same is hereby amended as follows:
  
1.5.1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
As required by Idaho Code section 50-213, "The Adams County Record", a weekly
newspaper printed and published in, and of general circulation in, the city is
hereby designated as the official newspaper of the city, in which shall be
published all official notices, ordinances, statements and proceedings required
by law to be published in an official newspaper, as defined by Idaho Code
section 50-213The Record Reporter, a weekly newspaper printed and published in
the City of Council, Adams County, Idaho, is designated the Official Newspaper
of the City of Council for all official publications required by statute or
ordinance, effective immediately.
 
Section 2 :    Severability. Provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed
severable and the invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions. The remaining sections of
Title 3 shall remain in full force and effect.
 
Section 3 :   Codification. The City Clerk is instructed to immediately forward
this Ordinance to the codifier of the official municipal code for proper
revision of the code.
 
Section 4 :   Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. From and after the effective
date of this Ordinance, all prior ordinances which conflict with the provisions
of this Ordinance are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
 
Section 5 :   Publication. This Ordinance, or a summary thereof in compliance
with Section 50-901A, Idaho Code, shall be published once in the official
newspaper of the City.
 
 
 
Section 6:   Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
immediately upon its passage, approval and publication.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 10th day of February,
2026.
 
 
                  CITY OF COUNCIL
 
 
 
                  By_____________________________
                  Malvin G. Wilson, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST: ______________________
Ashley Scott, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
COUNCIL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Council. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the COUNCIL CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2015 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2015 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. (2015 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code books,
while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be
and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the
city clerk-treasurer when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed by the mayor and city council prior
to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances.
   B.   Appropriation ordinances.
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations.
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants.
   F.   Salary ordinances.
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places.
   H.   Improvement ordinances.
   I.   Bond ordinances.
   J.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city.
   K.   All special ordinances. (2015 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2015 Code)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The city council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   H.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Council".
   I.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   J.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2015 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
CITY: The city of Council, county of Adams, state of Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Council.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Council.
COUNTY: The county of Adams, state of Idaho.
IC: Idaho Code.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability
partnership, trust, association, limited liability company, organization,
government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
STATE: State of Idaho. (2015 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this code which is deemed a misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not less than ten dollars ($10.00) for each
offense, and such person may be confined in jail a period of not more than six
(6) months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed; and in
addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may
assess. (Ord. 273, 7-10-1990; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), and no incarceration may
be imposed.
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses. (2015 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 182, 2-9-1971; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 182, 2-9-1971)
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2015 Code)
1-4-3: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official Newspaper
1-5-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
As required by Idaho Code section 50-213, "The Adams County Record", a weekly
newspaper printed and published in, and of general circulation in, the city is
hereby designated as the official newspaper of the city, in which shall be
published all official notices, ordinances, statements and proceedings required
by law to be published in an official newspaper, as defined by Idaho Code
section 50-213. (Ord. 313, 10-20-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Mayor
1-6-2: Council Members
1-6-3: Compensation
1-6-4: Meetings
1-6-5: Official Rules Of Procedure
1-6-6: Ordinances
1-6-1: MAYOR:
   A.   Qualifications: Any person shall be eligible to hold the Office of
Mayor who is a qualified elector of the City at the time of his declaration of
candidacy or declaration of intent is submitted to the City Council and remains
a qualified elector during his term of office.
   B.   Elected Official; Term Of Office: The Mayor is an elected official, and
his term of office shall be a period of four (4) years.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The Mayor shall be the chief administrative official
of the City and shall preside over all meetings of the City Council and shall
possess such powers and discharge such duties as are prescribed by the laws of
the State.
   D.   Absence Of Mayor: In the Mayor's absence, the Council President will
assume the Mayor's duties. (2015 Code)
1-6-2: COUNCIL MEMBERS:
   A.   Qualifications: Any person shall be eligible to hold the Office of City
Council member who is a qualified elector at the time his declaration of
candidacy or declaration of intent is submitted to the City Clerk-Treasurer,
and remains a qualified elector under the Constitution and laws of the State of
Idaho.
   B.   Elected Officials; Terms Of Office: A Council member shall hold office
for a term of four (4) years, and the City shall have four (4) Council members,
one-half (1/2) of whom shall be elected every two (2) years.
   C.   Duties: The members of the City Council, the legislative and
policymaking branch of the government of the City, shall devote as much of
their time to the duties of their office as an efficient and faithful discharge
thereof may require. They shall attend all meetings of the Council unless
lawfully excused therefrom by the Mayor or by a majority of the remaining
members, shall perform all duties required of them by law and as may be
assigned by committees to which they may severally be appointed by the Mayor,
and shall possess such powers and perform all additional duties as may be
prescribed by law. (2015 Code)
1-6-3: COMPENSATION:
The Mayor shall receive a salary of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month,
and each member of the City Council shall receive a salary of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per month. (Ord. 349, 7-7-1998; amd. 2015 Code)
1-6-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   Date; Time; Quorum; Absence Of Mayor: Regular City Council meetings
of the City of Council, Idaho shall be held on the second Tuesday of every
month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. Regular meetings shall take place at
City Hall, which is located at 501 Galena Street, Council, Idaho. Three (3)
members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings. In case of the absence of
the Mayor or his inability to act, the Council President shall act in the place
and stead of the Mayor. (Ord. 147, 4-5-1960; amd. Ord. 423A, 4-10-2007; 2015
Code; Ord. 518, 3-12-2019)
      2.   Unexcused Absences: The Mayor's or any City Council member's seat
shall be declared vacant after three (3) consecutive unexcused absences from
the regular City Council meetings. (Ord. 347, 5-5-1998)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the City Council may be called by
the Mayor or, in his absence or refusal to act, by any two (2) members of the
City Council, by notice in writing, signed by each of them, setting the time
and place of the meeting for which, unless in case of emergency, there shall be
not less than one day's notice to each member of the Council, which notice must
be delivered by the City Clerk- Treasurer or designee to each member of the
Council. Such notice shall, in addition to the time and place of said meeting,
specify the object or business to be transacted, and no business other than
that which is specified in the notice shall be transacted at such meeting.
(Ord. 59, 5-16-1919; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Adjourned Meetings: The City Council, at any regular meeting, may
adjourn to a date to be specified and entered upon the minutes of the meeting,
at which adjourned meeting any regular business may be taken up. In case of any
emergency, a special meeting may be convened at any time upon notice to each of
the members of the City Council. (Ord. 59, 5-16-1919)
1-6-5: OFFICIAL RULES OF PROCEDURE:
   A.   The following rules are hereby established, shall be observed in the
conduct of any public hearing before the City Council and shall be known as the
OFFICIAL COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURE:
      1.   No person shall be permitted to testify or speak before the City
Council at a public hearing, unless such person has signed his name and written
his residential address thereafter on sign up sheets to be provided by the
City. This rule shall not apply to staff or technical witnesses directed by the
Mayor to give evidence or information to the City Council.
      2.   No person shall be permitted to speak before the City Council at a
public hearing until such person has been recognized by the Mayor. (Ord. 233,
1-11-1983)
      3.   All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded electronically or
stenographically, and all persons speaking at such public hearings shall speak
in such a manner as will assure that the recorded testimony or remarks will be
accurate and trustworthy. (Ord. 233, 1-11-1983; amd. 2015 Code)
      4.   At the commencement of the public hearing, the City Council shall
establish a time limit to be observed by all speakers. The time limit shall be
established depending on the number of speakers who sign up for each public
hearing and shall apply only to the speakers' comments.
      5.   The speaker shall not be interrupted by members of the City Council
until his time limit has been expended or until he has finished his statement.
      6.   At the conclusion of a speaker's comments, each City Council person,
when recognized by the Mayor, shall be allowed to question the speaker, and the
speaker shall be limited to answers to the questions asked. The question and
answer period shall not be included in the speaker's time limit, as
established.
      7.   When the public hearing is quasi-judicial in nature or one after
which the City Council is required by law to make findings of fact, each
speaker must swear or affirm that his testimony will be true and correct.
      8.   Any person not conforming to any of the above rules may be
prohibited from speaking during the public hearing. Should any person refuse to
comply with such prohibition, he may be removed from the room by order of the
Mayor.
      9.   The City Council may suspend or amend any one or more of these rules
by vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full City Council.
      10.   The Mayor shall have the authority to interpret and apply the
foregoing rules, subject to an appeal to the City Council, whose decision shall
be determined by a majority vote of the Council members present. (Ord. 233, 1-
11-1983)
1-6-6: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Passage Generally: All ordinances of the City (except those of an
emergency nature in case of a riot or an emergency requiring immediate action)
shall be read at a regular or special meeting and adopted section by section
(except under the suspension of rules) when, if a majority of the City Council
vote in favor of the adoption or passage of the ordinance, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall so note it in the journal. Thereupon, if the Mayor approves the same, he
shall sign his name after the word "approved", giving the date thereof. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall then attest the same under the Seal of the City. (Ord. 5,
2-2-1903)
   B.   Publication: Before any ordinance, except those of an emergency nature,
as referenced in subsection A of this section, shall take effect, the same
shall be published for one issue in the official newspaper of the City, and the
said ordinance shall take effect the day following the publication thereof.
(Ord. 5, 2-2-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Emergency Ordinances: Ordinances of an emergency nature, in case of a
riot or any other emergency, shall take effect immediately after the passage of
the same by proclamation of the Mayor, posted in five (5) public places within
the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 5, 2-2-1903)
   D.   Vetoed Ordinances: In case the Mayor vetoes an ordinance passed by the
City Council, the same shall again be referred to the City Council when, if
one-half (1/2) plus one of the members vote for the same, it shall be passed
and published as other ordinances. (Ord. 5, 2-2-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Arrest Powers; Duty To Assist
1-7-2: Personnel Policy Adopted
1-7-1: ARREST POWERS; DUTY TO ASSIST:
   A.   Arrest Powers: Whenever any person is guilty of a violation of any of
the ordinances of the city, the county sheriff's department shall have power
and authority, either with or without a warrant, to arrest the person and shall
cause the person so arrested to be brought before the proper judge for trial
upon the charge of violation of the ordinances of the city.
   B.   Duty To Assist: For the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions
of subsection A of this section, the persons named in subsection A of this
section shall have authority to call upon the bystanders for such assistance as
may be necessary in the making of any such arrest, and any such bystander
failing or refusing to assist such officer in making such arrest shall, upon
complaint made before the proper officer, be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 10, 2-9-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
1-7-2: PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED:
The city council hereby adopts by reference the most recent personnel policy of
the city. Said policy may be amended from time to time by the city council.
(2015 Code)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC RECORDS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Requests For Public Records
1-8-2: Classification And Retention Of Certain Public Records
1-8-1: REQUESTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   Request Procedure:
      1.   A public records request form must be filled out in complete and
turned into the city clerk-treasurer before duplicates will be produced.
      2.   All persons requesting to examine public record must first check in
with the clerk-treasurer. Examination of public records must be conducted
during regular office or working hours unless the clerk-treasurer authorizes
examination at other hours. The clerk-treasurer is required either to grant or
deny a request for inspection or copying within three (3) working days of the
date of receipt of the request. If a longer time is needed, the clerk-treasurer
must notify the requesting person in writing and provide the record within ten
(10) working days. (Res. 458, 5-12-2009)
   B.   Fees: A fee as established by resolution of the city council will be
assessed to anyone requesting duplicates of city public records. Duplicates
will not be produced in color unless needed to protect the integrity of the
information duplicated. (Res. 458, 5-12-2009; amd. 2015 Code)
1-8-2: CLASSIFICATION AND RETENTION OF CERTAIN PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   Permanent Records:
      1.   Records Classified As Permanent: The following records are
classified as permanent records:
         a.   Adopted meeting minutes of the city council and city boards and
commissions;
         b.   Ordinances and resolutions;
         c.   Building plans and specifications for commercial projects and
government buildings;
         d.   Fiscal year end financial reports;
         e.   Records affecting the title to real property or liens thereon;
         f.   Poll books, excluding optional duplicate poll books used to
record that the elector has voted, tally books, sample ballots, campaign
finance reports, declarations of candidacy, declarations of intent, notices of
election, and records of voting results by precinct; and
         g.   Executed contracts.
      2.   Retention Schedule: Permanent records shall be retained by the city
in perpetuity, or may be transferred to the Idaho state historical society's
permanent records repository upon resolution of the city council authorizing
such transfer.
   B.   Semipermanent Records:
      1.   Records Classified As Semipermanent: The following records are
classified as semipermanent records:
         a.   Claims, canceled checks, warrants, duplicate warrants, purchase
orders, vouchers, duplicate receipts, and utility and other financial records;
         b.   Building applications for commercial projects and government
buildings;
         c.   License applications;
         d.   Departmental reports; and
         e.   Bonds and coupons.
      2.   Retention Schedule:
         a.   Semipermanent records shall be kept for not less than five (5)
years after the date of issuance or completion of the matter contained within
such semipermanent record.
         b.   Semipermanent records may only be destroyed by resolution of the
city council, and upon the advice of the city attorney. Such disposition shall
be under the direction and supervision of the city clerk-treasurer. The
resolution ordering destruction of semipermanent records shall list in detail
such semipermanent records to be destroyed.
         c.   Prior to destruction of semipermanent records, the city clerk-
treasurer shall provide written notice, including a detailed list of the
semipermanent records proposed for destruction, to the Idaho state historical
society thirty (30) days prior to the destruction of any records.
   C.   Temporary Records:
      1.   Records Classified As Temporary: The following records are
classified as temporary records:
         a.   Building applications, plans, and specifications for
noncommercial and nongovernment projects after the structure or project
receives final inspection and approval;
         b.   Cash receipts subject to audit;
         c.   Election ballots and duplicate poll books;
         d.   The most current draft of an unexecuted contract until such
contract is executed; and
         e.   Records which are normally believed to be the subject of
litigation discovery and determined to be so after consultation with the city
attorney.
      2.   Retention Schedule:
         a.   Temporary records shall be retained for not less than two (2)
years, but in no event shall financial records be destroyed until completion of
the city's financial audit as provided in Idaho Code section 67-450B related to
such financial records.
         b.   Temporary records may only be destroyed by resolution of the city
council, and upon the advice of the city attorney. Such disposition shall be
under the direction and supervision of the city clerk-treasurer. The resolution
ordering destruction of temporary records shall list in detail such temporary
records to be destroyed.
         c.   Prior to destruction of temporary records, the city clerk-
treasurer shall provide written notice, including a detailed list of the
temporary records proposed for destruction, to the Idaho state historical
society thirty (30) days prior to the destruction of any records.
   D.   Other Documents: Writings, documents, and other similar city
information not classified as "permanent records", "semipermanent records", or
"temporary records" herein shall not be considered "records" for the purposes
of retention pursuant to this records retention schedule. Such "nonrecords"
writings, documents, and other similar city information include, but are not
limited to, drafts, unapproved minutes, "post it" notes, duplicates, phone call
slips, voice mail, to do lists, telephone text messages, and e-mails which are
not related to the promotion of the business of city government, etc. Writings,
documents and other similar city information which, in the reasonable belief of
the recipient or custodian, do not have any historical, intrinsic or other
value, and records which are not reasonably believed to be the subject of
litigation discovery shall not be considered "records" for purposes of this
records retention schedule.
   E.   Determination Of Classification And Retention: Where there is a
question regarding the classification of records or their retention, such
questions should be directed to the city clerk-treasurer and/or the city
attorney prior to any destruction. (Res. 486, 4-10-2012)
TITLE 2
FINANCE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Preauthorized Payment Of Certain Bills
2-1-2: Official Depositories
2-1-3: Land Use Application Fees
2-1-1: PREAUTHORIZED PAYMENT OF CERTAIN BILLS:
   A.   The city clerk-treasurer is authorized to pay bills that meet the
criteria for summarized categories by the due date listed on the bill prior to
submitting the bill to the city council for approval.
 
Category                   Purpose
                           To maintain licenses or permits when required to
Certain agencies           operate and/or provide service to our customers and
                           have a renewal date prior to a monthly city council
                           meeting. (Example: DEQ, employee certifications)
                           Contracts where signed agreements or actions require
Certain contracts          payment prior to a monthly city council meeting.
                           (Example: law enforcement agreement)
                           To avoid late fees where due date is prior to the
Certain vendors            monthly city council meeting. (Example: Farmers
                           Supply Coop, Jerry's Auto Parts)
Payroll                    Payroll and payroll vendors. (Example: PERSI,
                           federal/state withholding, garnishments)
                           Refunds and reimbursements that are a result of
                           overpayment for services that should be repaid in a
Refunds and reimbursements timely manner and receipt of payment was made at
                           least 21 days prior. (Example: overpayment on water/
                           sewer bills, refund of water deposits)
                           Per diem reimbursement of expenses related to
Training/meetings          training when required prior to a monthly city
                           council meeting. (Example: meals, hotel, mileage,
                           registration)
 
(Res. 2014-03, 5-13-2014)
   B.   The city clerk-treasurer shall include the above bills in the bills
submitted to the council for ratification at the first regular council meeting
following the payment of the bill. (Res. 487, 7-10-2012)
2-1-2: OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES:
Pursuant to Idaho Code, as amended, pertaining to municipalities, the U.S. Bank
National Association, a banking corporation of the state, and Zions Bank are
designated as official banking depositories for the city. (Res. 456, 3-10-2009;
amd. 2015 Code)
2-1-3: LAND USE APPLICATION FEES:
   A.   Established: Pursuant to the authority set out in Idaho Code title 50,
the city hereby establishes a fee structure for certain land use applications.
Said fee structure is established by resolution of the city council. (Res. 419,
eff. 11-7-2006; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Responsibility For Additional Costs: Applicants will be responsible for
all publishing and notification costs.
   C.   Payment Of Fees: All fees must be paid prior to issuance. (Res. 419,
eff. 11-7-2006)
CHAPTER 2
PROFESSIONAL FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE AND SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS AND ACTIONS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Professional Fee Schedule For Land Use, Subdivision, And Certain Other
Applications Or Requests
2-2-1: PROFESSIONAL FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE, SUBDIVISION, AND CERTAIN OTHER
APPLICATIONS OR REQUESTS:
   A.   Fee Schedule Established: The City Clerk or their designee, at the time
of the filing of a land use application, subdivision plat, petition, or any
other request or application for any service, any permit, any request for any
improvements or for any action from the city which causes the city to incur
costs, shall collect the fee and/or deposit established by resolution of the
City Council together with a deposit for any direct costs incurred by the City
to review such requests by architects, engineers, attorneys, or other
professionals and contractors the City deems necessary to enable the City to
process said application, petition, or referral in an informed manner.
   B.   Payments And Deposits For Direct Costs:
      1.   Billing For Costs: The City shall bill all applicants and/or
landowners for all costs incurred by the City in obtaining a review of the
application, petition or referral by architects, engineers, attorneys, or other
professionals and contractors the City deems necessary to enable the City to
process such application, petition or referral for compliance with this Code,
applicable State and Federal laws, applicable conditions of approval (new or
existing), and/or other final action including implementation of City
decisions. The city shall be reimbursed for professional costs even if the
professional services have not been requested, agreed to or contracted for by
the party requesting the permit or application.
      2.   Requirement Of A Cash Deposit: Where required, all applicants or
landowners shall provide a deposit to the City Clerk, or their designee, in
cash. The cash deposit shall be collected at the time of application for any
land use action. Cash deposits shall be held for the time period in which the
application is under consideration and until such time as the implementation of
any final action on the application is complete. The amount of the deposit and
the procedures shall be further set forth by resolution approved by the City
Council which may be amended any time.
         a.   Payment: The cash deposit shall be considered as a payment on the
account and be drawn down based on the invoices received by the City for the
costs incurred to process any application, petition and/or referral described
in this title. Minimum balances shall be retained pursuant to a fee resolution
of the City Council upon the passage of this chapter and by resolution approved
by the City Council which may be amended any time.
         b.   Contest Of Invoices Sent By The City: Where there is any defect
or claim of impropriety in an invoice submitted for payment for the review and
processing of any application, petition or referral, the applicant shall
contact the City Clerk in writing within ten (10) working days of receiving the
invoice. The written contest shall specify the date, services rendered, and
rationale for any invoice, partial or in full. An error in the City’s invoice,
if corrected within five (5) working days of being contacted by the applicant,
shall not delay the applicant’s timely payment. Any invoice, or portion of an
invoice, that is not contested as described in this section is considered
final, due and owing.
         c.   Release Of Deposit Balance: Within sixty (60) days after final
City action and completion of implementation of said final action, the City
will release any unused funds from the account to the applicant or landowner of
record, minus any outstanding fees. Completion of the implementation of a final
action shall be determined solely by the City Clerk’s Office in conjunction
with the Zoning Administrator or its designee.
   C.   Payment Of Fees Prior To Action By The City: Until all required fees
established by this section have been paid in full, no final action shall be
taken by the City on any application, petition, or referral to which this
section applies.
   D.   Refunds: Fees charged pursuant to subsection A of this section shall
not be refundable.
   E.   Waivers: The City Council may, upon receipt of a written request from
the applicant, prior to the City deeming any application, petition, or referral
complete for processing, approve a waiver or payment plan for the required fees
and/or direct costs incurred in obtaining a review only upon clear
representation that the applicant has:
      1.   The inability to pay at the time of application such that the
applicant is considered in forma pauperis, and
      2.   The public interest would suffer by assessment of collection of the
fee(s). (Ord. 542, 8-12-2025)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Required; Expiration
3-1-3: License Fee; Renewals; Late Payment Penalty
3-1-4: Information On License
3-1-5: Nontransferability Of License; Change Of Location
3-1-6: Revocation Of License
3-1-7: Exemptions From Provisions
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The word "business" or "occupation", when used in this chapter, means all
activities, occupations, callings, trades or professions, new or existing,
located within the city with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage.
Each business location shall be deemed a separate business, unless it is a
specific annex to the main location of the business. (Ord. 363, 6-6-2000)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXPIRATION:
No person shall engage in any business or activity in the city for which a
license fee is imposed by this chapter without first having obtained and being
a holder of a valid license, paid in full. Such license shall expire at the end
of the calendar year in which it was issued. (Ord. 363, 6-6-2000)
3-1-3: LICENSE FEE; RENEWALS; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
A fee as established by resolution of the city council will be imposed on every
new business or occupation within the city limits. Each existing business has
until January 1, 2001, to apply for its license and thereafter on the first of
each year. Each new business must apply when started. Each annual license fee
shall be renewable on January 1 of each calendar year. Failure to pay the
license fee within thirty (30) days after the date that it is due shall result
in a penalty of double the amount of the license fee. Any license fee or
penalties shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by court
proceedings if not paid to the city by the proper date, and considered an
infraction by the courts. (Ord. 363, 6-6-2000; amd. Res. 445, 12-9-2008; 2015
Code)
3-1-4: INFORMATION ON LICENSE:
A list of the following will be on the face of the business license, and a copy
will be filed at city hall: number of employees, hours of business, physical
address and mailing address, description of business. (Ord. 363, 6-6-2000)
3-1-5: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A business license shall be named for a specific business location and shall
not be transferable. In the event a business shall change its location after
obtaining a business license, it shall, within ten (10) days, obtain a new
business license. (Ord. 363, 6-6-2000)
3-1-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Revocation must be proceeded by notice in writing from the city clerk-treasurer
to the business owner, informing the licensee that the city council has ordered
the holding of a public hearing at a certain date and time, not less than ten
(10) days from the date of the notice, at which time, the licensee will be
required to appear personally and show cause why the license should not be
revoked. Should the council determine that such license shall be revoked, it
shall pass a motion to that effect, and such license then shall be revoked.
(Ord. 363, 6-6-2000)
3-1-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Any agency of the United States government, any state agency, any
political subdivision of the state of Idaho, including, but not necessarily
limited to, counties, school districts, irrigation districts, sewer districts,
or fire districts.
   B.   Domestic servants, paper carriers, or casual labor not included as a
temporary employee of an existing business. (Ord. 363, 6-6-2000)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-1: State Regulations Adopted
3-2-2: Liquor License Fee
3-2-3: Beer And Wine
3-2-4: Days And Hours Of Sales
3-2-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and
use of alcoholic beverages within the city the laws of the state of Idaho being
particularly title 23, Idaho Code, as presently in effect or as may hereafter
be amended by the legislature and as contained in that certain volume "Idaho
liquor act", revised through the acts of the 1969 legislature, as the same may
be revised by the legislature or by the governing body of the city, and the
same are hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully
as though set forth at length herein. One copy of the Idaho liquor act,
together with all amendments thereto, all duly certified by the city clerk-
treasurer, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk- treasurer for
use and examination of and by the public. (Ord. 181, 2-9-1971; amd. 2015 Code)
3-2-2: LIQUOR LICENSE FEE:
The fee for a liquor license shall be as established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 450, 12-23-2008; amd. 2015 Code)
3-2-3: BEER AND WINE:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
terms shall have the following meanings:
    BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
   RETAILER: Any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation,
group or combination acting as a unit engaged in the sale or distribution of
beer and/or wine to the consumer.
   WINE: Table wines not containing more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by
volume.
   B.   Application For License: Before any retailer shall sell beer or wine
within the city limits under the provisions of this section, he shall first
make application therefor in writing to the city clerk-treasurer and city
council on a form prepared and furnished by the clerk-treasurer and pay the
license fee hereinafter prescribed to the clerk- treasurer, which application
shall state the proposed location of the applicant's place of business. Any
person making application for license shall first exhibit to the clerk-
treasurer his license secured from the state of Idaho and license from the
county to sell beer and/or wine upon the premises described in his application.
   C.   Ineligibility For License: No license shall be granted to the following
persons:
      1.   A person who has not been continuously a resident of the city for at
least six (6) months at the time of his application.
      2.   A person under twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   A person having been convicted of a felony within the previous five
(5) years.
      4.   Any person to sell for consumption upon the premises where sold
within four hundred feet (400'), measured on street lines of any block within
the city limits, in which a public school building is located. (Ord. 283, 10-8-
1991)
   D.   License Fee: The license fee to sell beer or wine shall be as
established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 450, 12-23-2008; amd. 2015
Code)
   E.   Posting License: All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises and kept posted for the full period of time for which the license
is issued or until the same shall be revoked as hereinafter provided.
   F.   Nontransferability Of License: No license shall be assigned or
transferred and no power of attorney issued over a license without the written
consent and approval of the City Council.
   G.   Responsibility For Patrons Leaving With Open Container: Any licensee,
owner or employee shall be held responsible for knowingly allowing any open
container to leave the premises of said licensee. (Ord. 283, 10-8-1991)
   H.   Revocation, Cancellation Or Suspension Of License: The right shall be
and remain at all times vested in the City Council to revoke and cancel any
license issued under the provisions of this section for fraud and
misrepresentation in its procurement or for any violations of the provisions of
this section or any laws of the State of Idaho or the United States of America
or any conduct or act of a licensee or his employees or any conduct or act
permitted by him or them on the premises where beer and/or wine is sold or in
connection therewith or adjacent thereto tending to render said premises a
public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety or general welfare of
the City. It is further provided, that any license issued hereunder shall be
automatically canceled or suspended in case the license issued by the State of
Idaho or the County is canceled or suspended. The license may be revoked upon
the licensee or any employee knowingly allowing any open container to leave the
premises. (Ord. 283, 10-8-1991; amd. 2015 Code)
   I.   Violation; Penalty: Any violation of the provisions of this section is
a misdemeanor and is punishable as such. (Ord. 283, 10-8-1991)
3-2-4: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES:
   A.   The sale of beer, wine and liquor shall be allowed at State licensed
liquor stores or special distributors from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. every day of the year except for Christmas Day and any
other day when the sale of beer, wine or liquor is prohibited by the State of
Idaho or the State Liquor Division. Beer, wine and liquor may be dispensed or
sold at liquor stores or special distributors on Sundays, Memorial Day and
Thanksgiving Day, but only during the hours set out in this section. Beer, wine
or liquor shall not be sold or dispensed at State licensed liquor stores or
special distributors between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   The sale of beer, wine and liquor by the drink shall be allowed from
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. every day of the year
except for Christmas Day and any other day when the sale of beer, wine or
liquor is prohibited by the State of Idaho or the State Liquor Division. Beer,
wine and liquor by the drink may be dispensed or sold on Sundays, Memorial Day
and Thanksgiving Day, but only during the hours set out in this section. Beer,
wine or liquor by the drink shall not be sold or dispensed between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
   C.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable in
accordance with the general misdemeanor statutes of the State of Idaho. (Ord.
514, 8-8-2017)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND
TRANSIENT VENDORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
3-3-2: Enforcement
3-3-3: Penalty
3-3-1: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
The practice of being in and upon private residence properties, business
establishments and offices in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers,
itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been
requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of
said private residence properties, business establishments or offices, for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/
or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 136, 4-6-1954)
3-3-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The county sheriff's department is hereby required and directed to suppress the
same and to abate any such nuisance as is described in section
3-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 136, 4-6-1954; amd. 2015 Code)
3-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited in
section
3-3-1 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, together with the costs of proceedings. The fine may be
satisfied, if not paid in cash, by execution against the person or anyone
convicted of committing the misdemeanor, as herein prohibited. (Ord. 136, 4-6-
1954; amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Unlawful Disposal; Accumulation Prohibited
4-1-2: Container Requirements
4-1-3: Garbage Collection And Removal
4-1-4: Violation; Penalty
4-1-1: UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL; ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
For the purpose of better protecting the inhabitants of the city against the
hazards of disease and fire, it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to place in the open, dump, pile or scatter any
garbage, refuse or litter of any kind in or upon any street or alley within the
city, or upon any private property where the same might be a menace to health
or create a hazard by fire. (Ord. 400, 8-9-2005)
4-1-2: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be the duty of each person,
firm or corporation maintaining a residence, property or place of business
within the city to procure and maintain in or along the alleys adjacent to
their respective premises, suitable containers or receptacles for collection of
all garbage, litter and refuse resulting from the use or occupancy of such
premises, and said person, firm or corporation shall be responsible for the
cost of all disposal thereof. All containers required hereunder shall be of
such size and capacity so they can be readily handled by one person. All
garbage containers shall be of metal or tight construction and equipped with a
securely closing lid and shall be made secure against overturning by dogs or
other animals, and all refuse containers shall be of such construction as to
prevent scatter of rubbish and litter placed therein; provided, however, that
grass cuttings and weeds, and brush and tree trimmings, when closely trimmed
and to lengths not exceeding four feet (4'), need not be placed in containers
but may be neatly piled at usual places of collection of garbage and litter so
the same can be picked up by fork. (Ord. 400, 8-9-2005; amd. 2015 Code)
4-1-3: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL:
   A.   All garbage collection and removal shall be the responsibility of
either the property owners or residents of each property.
   B.   Each person, firm or corporation owning, operating or conducting any
place of business within the city shall be responsible for the removal of all
garbage originating on their premises from the city at least once each week,
and other refuse, litter and debris originating on their premises removed from
the city at least once each two (2) weeks or as needed to prevent offensive
odor or dangerous or unsightly accumulation of such garbage, litter and refuse.
(Ord. 400, 8-9-2005)
4-1-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter by refusing to
maintain and use proper receptacles for the collection of garbage, refuse or
litter, or, being proprietors of a commercial business house, shall fail to
provide for the containment and removal of garbage, litter and debris, or who
shall openly place, pile, dump or scatter any garbage, refuse or litter on or
in any streets, alleys or roads within the city limits, or who shall permit the
accumulation of any offensive or unsanitary or dangerous substance constituting
a menace to health or hazard from fire upon any private property within the
city limits shall be guilty of an infraction, and shall be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day that such violation shall be continued shall
constitute a separate offense under this chapter. (Ord. 400, 8-9-2005; amd.
2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose And Intent
4-2-2: Definition
4-2-3: Burning Restrictions Generally
4-2-4: Permitted Burning
4-2-5: Prohibited Burning
4-2-6: Violation; Penalties
4-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to eliminate most forms of open
burning except those forms permitted herein. (Ord. 245, 6-18-1985, eff. 6-18-
1985; amd. 2015 Code)
4-2-2: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "open burning" means the outdoor
burning of materials where the products of combustion are not directed through
a duct, passage, smokestack or chimney. (Ord. 245, 6-18-1985, eff. 6-18-1985)
4-2-3: BURNING RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall allow, suffer, cause or permit
the open burning of materials which emit toxic contaminants or large volumes of
smoke, particulates or odors. (Ord. 245, 6-18-1985, eff. 6-18-1985)
4-2-4: PERMITTED BURNING:
The following shall be considered lawful burning within the city:
   A.   Outdoor fireplaces, barbecues and grills for outdoor cooking and
recreational purposes using either gas, wood or charcoal. (Ord. 245, 6-18-1985,
eff. 6-18-1985; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Fires used in the training of organized firefighting personnel.
   C.   Leaves, limbs, brush and other natural living debris. (Ord. 245, 6-18-
1985, eff. 6-18-1985)
4-2-5: PROHIBITED BURNING:
   A.   The burning of any material other than as permitted in section
4-2-4 of this chapter shall not be permitted within the city. (Ord. 245, 6-18-
1985, eff. 6-18-1985)
   B.   There shall be no burning if the fire chief has issued a no burn order.
(2015 Code)
4-2-6: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be
punishable as follows:
   A.   First offense, a minimum fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   B.   Second and subsequent offenses, a minimum fine of three hundred dollars
($300.00). (Ord. 245, 6-18-1985, eff. 6-18-1985; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose; Authority; Policy
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Prohibited Noises
4-3-4: Provisions Are Additional
4-3-5: Enforcement By Citation
4-3-6: Violation; Penalty
4-3-7: Severability
4-3-1: PURPOSE; AUTHORITY; POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of Council. It is determined that sound can and does
constitute a hazard to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of
residents of the city. The mayor and city council, by way of Idaho Code section
50-308, are empowered to impose reasonable limitations and regulations upon the
production of sound to reduce the harmful effects thereof. Now, therefore, it
is hereafter the policy of the city to prevent and regulate sound wherever it
is deemed to be harmful to the health, safety, welfare, or quality of life of
the citizens of the city, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to
effectuate that purpose. (Ord. 388, 8-5-2003 Repealed & Replaced, Ord. 531, 10-
10-2023,)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY:                      Council, Idaho, or the area within the city limits
                           of Council, Idaho.
                           The area(s) of a facility, complex, apartment unit,
                           hotel, motel or the like that is open either to the
                           general public or persons with the permission of the
                           owner or agent of the owner of the area. This
COMMON AREA(S):            definition would include, but is not limited to, the
                           following: swimming pools, restaurants, patios, hot
                           tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies,
                           lounges, bars and other areas within the facility
                           that are either constructed or designed for use in
                           this manner.
                           Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
EMERGENCY:                 actual or imminent physical trauma or property
                           damage demanding immediate attention.
                           A motor vehicle belonging to a fire department,
                           firefighting association, or fire district, an
EMERGENCY VEHICLE:         ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a
                           federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement
                           agency.
                           Any equipment designed or used for sound production,
                           reproduction, or amplification, including, but not
                           limited to, any radio, television, phonograph,
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: musical instrument, stereo, tape player, compact
                           disc player, loudspeaker, public address (PA)
                           system, sound amplifier, or comparable sound
                           broadcasting device.
                           Any individual, association, organization, or entity
PERSON:                    having a legally recognized existence, whether
                           public or private.
                           Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and
                           intended for the overnight accommodation of persons.
                           In the event the building is used for multiple
PLACE OF RESIDENCE:        individual units (i.e., apartment, condominium,
                           hotel, motel, duplex, triplex, etc.), each
                           individual unit shall be considered a separate
                           residence for the purposes of this chapter.
                           Sound for which the information content is clearly
                           communicated to the listener, including, but not
                           limited to, understandable spoken speech,
PLAINLY AUDIBLE:           comprehension of whether a voice is raised or
                           normal, comprehensible musical rhythms, melody, or
                           instrumentation, and the source of which is
                           identifiable to the listener. (Ord. 531, 10-10-2023,
                           Prior Ord. 388, 8-5-2003)
 
4-3-3: PROHIBITED NOISES:
   A.   Loud Amplification Devices: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or permit the operation of any loud amplification device in such a
manner that the sound therefrom:
      1.   Is plainly audible within any place of residence not the source of
the sound; or
      2.   Is plainly audible upon a public right of way or street at a
distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source of such sound.
   B.   Compression Brakes: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
permit the operation of any compression type braking system (i.e., engine
compression brake, etc.) within the city limits from eleven o’clock (11:00)
P.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. the following day.
   C.   Noise In Excess of 70 Decibels: Production of noise by any means,
including but not limited to live or recorded voices or instruments, music,
exhaust systems of vehicles, and operation of machinery or equipment, in excess
of seventy (70) decibels as measured from any public road, space, or right of
way is prohibited.
      1.   Exemptions: The following is exempted from the provisions in this
subsection:
         a.   Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency vehicles.
         b.   Lawnmowers, garden tractors, and power tools between the hours of
7:00 AM and 11:00 PM.
         c.   Parades, concerts, festivals, and events permitted through the
city council.
         d.   Attendant noise connected with the actual performance of athletic
or sporting events.
         e.   The emission of sound for purposes of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency or for the performance of emergency work.
         f.   Sounds associated with normal conduct of a legally established
nontransient business when such sounds are customary, incidental, and within
the normal range appropriate to such use.
         g.   Noise associated with residential or commercial construction
between the hours of 7:00 AM and 11:00 PM. (Ord. 388, 8-5-2003; amd. 2015 Code;
Ord. 531, 10-10-2023)
4-3-4: PROVISIONS ARE ADDITIONAL:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall
not affect any other claim, cause of action, or remedy; nor, unless
specifically provided, shall it be deeded to repeal, amend, or modify any law,
ordinance, or regulation relating to noise or sound, but shall be deemed
additional to existing legislation and common law on such subject. (Ord. 531,
10-10-2023, Prior Ord. 388, 8-5-2003)
4-3-5: ENFORCEMENT BY CITATION:
   A.   Enforcement Official Citation: Any officer of the county sheriff’s
department or person empowered to enforce this chapter is authorized to issue a
uniform citation upon his own observation of a violation without the necessity
of a citizen complainant’s signature on said citation. By signing the citation,
the officer or person is certifying that he has reasonable grounds to believe
that the person cited committed the offense contrary to law.
   B.   Citizen Citation: A uniform citation may also be signed by any citizen
or person in whose presence an alleged violation of this chapter occurred and
be witnessed by an officer of the county sheriff’s department or person
empowered to enforce this chapter whose name shall be endorsed on the citation.
(Ord. 388, 8-5-2003; amd. 2015 Code; Ord. 531, 10-10-2023)
4-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of $300.00,
excluding court costs and fees. There is no right to a trial by jury of a
citation or complaint for an infraction, and such trials shall be held before
the court without a jury. (Ord. 388, 8-5-2003; amd. 2015 Code; Ord. 531, 10-10-
2023)
4-3-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or section of this chapter shall be held to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision or section shall be
considered separately and apart from the remaining provision or sections of
this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 531, 10-10-
2023)
CHAPTER 4
JUNK VEHICLES AND DEBRIS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Findings Of Fact
4-4-2: Definitions
4-4-3: Junk Vehicle On Public Right Of Way
4-4-4: Junk Vehicles, Machinery, Appliances And Debris On Public Or Private
Property
4-4-5: Removal Procedures
4-4-6: Salvage Permit
4-4-7: Violation; Penalty
4-4-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
All of the premises stated in the ordinance codified herein are hereby found to
be true and correct legislative and factual findings of the city council and
are hereby approved and incorporated into the body of this chapter as if copied
in their entirety. (Ord. 468, 6-8-2010)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
DEBRIS: Junk, rubbish and refuse.
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES: Examples, but not limited to: washers, dryers, freezers,
stoves, ovens, refrigerators, dishwashers, saws and other hazardous tools,
toasters, or other devices dependent upon electricity as a power source.
JUNK: Any discarded material or items including, but not limited to, glass,
rags, paper, metal, furniture, household items and tools.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle capable of being registered with the appropriate
department of the state, which is not registered or roadworthy.
MACHINERY: All articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or equipment
and any and all metal or wooden machinery, motors, equipment or tools.
MAJOR HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES: All articles usually referred to as
major household furnishings and appliances used in housekeeping, including, but
not limited to: chairs, tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators, stoves,
washers, dryers, furnaces; and grease, oil and paint containers.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Junk vehicles; nonlicensed, nonroadworthy trailers; all types
of machinery and equipment; electrical appliances or parts thereof; major
household furnishings and appliances; and/or debris that are visible from a
public place or public right of way.
REFUSE: Solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish, that may cause a public
nuisance.
RUBBISH: Refuse other than garbage, such as tin cans, bottles, ashes, paper,
pasteboard, cardboard or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds, and cuttings from
trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens, or other waste materials produced in the
normal course of doing business or in everyday living that may cause a public
nuisance. (Ord. 468, 6-8-2010; amd. 2015 Code; Ord. 538, 6-10-2025)
4-4-3: JUNK VEHICLE ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
It is unlawful for any person to park any "junk vehicle" as defined in this
chapter on the public right of way for any length of time; provided, however,
that upon notification to the county sheriff's department that a motor vehicle
has become disabled while being operated, such vehicle may be lawfully parked
against the curb area of a public right of way for a period not to exceed
twenty four (24) hours to effect repairs or arrange for removal. (Ord. 468, 6-
8-2010; amd. 2015 Code)
4-4-4: JUNK VEHICLES, MACHINERY, APPLIANCES AND DEBRIS ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY:
   A.   The accumulation and storage of junk vehicles, trailers, all types of
machinery and equipment, electrical appliances, or parts thereof and/or debris
on private or public property is hereby found to create a condition tending to
reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to
invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to health and safety to minors, to create a welcoming
environment for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety
and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of junk vehicles, trucks,
trailers, all types of machinery and equipment, electrical appliances, or parts
thereof and/or debris on private or public property, except as expressly herein
permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which shall be
removed.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation
to maintain junk vehicles, trailers, all types of machinery and equipment,
electrical appliances or parts thereof and/or debris on residential property or
business property exposed to the public view for a period of more than thirty
(30) days.
   C.   This section shall not apply to junk vehicles, or parts thereof, which
are completely enclosed within a building or a privacy fence which has been
approved by the city, in a lawful manner, where not visible from the street or
other public or private property. Any person who seeks an exception to this
section shall be required to come before the city council for any consideration
(i.e., salvage permit). (Ord. 468, 6-8-2010)
4-4-5: REMOVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Order To Remove: Any officer of the county sheriff's department or
member of the city council may order any junk vehicles, trailers, all types of
machinery and equipment, or parts thereof and/or debris removed.
   B.   Failure To Remove; Penalty: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for
any person to fail or refuse to remove an unidentified, stolen, wrecked,
abandoned or junk vehicle, trailer, all types of machinery and equipment,
electrical appliances or parts thereof and/or debris or other personal property
herein referred to, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in
accordance with section
4-4-3 of this chapter. Violation of any of the above shall result in a penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per occurrence.
   C.   Removal By City; Costs: If said junk vehicles, trailers, all types of
machinery and equipment, electrical appliances or parts thereof and/or debris
are not removed after a responsible person has been instructed to remove the
same, the county sheriff's department or the city may cause said junk vehicles,
trailers, all types of machinery and equipment, electrical appliances or parts
thereof and/or debris to be removed and the actual costs of removal or towing
charge, and a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per offense shall be charged. The procedure for ordering
said removal shall be developed and maintained by the city. (Ord. 468, 6-8-
2010; amd. 2015 Code)
4-4-6: SALVAGE PERMIT:
Upon application by any person for a special permit and the payment of a
nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council, the city
council may cause a permit to be issued to such applicant for salvage of parts
from one vehicle for necessary repair of an existing vehicle titled to that
person. The permit shall be valid for a period to be determined at the time of
permit issuance and not to exceed twelve (12) months, and will allow the
presence of two (2) junk vehicles on the property; one vehicle being used as
salvage and one vehicle being repaired, which vehicles shall be shielded from
public view. A permit issued according to this section shall not be renewed.
(Ord. 468, 6-8-2010; amd. 2015 Code)
4-4-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with
the misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 468, 6-8-2010)
CHAPTER 5
FLAMMABLE, OVERGROWN VEGETATION
SECTION:
4-5-1: Nuisance Declared
4-5-2: Prohibitions
4-5-3: Removal Procedures
4-5-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The suffering or permitting of any dry or flammable weeds, grass, or other rank
vegetable growth to grow and remain upon, or any flammable debris or substance
to accumulate upon, any private real property or premises within the city or to
any of the street parking places upon which any such private property and
premises abuts is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 170, 9-1967)
4-5-2: PROHIBITIONS:
No person, as the owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of any
private property or premises within the city, shall suffer or permit,
including, but not limited to, flammable weeds, grass, rank vegetable growth,
debris and substances upon such property, ditch, culvert or upon the street or
street parking area upon which such property abuts, or suffer or permit such to
grow in excess of ten inches (10") and/or to overhang or to rest upon the
sidewalk space in the city so as to interfere in any manner with the full, free
and unrestricted use of a sidewalk or sidewalk space. (Ord. 170, 9-1967; amd.
2015 Code)
4-5-3: REMOVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Remove: The city, acting by or through its clerk-treasurer or
public works supervisor, shall cause notice to be served, by certified mail,
upon the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of any real property or
premises within the city upon which or which the abutting street, street
parking area, ditch or culvert may be found any dry or flammable weeds, grass,
or other rank vegetable growth, or any flammable debris or substances, to cut
down and remove from such premises, ditch, culvert, street and street parking
all such dry or flammable weeds, grass or other rank vegetable growth, or to
remove any other flammable debris or substances from such premises within five
(5) days from the date of receipt of the certified mail. Should receipt of the
certified mail not be accepted within five (5) days of date of mailing, then
the city shall follow the procedures outlined in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Removal By City; Costs A Lien: If dry or flammable weeds, grass or
other rank vegetable growth shall not be cut down and removed from the premises
and street parking or such other flammable debris and substances are not
removed from the premises and street parking within the time specified in the
notice, the public works supervisor may cause the same to be cut down and/or
removed, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be a lien upon the premises upon
which the work shall have been performed. If the work is performed upon a
street parking, the time shall extend to the abutting premises. If the cost
shall not be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of service of a
statement of such costs upon the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
premises upon which or upon the abutting parking of which the work shall have
been performed, a notice of assessment for the costs may be certified and filed
with the county treasurer by the city clerk-treasurer on behalf of the city.
The notice of assessment shall be duly certified in accordance with Idaho Code
section 50-1008, and such assessment shall be placed on the assessment roll and
collected in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected. (Ord. 170,
9-1967; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 6
COUNTY MULTIHAZARD MITIGATION PLAN
SECTION:
4-6-1: Plan Adopted And Supported
4-6-1: PLAN ADOPTED AND SUPPORTED:
The city council hereby adopts and supports and will facilitate the
implementation of the Adams County multihazard mitigation plan as deemed
appropriate. (Res. 497, 8-13-2013)
CHAPTER 7
SHORT TERM RECREATIONAL VEHICLE USE
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-2: Definitions
4-7-3: License Requirements
4-7-4: Permit Types
4-7-5: Permit Process
4-7-6: Fees
4-7-7: Enforcement
4-7-8: Penalties And Fines
4-7-1:   PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is for the health, safety, sanitation and orderly
growth of the City of Council as it relates to the use of recreational vehicles
used for temporary housing outside of RV parks. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023)
4-7-2:   DEFINITIONS:
 
                               A motor home, travel trailer, or truck camper
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES (“RVs�with or without motive power designed for human
                               habitation for recreational or emergency
                               occupancy. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023)
 
4-7-3:   LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
All recreational vehicles located in the City limits must have a valid license
and registration. Unless a permit is obtained, RV occupation within the City is
limited to no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days on any single property
and no more than thirty (30) calendar days in a twelve-month period. The RV
shall not be connected to the City sewer system nor may the RV be located in a
street or easement. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023; amd. Ord. 532, 3-12-2024)
4-7-4:   PERMIT TYPES:
Permit E, Emergency RV Use: Emergency RV use is permitted when the occupants
have been displaced from their residence due to an emergency such as fire,
wind, flood, earthquake or other such disaster. The RV must be located on the
property owner’s property and inhabited by the property owner in order for
emergency RV use to be permitted, or within written permission of the property
owner. Renters of property that is uninhabitable due to an emergency shall not
be allowed to live in an RV on the rented property. Initial permit for thirty
(30) to ninety (90) days with one extension available for an additional 30-90
days if necessary. Proof of the emergency shall be required such as pictures of
areas affected, contracts with repair and maintenance contractors, etc. RVs are
allowed to be parked in an easement, but not the street from May 1 to October
31. No parking will be allowed in the easement or street from November 1 to
April 30.
Permit T, Transitional RV Use: Transitional RV use is permitted when a new home
is being constructed on property within Council City limits and the owners of
the land and new home are living in the RV on site temporarily. Initial permit
for ninety (90) to one hundred eighty (180) days shall be issued with proof of
building permit and building contract or manufactured home purchase. One
extension of ninety (90) days is available if need for additional time is
proven. RVs are allowed to be parked in an easement, but not the street from
May 1 to October 31. No parking will be allowed in the easement or street from
November 1 to April 30. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023)
4-7-5:   PERMIT PROCESS:
Landowners are required to complete an application process prior to a permit
being issued. The permit shall include the location of the land where the RV is
to be placed and where on the land it will be placed, the permit type desired,
photos and exhibits as necessary, a copy of the registration of the RV, photo
identification of the property owner, a copy of the deed for the property or
other proof of ownership and a signed affidavit indicating the truth and
correctness of the application along with all fees necessary or being charged.
Permits may be issued by the City Clerk’s Office for emergency RV use and
transitional RV use.
Recreational vehicles will comply with City Code for the zone in which they
reside. Generators shall only be in operation between the hours of 7 A.M. and 9
P.M.
When an application is approved, a permit shall be issued that bears the type
of permit being issued, the date in which it is valid and its expiration date.
The permit shall be displayed in the window of the RV that can be seen from the
abutting street. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023; amd. Ord. 532, 3-12-2024)
4-7-6:   FEES:
Fees will be set by Council City Council by resolution from time to time. (Ord.
528, 7-11-2023)
4-7-7:   ENFORCEMENT:
Recreational vehicles not bearing a valid non-expired permit, shall be removed
from the property at the owner’s expense. Any City Enforcement Officer duly
authorized by the Mayor and City Council shall enforce this chapter, including
sworn law enforcement officers. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023)
4-7-8:   PENALTIES AND FINES:
Violation of this chapter carries an initial penalty of a written warning to
the landowner.
Any violation that occurs after the written warning carries a civil penalty of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day paid to the City Treasurer for any day
after three (3) days up to fifteen (15) days, assessed to the landowner. If the
violation continues to occur, another civil penalty will be assessed to the
landowner in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day paid to the City
Treasurer for any day after sixteen (16) up to thirty (30) days. If a violation
continues after the thirty (30) days, or there is a failure to pay the civil
penalty after thirty (30) days, the landowner will be charged with a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to six (6) months in jail and a one thousand
dollar ($1,000.00) fine for every day a violation occurs, including all legal
costs incurred by the City. (Ord. 528, 7-11-2023)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
LAW ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Contracted With County
5-1-1: CONTRACTED WITH COUNTY:
Pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, the city has contracted with the
Adams County sheriff's department to enforce state statutes and county and city
ordinances, including, but not limited to, traffic enforcement and criminal and
civil enforcement. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
COMBINED FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-2-1: Combined Department Established
5-2-1: COMBINED DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
In accordance with the public comment at two (2) city council special meetings,
and in accordance with the request of the volunteer firefighters, it is hereby
declared to be the intent of the governing body of the city to establish a
combined fire department (see description of the combined boundary attached to
the resolution codified herein) consisting of the rural fire department and the
Council volunteer fire department, granting the governing powers and releasing
all liability to the elected fire commissioners. (Res. 317, 3-7-1995)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Location Restriction
5-3A-2: Size Of Enclosure
5-3A-3: Sanitary Premises
5-3A-4: Running At Large Prohibited
5-3A-5: Exemptions From Provisions
5-3A-6: Violations Declared A Nuisance
5-3A-7: Chickens
5-3A-8: Enforcement And Penalty
5-3A-1: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
Except only as herein otherwise provided, no person, partnership, association
or corporation shall, within the city, keep, harbor, shelter, stable or confine
any horses or cattle animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, either exotic or
native, except dogs and/or cats, in any stable, barn, or other building, or in
or upon any corral, lot, area or enclosure, where any portion of the exterior
boundaries of such building or enclosure is less than one hundred fifty feet
(150') distant of the place of residence of any person other than the owner or
keeper of the concerned horses or cattle animals, domestic livestock and
wildlife, either exotic or native, except dogs and/or cats. (Ord. 310, 6-7-
1994)
5-3A-2: SIZE OF ENCLOSURE:
Except only as herein otherwise provided, no horses or cattle animals, domestic
livestock and wildlife, either exotic or native, except dogs and/or cats, shall
be grazed, pastured, fed or kept in any enclosure within the city having an
area of less than one acre for each head of horses or cattle animals, domestic
livestock and wildlife, either exotic or native, except dogs and/or cats,
grazed, pastured, fed or kept therein and where any portion of the exterior
boundaries of such enclosure is less than one hundred fifty feet (150') distant
of the place of residence of any person other than the owner or keeper of the
concerned horses or cattle animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, either
exotic or native, except dogs and/or cats. (Ord. 310, 6-7-1994)
5-3A-3: SANITARY PREMISES:
Owners or persons in charge of buildings or enclosures within the city used for
the keeping, harboring or confining of horses or cattle animals, domestic
livestock and wildlife, either exotic or native, except dogs and/or cats, shall
at all times keep said premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from
accumulation of manure, litter or other debris constituting a menace to the
health or public safety or offensive to the senses of the general public. (Ord.
310, 6-7-1994)
5-3A-4: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
Horses or cattle animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, either exotic or
native, except dogs and/or cats, owned or reduced to possession by any person,
partnership, association or corporation are prohibited from being at large
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 310, 6-7-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3A-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provision of sections
5-3A-1 and
5-3A-2 of this article may, in the discretion of the city council, be waived on
a case by case basis as to any premises when all persons residing within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of the building, lot or enclosure where any horses or
cattle animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, either exotic or native,
except dogs and/or cats, are kept or grazed shall give written approval, to be
filed with the city clerk- treasurer, for the keeping or grazing of horses or
cattle animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, either exotic or native,
except dogs and/or cats, within such building or enclosure. (Ord. 310, 6-7-
1994; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3A-6: VIOLATIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
The keeping of horses or cattle animals, domestic livestock and wildlife,
either exotic or native, except dogs and/or cats, within the city in situations
or under conditions other than by this article authorized or permitted shall
constitute public or private nuisances which may be abated pursuant to
provisions of Idaho Code upon proceedings instituted by the city, including
reasonable attorney fees which may be assessed against the person creating or
maintaining such nuisance. (Ord. 310, 6-7-1994)
5-3A-7: CHICKENS:
Chickens may be allowed within the city limits in accordance with the
following:
   A.   Only hens are allowed; roosters are prohibited.
   B.   The total number of small farm animals must be no more than twelve (12)
per parcel in all zones.
   C.   All chickens must be enclosed in a structure that provides for safety,
protected from the weather, and providing a minimum of two (2) square feet per
animal. Enclosures must be roofed or otherwise enclosed on top as well as all
sides and must be kept clean to prevent offensive odors. All feed must be kept
in animalproof containers or indoors. In the residential zones, the enclosures
should be located on the side or behind the dwelling units.
   D.   Outside slaughtering of chickens is prohibited. (2015 Code)
5-3A-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
   A.   Violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be an
infraction, punishable by a fine according to Idaho Code. Each day such
violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Action for violation of the provisions of this article may be
instituted upon citation issued by any officer of the county sheriff's
department or by complaint of any citizen filed in magistrate court. (Ord. 310,
6-7-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
ARTICLE B. DOGS
SECTION:
5-3B-1: Animal Control Officer
5-3B-2: Licensing Regulations
5-3B-3: Running At Large; Dangerous, Vicious Dogs; Impoundment
5-3B-4: Vicious Dogs; Dogs That Bite
5-3B-5: Injuring, Destroying Or Trespassing On Public Property
5-3B-6: Nuisance Conditions
5-3B-7: Sanitary Premises
5-3B-8: Abandoned Dogs
5-3B-9: Unlawful Release Of Dog
5-3B-10: Dog Pound; Redemption Of Impounded Dogs; Fees
5-3B-11: Dog Kennels
5-3B-12: Violations; Penalties
5-3B-1: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   Appointment: The mayor, upon approval by the city council, is hereby
authorized to appoint an animal control officer. Whether contractual or
otherwise, this person with whom the city enters into agreement will be a city
employee for the control of dogs within the city.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   To issue warnings, either oral or written, or issue citations and
summonses, or sign complaints for violations of this article within the city,
appear as a witness and perform all other acts necessary for the enforcement of
this article.
      2.   To transport or destroy any dog which is stray or unclaimed for not
less than three (3) days, after appropriate public notification, or is
suffering from serious injury or disease. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
5-3B-2: LICENSING REGULATIONS:
   A.   License And Fee Required: Every person within the city who owns, keeps,
harbors or has custody of a dog of more than three (3) months of age shall
obtain a city dog license and pay therefor an annual license fee for each dog
as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd.
2015 Code)
   B.   Payment Of Fees; Late Charge; Penalty: License fees shall be due and
payable on or before January 10 of each year. Dogs attaining four (4) months of
age during the calendar year shall be licensed within ten (10) days of
attaining such age. For delinquent licenses purchased after January 10, there
shall be imposed a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per unlicensed animal, and said violation shall be deemed an
infraction. (Ord. 435, 3-11-2008; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Conditions Of License Issuance; Tag: Annual license fees shall be paid
to the city clerk-treasurer. The clerk- treasurer shall require proof of
current rabies vaccination and issue to such dog owner a metallic or durable
plastic tag, stamped with an identifying number and designed so that it may be
conveniently fastened to a dog collar or harness. Such tag shall be fastened to
the dog's collar or harness by the owner and shall be worn by the dog at all
times. Should a tag be lost, stolen or mutilated, a replacement tag must be
used and will be issued at a cost as established by resolution of the city
council.
   D.   Records Kept: The city clerk-treasurer shall maintain appropriate
records of identifying number, corresponding owner and receipt for the annual
license fee.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having
custody of any dog who fails or refuses to license such dog as required by this
section, or fails or refuses to keep the dog tag properly attached to the dog
so licensed, or fails or refuses to prove current adequate rabies vaccination
shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-3: RUNNING AT LARGE; DANGEROUS, VICIOUS DOGS; IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person owning
or having custody of any dog to allow the same to run at large in the city.
Dogs are at large when the animal is off the premises of the owner or person
who has custody of said dog. Provided, a dog shall not be considered running at
large if it is restrained by a leash not exceeding ten feet (10') in length or
unless such dog is confined in a motor vehicle.
   B.   Impoundment And Disposition:
      1.   The city animal control officer is authorized to enter upon the
private premises of any person to take possession of a licensed or unlicensed
dog when said dog is running at large, vicious or dangerous to other people, or
in fresh pursuit of such dog at the time the dog goes upon the private
property.
      2.   Unlicensed dogs or unclaimed dogs shall be picked up and taken to
the city dog pound for a time not to exceed fourteen (14) days. After a minimum
of three (3) days, if the dog is not claimed, the dog may be taken to an animal
shelter for adoption or destroyed in a humane manner. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
   C.   Violations; Penalties:
      1.   Running At Large: Any person who is found to be in violation of this
section regarding his dog running at large shall be guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      2.   Vicious, Dangerous Dog: Any person who is found to be in violation
of this section regarding a vicious or dangerous dog shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-4: VICIOUS DOGS; DOGS THAT BITE:
   A.   Confinement Requirements:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors or has
custody of a vicious dog to keep such dog within the city limits unless such
dog is confined within an absolutely secure enclosure. "Absolutely secure"
means no person except the owner or keeper shall be able to open the enclosure.
(Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   A vicious dog is unconfined if the dog is not securely confined
indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the
premises of the owner or keeper of the dog. The pen or structure must have
secure sides and either: a) a secure top attached to the sides; or b) be not
less than ten feet (10') in height. If the pen or structure has no bottom
secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than
one foot (1'). All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted and kept
in a clean and sanitary condition. It is unlawful for any owner to maintain a
vicious dog upon any premises which does not have a locked enclosure.
   B.   Requirements When Unconfined: The owner or keeper of a vicious dog
shall not allow or permit the dog to be beyond the premises of the owner or
keeper unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash as
defined in this subsection. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not
cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall
prevent it from biting any human or animal. The vicious dog shall be restrained
with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds
and not exceeding three feet (3') in length and shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
   C.   Warning Sign Required: The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall
display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning
sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises. Such sign shall be
in large enough lettering to be read from the street. A similar sign is
required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the dog. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
   D.   Authority Of Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer is
empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this section, and any such animal control officer is
empowered to seize and impound any vicious dog whose owner or keeper fails to
comply with the provisions of this section. In the event that the owner or
keeper of the animal refuses to surrender the dog to the animal control
officer, the animal control officer may request any peace officer to obtain a
search warrant and to seize the dog upon execution of the warrant.
   E.   Determination Of Vicious Dog; Encouraging Viciousness: Any dog which,
when unprovoked, attacks, scratches, kills, wounds, bites or otherwise injures
any human being or domestic animal is vicious. No person shall possess, harbor
or maintain care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dogfighting, or
train, torment, badger, bait, or use any dog for the purpose of causing or
encouraging the dog to attack human beings or domestic animals. For such
violation, the owner or keeper shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. If this is a first offense for the dog, then the court
shall set the matter for sentencing and notify the office of the city attorney
of the date, time and place of sentencing. In addition to any fine and/or jail
time imposed, the court may order as part of the sentence that the dog be
turned over to the animal control officer. The animal control officer is
authorized to seize the dog in the event it is not turned over thereto within
five (5) days of the order. Each day following the day of the order that the
dog is not turned over to the animal control officer is a separate misdemeanor.
If this is a second offense for the dog, then the court shall order as a part
of the sentence, regardless of the form of this judgment or any prior judgment,
that the dog be turned over to the animal control officer for destruction and
shall simultaneously issue an order to the animal control officer to seize the
dog in the event it is not turned over within five (5) days unless the office
of the city attorney or the animal control officer requests, in writing or in
person before the court, that no destruction order be given. Each day following
the day of the order that the dog is not turned over to the animal control
officer is a separate misdemeanor. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
   F.   Restitution Required: An adult owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall
be required to pay restitution for all medical costs incurred and property
damage sustained by any person or dog, in addition to any criminal fines and
costs imposed by the court. In the event the owner or keeper of a vicious dog
is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be required to pay for
the restitution as herein provided.
   G.   Bites From Dogs:
      1.   Notice Requirements:
         a.   When an owner or keeper of a dog has knowledge that his or her
dog has bitten a human being, such owner or keeper shall notify the animal
control officer of such bite, and the name and address of the person bitten, if
known.
         b.   Any person who is bitten by a dog shall notify the animal control
officer of such bite, giving a description of the dog, the time and
circumstances of the bite, and the name and address of the owner, if known.
         c.   When a doctor, veterinarian, hospital employee or other person
has information that a person has been bitten by a dog, such person shall
notify the animal control officer.
      2.   Confinement Of Biting Dog:
         a.   In order to permit observation of a dog for rabies, the owner of
any dog known to have bitten a human being must confine the dog immediately
after such biting for a period of ten (10) days in one of the following ways:
            (1)   Confinement in a licensed veterinary hospital.
            (2)   Confinement in an animal shelter impoundment facility
approved by the city.
         b.   Care shall be exercised to avoid neglect of or injury to such dog
during confinement pursuant to this section, and all costs or expenses incurred
as a result of such confinement shall be borne entirely by the owner. (Ord.
432, 9-11-2007)
   H.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who is found to be in violation of any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-5: INJURING, DESTROYING OR TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has
custody of any dog to allow or permit such dog to trespass upon and injure,
damage or destroy any personal or real property of any person, or any public
park, playground or school ground or other public property by, but not limited
to, urinating, defecating or digging on any property other than that of the
owner of such dog. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
   B.   Any person who is found to be in violation of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-6: NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has
custody of any dog to fail to exercise proper care and control of said dog so
as to prevent it from becoming a nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely
barking, attacking, biting or injuring of a person shall be deemed a nuisance.
(Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
   B.   Any person who is found to be in violation of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   If excessive aggressive behavior persists, said animal may be deemed,
by the city or court, vicious. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
5-3B-7: SANITARY PREMISES:
   A.   Every owner of a dog shall maintain his premises, or other location
where a dog owned by him is kept, including, but not limited to, dog kennels,
pens or runs, in a clean and sanitary condition so that such premises is free
from substantial amounts of dog waste matter and so that such premises is not
offensive to sight or smell, harborage to vermin or a health hazard. (Ord. 432,
9-11-2007)
   B.   Any person who is found to be in violation of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-8: ABANDONED DOGS:
   A.   Any person who is found to have intentionally abandoned a dog or dogs
in the city shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Any person who obtains a dog and turns said dog over to the city will
be held financially responsible, and a fee as established by resolution of the
city council will be required. This fee will be mandatory at the time that the
animal control officer receives the dog. The fee will pay for care of that
animal which includes, but is not limited to, dog pick up, impound fees,
shelter fees and/or disposal and mileage. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-9: UNLAWFUL RELEASE OF DOG:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner, to release any
dog restrained upon the owner's property without the owner's permission, or to
release his own or any other dog from the city pound or other place of
confinement without the consent of the animal control officer or other official
authorized to release dogs. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
   B.   Any person who is found to be in violation of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) and shall be ordered to pay restitution for any damage caused
through said person's release of such dog. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015
Code)
5-3B-10: DOG POUND; REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS; FEES:
   A.   City Pound: The mayor, upon approval by the city council, is authorized
to establish a city pound and/or enter into an agreement with any person or
entity, whether contractual or otherwise, for the impoundment, keeping, care
and disposal of dogs seized in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Redemption Of Impounded Dogs: Any dog impounded in accordance with the
provisions of this article may be redeemed by the owner prior to adoption or
destruction of such impounded dog by paying all fines or fees accrued by such
impounding as provided by this article. Fines and fees must be paid to the city
clerk-treasurer or animal control officer before the dog is released. (Ord.
432, 9-11-2007)
   C.   Impound Fees: Except as otherwise provided, the owner of any dog
impounded under the provisions of this article may redeem or reclaim his dog
upon payment of the fees established by resolution of the city council, as and
for impound reimbursement fees, along with a fee as established by resolution
of the city council, as and for care and feeding for such dog. Any and all
veterinary or hospital costs that said animal might need will be passed to the
owner of said dog to be paid along with other impoundment fees. (Ord. 432, 9-
11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3B-11: DOG KENNELS:
   A.   Determination Of Kennel; License Requirements:
      1.   Determination Of Kennel; License Required: The owner of any three
(3) dogs or more, regardless of age, shall be deemed the operator of a dog
kennel. It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain or possess upon the premises of
any one household more than two (2) dogs unless the owner or person in charge
thereof shall have obtained a kennel license. Provided further, that in the
event the number of dogs upon the premises of any one household exceeds the
number of two (2) dogs for the reason that newborn puppies have been born to a
dog living on said premises, then and in that event, it shall be lawful to
keep, maintain and possess upon said premises, said puppies until they reach
the age of three (3) months without obtaining a kennel license.
      2.   Application For License:
         a.   The application for kennel license shall state the name and
address of the owner of said kennel, the location where the kennel is to be
kept and the number of dogs proposed to be kept. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
         b.   City council will make a decision on the issuing of a license
after receiving response from notices sent to owners of property within three
hundred feet (300') of the premises upon which the kennel is to be maintained.
            (1)   City staff will send a notice via certified mail to owners
above, and keep a listing of all property owners contacted and their decision
on whether to allow or disallow the requested kennel. The owner has ten (10)
business days from date of mailing of the certified mail to respond. Cost of
mailing the certified mail will be paid by the applicant. (2015 Code)
      3.   License Fee; Posting License; Nontransferability: If a kennel
license is required and issued, the holder thereof shall pay the city an annual
license fee as established by resolution of the city council, and said
certificate of license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the kennel. No
kennel license shall be transferable. (Res. 444, 12-9-2008; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Location: No kennel shall be established within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of any dwelling house other than that of the kennel owner; provided,
that all other regulations of this article are met. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd.
2015 Code)
   C.   Sanitary Premises; Noise Control: The dog kennel shall be kept at all
times in a clean and sanitary condition, and the dogs shall be reasonably
restrained from annoying the neighborhood or the general public by loud,
frequent, or habitual barking, yelping or howling.
   D.   Compliance With Other Regulations: The issuance of the kennel license
shall not relieve the owner from the obligation of obtaining an individual dog
license, nor shall any of the provisions hereof be deemed to vary or alter any
of the zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
5-3B-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Fine Only: Any individual charged with a violation of any section of
this article, unless otherwise specifically set forth, shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by fine only, and no individual shall be subject to
incarceration. Such individual shall have no right to court appointed counsel
or right to trial by jury. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007)
   B.   Notice Of Violation: In order to eliminate burdening the court system
with violation of this article and as a convenience to the public, the animal
control officer may, in addition to or in lieu of issuing a citation for a
violation of this article, issue to any person who is in violation of this
article a notice of ordinance violation. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Fine Amounts: Any person receiving a notice of violation may pay, in
addition to any required license fee or impound fees, a fixed penalty in the
amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a first offense, fifty dollars
($50.00) for a second offense and seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a third
offense within one calendar year. Such penalty and/or license fee and impound
fee shall be paid to the city clerk- treasurer, in person or by mail, within
fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the notice of ordinance violation. (Ord.
435, 3-11-2008)
   D.   Failure To Pay Fine; Citation: In the event a person does not make
payment of the penalty and/or license and impound fee as set forth in this
section: for a first offense, an infraction citation for violation of the
section of this article for which the notice of ordinance violation was given
shall be issued; for a second or subsequent offense, in the event a person does
not make payment of the penalty and/or license and impound fee as set forth in
this section, a misdemeanor citation for violation of the section of this
article for which the notice of ordinance violation was given shall be issued.
   E.   Penalty For Failure To Appear In Court: Any person who fails to appear
before the court at the time or place directed in any citation which may be
issued for a violation of this article shall be dealt with in accordance with
Idaho Code section 19-3901A. (Ord. 432, 9-11-2007; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Disorderly Conduct
5-4-2: Disturbing Assemblies
5-4-3: Deposit Of Offensive Substances
5-4-4: Open Alcoholic Beverage Containers; Consumption In Public
5-4-5: Discharge Of Weapons
5-4-6: Vagrancy
5-4-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Any person who, by any loud or unusually loud, boisterous, insulting, profane
or obscene language, or by fighting, challenging to fight, or by being drunk in
any building, or upon any street or alley or other places within the corporate
limits of the city, or who, in any other manner, disturbs the peace and quiet
of any person, place or neighborhood, within the said incorporated limits of
the city, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any person, upon conviction for the violation of the provisions of this
section, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 6, 2-2-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
5-4-2: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any means whatsoever, to either
wilfully or maliciously disturb the peace and quiet of any place of worship,
meeting or assemblage of people within the corporate limits of the city. Any
person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 15, 2-9-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
5-4-3: DEPOSIT OF OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any deleterious, decaying,
noxious or offensive matter of any kind or nature upon any street, alley,
thoroughfare, lot or other place within the corporate limits of the city. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 7, 2-2-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
5-4-4: OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS; CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC:
   A.   Findings And Purpose: It being the mandatory duty of governments to
establish and secure the public health, convenience, safety, and welfare of the
jurisdiction they serve; and it being found and declared by the city council
that the carrying of open containers of alcoholic beverages and consumption of
said alcoholic beverages upon the public property of the city contributes
directly to littering of such public areas, to the creation of obstacles to
safe pedestrian and vehicular travel, and to the creation of unseemly and
unhealthy areas upon such public property, this section is enacted in pursuance
of and for the purposes of securing and promoting the public health,
convenience, safety and welfare and the peace and quiet of the city and its
inhabitants. The City also finds that occasionally allowing open alcoholic
beverages in limited designated public areas during certain officially
sanctioned citywide celebrations or festivals, when augmented by sufficient law
enforcement and other controls to protect public safety, can foster economic
development, support general commerce, and enhance the City’s overall welfare.
   B.   Definitions:
    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol.
   CONTAINER: Any bottle, cup, glass, or other vessel which is used for and
capable of holding liquids.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any of the roadways, intersections, or other property
belonging to the city, and sidewalks and rights of way open to the general
public though not owned by the city, which said property is in the corporate
limits of the city. (Ord. 224, 9-8-1981; amd. Ord. 299, 1-5-1993)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to consume
or carry in an open container, any alcoholic beverage upon public property
within the corporate limits of the city. Violations hereof shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections
5-4-4 -B and C above, the City Council may, by resolution duly adopted,
temporarily suspend the prohibitions in Section
5-4-4 -C, said resolution specifying the areas, dates, and times of the
suspension, and including a map of areas included in the suspension. Any such
resolution shall be provided to law enforcement agencies prior to the effective
date of the suspension. (Ord. 224, 9-8-1981; amd. 2015 Code; Ord. 539, 6-10-
2025)
5-4-5: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
    DANGEROUS WEAPON: Bow and arrow, pellet gun, pellet pistol, slingshot or
any other weapon or device which, when used in the ordinary manner contemplated
by its design and construction, will propel a projectile which is likely to
cause great bodily injury.
   FIREARM: Any deadly weapon capable of ejecting or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of any explosive or combustible propellant.
   B.   Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or
dangerous weapon within the city limits. (Ord. 277, 10-9-1990)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 277, 10-9-1990; amd. 2015 Code)
5-4-6: VAGRANCY:
   A.   Any person without visible means of support who, for a period of ten
(10) days, shall loiter within the city without seeking employment, or shall
lie and sleep in any outbuilding, street, alley or other place, other than a
room fitted for that purpose, or shall loaf or loiter in or near any public
building within the corporate limits of the city, or who shall beg or solicit
alms, or any other idle and dissolute person, shall, within the meaning of this
section, be deemed a vagrant and guilty of vagrancy.
   B.   Any person guilty of vagrancy as set forth in this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and any person so
convicted shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 14, 2-9-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MINORS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Curfew
5-5-2: Tobacco Sales And Use
5-5-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote the health and
safety of minors and of the community in general by the establishment of a
curfew to regulate the hours minors can be or remain upon the alleys, streets,
other public places, and places of business and amusement in the city.
   B.   Definitions: For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
    HABITUALLY VIOLATES: Any minor who has violated the provisions of this
section more than two (2) times.
   MINOR: Any person below the age of eighteen (18) years, not otherwise
emancipated pursuant to law.
   C.   Curfew Hours: It is unlawful for any minor to be upon any of the
alleys, streets, or public places or places of business and amusement in the
city between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M. of the following day.
   D.   Responsibility Of Parents, Guardians And Businesses:
      1.   Parents And Guardians: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or
other person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit
such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business or
amusement or other public places within the curfew hours set by subsection C of
this section, except as otherwise provided in subsection E of this section.
      2.   Businesses: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be
in or upon any place of business or amusement operated thereby within the
curfew hours set by subsection C of this section, except as provided in
subsection E of this section. (Ord. 217, 7-8-1980)
   E.   Affirmative Defense: The restriction provided by subsection C of this
section shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent
or other person charged with the care and custody of such minor, or other
responsible person over twenty one (21) years of age, nor shall the restriction
apply to any minor who is traveling directly between his home or place of
residence and: 1) his place of employment; or 2) the place where any library,
official place of worship, municipal or school function is being held.
   F.   Violations; Penalties:
      1.   Adults: Any adult, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
subsection D of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Minors: Any person violating the provisions of subsection D of this
section who is a minor shall be within the curfew of and subject to the
provisions of the juvenile corrections act, Idaho Code section 20-501 et seq.,
and shall be detained or otherwise dealt with pursuant to said act. (Ord. 217,
7-8-1980; amd. 2015 Code)
5-5-2: TOBACCO SALES AND USE:
   A.   Providing To, Permitting Use Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the
corporate limits of the city to either give, sell, barter or exchange any
tobacco, cigar or cigarette, or any substance or compound of which tobacco, in
any form, constitutes a component part, to any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years, or to suffer or permit any such person to smoke, chew or otherwise
use any tobacco, cigar or cigarette in and around any building or premises
owned or controlled by any such person, firm or corporation.
      2.   Any person violating this subsection A shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Use Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years, upon any street or alley or within any building or other place within
the corporate limits of the city, to either chew or smoke tobacco in any form
whatever.
      2.   Any person violating this subsection B shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 29, 2-5-1906; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 6
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Fireworks
5-6-2: Maximum Quantity Of Explosives Permitted
5-6-1: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Illegal Fireworks Prohibited: The sale or discharge of any illegal
fireworks as designated by state law is hereby prohibited in the city. (Ord.
270, 4-10-1990)
   B.   Discharge Near City Park: The ignition or discharge of any fireworks
within one hundred feet (100') of the city park is hereby prohibited. (Ord.
269, 4-10-1990)
5-6-2: MAXIMUM QUANTITY OF EXPLOSIVES PERMITTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to be in possession of
more than five hundred (500) pounds of dynamite, blasting powder or other
explosives at any one time. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and each and every day of violation shall be held to be a
separate offense. (Ord. 57, 3-6-1919; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 7
DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING
SECTION:
5-7-1: City Assist In Filing Complaint
5-7-2: Publication Of Provisions To Create Awareness
5-7-3: Fair Housing Program
5-7-1: CITY ASSIST IN FILING COMPLAINT:
Within available resources, the city will assist all persons who feel they have
been discriminated against because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, disability, or familial status to seek equity under federal and state
laws by filing a complaint with the U.S. department of housing and urban
development, office of fair housing and equal opportunity, compliance division.
(Res. 393, eff. 2-10-2004)
5-7-2: PUBLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO CREATE AWARENESS:
The city shall publicize this resolution and through this publicity shall cause
owners of real estate, developers and builders to become aware of their
respective responsibilities and rights under the federal fair housing law and
amendments and any applicable state or local laws or ordinances. (Res. 393,
eff. 2-10-2004)
5-7-3: FAIR HOUSING PROGRAM:
The program will, at a minimum, include, but not be limited to:
   A.   The printing and publicizing of this policy and other applicable fair
housing information through local media and community contacts;
   B.   Distribution of posters, fliers and any other means, which will bring
to the attention of those affected, the knowledge of their respective
responsibilities and rights concerning equal opportunity in housing; and
   C.   Preparing an analysis of impediments to fair housing choice and actions
to mitigate such impediments. (Res. 393, eff. 2-10-2004)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Traffic Laws Adopted
6-1-2: Vehicles Carrying Explosives
6-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED:
   A.   Purpose: It is hereby declared to be the intent of the governing body
of the city to aid and assist, by whatever means possible, for the utmost
consistency in traffic regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having
such jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by
the cities of Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within
the state. (Ord. 183, 2-2-1971, eff. retroactive to 1-2-1971)
   B.   State Regulations Adopted: There is hereby adopted for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets and public
thoroughfares of the city that certain code identified as the 1994 revised
edition, Idaho motor vehicle laws, more particularly title 49, Idaho Code.
(Ord. 395, 9-7-2004; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Copy On File: One copy of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, together with
any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk-treasurer, shall
be kept on file in his office for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 183,
2-2-1971, eff. retroactive to 1-2-1971; amd. 2015 Code)
6-1-2: VEHICLES CARRYING EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Definition: The term "motor vehicle", as used in this section, shall
include a truck, truck and trailer, or other combination of vehicular units
having a total carrying capacity of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons.
   B.   Restrictions:
      1.   No motor vehicle carrying more than two thousand (2,000) gallons of
petroleum fuel having a flashpoint of less than one hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(100°F) shall be permitted to unload such fuel at any garage, service station
or other public dispensary of such fuel within the city.
      2.   No petroleum fuel having a flashpoint below one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F) shall be delivered within the city from a motor vehicle
parked or standing upon any street, alley or sidewalk.
   C.   Responsibility Of Operator: The operator of any motor vehicle
delivering liquid petroleum products of any kind within the city limits shall
remain at the control valve of such vehicle at all times while such products
are being discharged therefrom. (Ord. 191, 11-9-1971)
   D.   Violation; Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 191, 11-9-1971; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Speed Limits
6-2-2: Through And Stop Streets
6-2-3: Bicycles And Skateboards On Sidewalks
6-2-4: Scene Of Fire
6-2-5: Reckless, Careless Driving
6-2-1: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Applicability Of State And City Regulations: The state traffic laws
regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within
the city except as this section, as authorized by state law, hereby declares
and determines regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in
certain areas, in which event, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this section when
signs are in place giving notice thereof.
   B.   Reasonable And Prudent Speed: No person shall drive a vehicle on a
highway at speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every
event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with
any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the highway in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
   C.   Specific Speed Limits: Except when a special hazard exists that
requires lower speed for compliance with subsection B of this section, the
limits specified in this subsection or established as hereinafter authorized
shall be lawful speeds, and any speed in excess of the limits specified shall
be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent, and that
it is unlawful.
      1.   Alleys: The speed limit shall be ten (10) miles per hour in any
alley.
      2.   School Zones:
         a.   The speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour when passing
any school building or when crossing any marked school zone, such zone to
extend one hundred fifty feet (150'), unless otherwise posted, in either
direction from any marked school crossing when appropriate signs giving notice
thereof are erected, and any of the following exist:
            (1)   A school speed limit sign with flashing lights attached and
the words "when flashing" included and the lights are activated; or
            (2)   A school speed limit sign with "when children are present"
included thereon, or there is a child or children present. "When children are
present" shall be defined to mean whenever one or more children are on the
roadway, sidewalk, pathway, road shoulder, in front of school buildings, or on
adjacent school grounds. This definition applies to children present on the
same side of the street as the school building, as well as across the street
from the school building in any direction within the marked school zone, and is
not restricted to school days or hours.
            (3)   A school speed limit sign with "7:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M."
included thereon.
            (4)   On streets where the maximum speed limit is twenty (20) miles
per hour, a school zone will be identified by a sign stating "school". (Ord.
395, 9-7-2004)
         b.   No person shall operate a vehicle on a highway in a marked school
zone in excess of the speed limit as established in this subsection C2. Any
person that violates this subsection shall be deemed guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be assessed a fixed penalty of three
hundred dollars ($300.00), plus court costs and fees as established by
resolution of the city council. An infraction is punishable only by a penalty
not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) and for which no period of
incarceration may be imposed. There is no right to a trial by jury of a
citation or complaint for an infraction, and such trial shall be held before
the court without a jury. (Ord. 395, 9-7-2004; amd. 2015 Code)
      3.   All Other Streets: The speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per
hour upon all other streets in the city. (Res. 399, 8-9-2005; amd. 2015 Code)
   D.   Authority To Alter Speed Limits: Whenever the city council determines,
on the basis of an engineering or traffic investigation, and the residential,
urban or business character of the neighborhood abutting the highway in a
residential, business or urban district, that the speed limit permitted under
this section is greater than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found
to exist upon a highway or part of a highway or because of the residential,
urban or business character of the neighborhood abutting the highway in a
residential, business or urban district, the city council may determine and
declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit which: (Ord. 395, 9-7-2004; amd.
2015 Code)
      1.   Decreases the limit within a residential, business or urban
district; or
      2.   Decreases the limit outside an urban district.
   E.   Driving Too Slowly: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic at the point of operation thereof, except when a
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with any law,
rule, or regulation. (Ord. 395, 9-7-2004)
6-2-2: THROUGH AND STOP STREETS:
   A.   Designated: All that portion of Michigan Street, Illinois Avenue and
Dartmouth Street, traversed by the north and south highways, as now located,
are hereby declared to be through streets, and all streets, roads and alleys
intersecting or entering the same are hereby declared to be "stop streets", and
all motor vehicles must be brought to a full stop before entering on any such
through streets from any such stop streets. (Ord. 90, 5-14-1935)
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is hereby declared to
be an infraction, and any person convicted of a violation of this section shall
be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 90, 5-14-1935; amd. 2015 Code)
6-2-3: BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS ON SIDEWALKS:
The riding, parking or leaving of unattended bicycles or skateboards on city
sidewalks unless using designated bicycle racks is hereby prohibited and deemed
an infraction. A fine of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for the first
offense, ten dollars ($10.00) for the second offense and fifty dollars ($50.00)
for the third offense. (Ord. 261, 3-7-1989; amd. 2015 Code)
6-2-4: SCENE OF FIRE:
   A.   Driving Over Fire Hose:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of
the city to drive, move or operate any vehicle over, upon or across any line of
fire hose which shall have been run or laid along, upon or across any street,
alley or road within the city, or to in any manner injure or destroy any such
fire hose. (Ord. 92, 8-4-1936)
      2.   Any person violating the provisions of subsection A1 of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and, in addition, may be required to pay the damages
occasioned by such unlawful act for collection of which civil action may be
prosecuted in behalf of the city.
   B.   Authority To Close Roadways: The county sheriff's department, public
works supervisor, fire chief, mayor and any city council member, or other
person in charge of any line of fire hose laid down on any street, alley or
road within the city for the purpose of fighting fire, or for any other
purpose, is hereby empowered to close any such street, alley or road to all
vehicular traffic when a fire hose is in use, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive or operate any vehicles upon or across such street, alley or
road while so closed to traffic. A violation of this subsection shall be a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 92, 8-4-1936; amd. 2015 Code)
6-2-5: RECKLESS, CARELESS DRIVING:
Any person who, by reckless or careless riding, or driving in a careless or
reckless manner, or by fast riding or driving upon the public streets of the
city, endangers the inhabitants of the city or disturbs the peace and quiet of
the inhabitants thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 30, 2-5-1906; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Method Of Parking
6-3-2: Stopping, Standing Or Parking In Specified Places
6-3-3: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
6-3-4: Parking During Snow Removal
6-3-5: Two Hour Parking
6-3-6: Enforcement And Penalty
6-3-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
Except in those areas within the city where angle parking is permitted, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way highway shall be stopped or parked
with the right hand wheels parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the
right hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right hand
shoulder. (Ord. 291, 9-8-1992)
6-3-2: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, in
compliance with law, the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
device, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         a.   On the traffic side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a highway.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks.
         i.   On any place where traffic control devices prohibit stopping.
      2.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at any intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of
a highway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a highway opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance (when properly signposted).
         f.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit standing.
      3.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where traffic control devices prohibit parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as to be unlawful. (Ord.
291, 9-8-1992)
6-3-3: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
The city council may, by resolution, determine and designate by proper signs
which parking spaces shall be limited to parking for persons with disabilities
only within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in
a space reserved for persons with disabilities, except for a vehicle that is
momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a person with a disability
to enter or leave the vehicle, unless the vehicle is displaying special license
plates for persons with disabilities, a special card for persons with
disabilities or a special temporary card as prescribed in Idaho Code section
48-410. (Ord. 291, 9-8-1992; amd. 2015 Code)
6-3-4: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the term "off street or highway
parking" shall be defined as parking so that the vehicle is at least ten feet
(10') off the pavement of all city streets.
   B.   Parking Restrictions:
      1.   From each November 15 until the following March 15, no person shall
park any vehicle on any public street or use off street or highway parking
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to
allow for snow removal.
      2.   All future places of residence shall provide for adequate off street
parking. (Ord. 314, 12-6-1994)
   C.   Enforcement And Penalty: Failure to use off street parking shall be
deemed an infraction and shall cause the offender's vehicle(s) to be towed away
and impounded by the city. Vehicles may be claimed by paying the towing fee and
paying a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 314, 12-6-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
6-3-5: TWO HOUR PARKING:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for longer than two (2) hours in
any one location on that portion of Illinois Avenue from Michigan Street to
Fairfield Avenue between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. (Ord. 406, 2-7-2006)
6-3-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Penalty: Any act which constitutes a violation of this
chapter shall be an infraction as defined in Idaho Code title 49, requiring the
payment of a fixed penalty as set forth in Idaho infraction rule 9 for parking
infractions. (Ord. 291, 9-8-1992)
   B.   Administrative Procedure:
      1.   In order to eliminate burdening the court system with violations of
this chapter, and as a convenience to the public, any peace officer may, in
lieu of issuing an infraction citation for a violation of this chapter, issue
to any person who is in violation of this chapter a notice of ordinance
violation.
      2.   Any person receiving a notice of ordinance violation may pay a fixed
penalty in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Such penalty shall be
paid to the city clerk- treasurer, in person or by mail, within ten (10) days
of the issuance of the notice of ordinance violation. (Ord. 291, 9-8-1992; amd.
2015 Code)
      3.   In the event a person does not make payment of the penalty as set
forth in this subsection B, an infraction citation for violation of the section
of this chapter for which the notice of ordinance violation was given shall be
issued. (Ord. 291, 9-8-1992)
CHAPTER 4
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
6-4-1: Lights Required
6-4-2: Open Cutout Prohibited
6-4-1: LIGHTS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave standing upon
any of the public streets of the city, after dark, any automobile or other
power driven vehicle, without displaying conspicuously, both front lights and
taillights, or to drive or operate any such automobile, or other power driven
vehicle, after dark in the nighttime without displaying both headlights and
taillights, the taillight to be or show red, and a rear license plate
illumination light. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 51, 5-21-1917; amd. 2015 Code)
6-4-2: OPEN CUTOUT PROHIBITED:
No motor driven vehicle within the city shall be driven within the corporate
limits with the cutout open. Any person violating this section shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 70, 8-9-1920; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Compliance With State And County Laws
6-5-2: Operation On Designated Streets
6-5-3: Speed Limit
6-5-4: Lights
6-5-5: Hours Of Operation
6-5-6: Prohibited Acts
6-5-7: Violation; Penalty
6-5-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND COUNTY LAWS:
All state and county laws concerning snowmobiles shall be obeyed, including
drinking and driving, stopping for intersections, licensed drivers and
registration of snowmobiles. (Ord. 298, 1-5-1993)
6-5-2: OPERATION ON DESIGNATED STREETS:
The snowmobile operator shall ride from his house directly to a designated exit
street. There shall be no running up and down the street or around the block.
(See the map of designated streets attached to the ordinance codified herein.)
(Ord. 298, 1-5-1993)
6-5-3: SPEED LIMIT:
The speed limit for snowmobiles is the same as for cars. (Ord. 298, 1-5-1993)
6-5-4: LIGHTS:
Headlights and taillights must be in good working order and on. (Ord. 298, 1-5-
1993)
6-5-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Snowmobiles may be ridden within the city limits between eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. only. (Ord. 298, 1-5-1993)
6-5-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
There shall be no towing of anything and no hookybobbing. (Ord. 298, 1-5-1993)
6-5-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 298, 1-5-1993; amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Public Works Construction Standards
7-1-2: Culverts Required
7-1-3: Obstructing Public Ways Prohibited
7-1-1: PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards Adopted: The most recent version of "Idaho Standards For
Public Works Construction" shall govern all public works construction in the
city. (Ord. 301, 3-23-1993; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Additional Standards:
      1.   Water main lines shall be ductile iron for all mains six inches (6")
in diameter and larger class 50 or greater with brass wedges. All other mains
shall be class 150 PVC or equal.
      2.   Water services shall have class K copper service lines from the main
to the water meter. Saddle and corporation stop is required. The water meter
shall be Rockwell with fittings and associated brass being Mueller.
      3.   Fire hydrants shall have a minimum of five inch (5") diameter valve
opening, four inch (4") pumper nozzle and two inch (2") to two and one-half
inch (21/2") hose nozzles and shall be made by Waterous or Mueller.
      4.   All water main line fittings shall be mechanical or flanged joint.
      5.   All water valves shall be Waterous or Mueller.
      6.   Wastewater and drainage system mains shall be eight inches (8") or
larger and be PVC SDR35 or approved equal. (Ord. 301, 3-23-1993)
7-1-2: CULVERTS REQUIRED:
All driveways crossing city drainage ditches shall have a minimum of twelve
inch (12") culverts installed with all expenses for the culverts paid by the
property owner. All culvert pipe installation shall be supervised and approved
by the city maintenance crew. (Ord. 334, 4-8-1997)
7-1-3: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Streets, Alleys And Highways: It shall be unlawful for any person to
obstruct, in any manner, the free use and passageway of any street, alley,
thoroughfare or highway of the city, county and state.
   B.   Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner,
obstruct any sidewalk built upon any street or alley or any other thoroughfare
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 8, 2-9-1903)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 8, 2-9-1903; amd. 2015 Code)
ARTICLE A. CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Scope Of Provisions
7-1A-2: Determination Of Required Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks
7-1A-3: Installation Required; Responsibility For Costs; Waivers
7-1A-4: Permit Required; Survey
7-1A-5: Completion Requirements
7-1A-6: City Rights; Nonliability
7-1A-7: Specifications
7-1A-1: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The changes and building requirements described in this article shall be
applicable to the incorporated limits of the city upon its passage and shall
additionally be applicable to the council area of city impact upon the
appropriate consent being received from the Adams County commissioners. (Ord.
341, 10-7-1997)
7-1A-2: DETERMINATION OF REQUIRED CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS:
The public works supervisor or person employed by the city with such authority,
or his designee, shall inspect all curbs, gutters and sidewalks, and if the
same are found to be so damaged or defective so as to require, in his or her
judgment, the construction of new curbs, gutters and sidewalks, and in all
cases where there is no curb, gutter and sidewalk, such fact shall be reported
to the mayor and city council. If, after consideration of such report and
recommendation of the public works supervisor, the mayor and city council deem
it necessary, they shall order such curbs, gutters and sidewalks to be repaired
or reconstructed. (Ord. 341, 10-7-1997; amd. 2015 Code)
7-1A-3: INSTALLATION REQUIRED; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS; WAIVERS:
Any person who files an application for development of property within the
city, which property has frontage abutting upon or along a public street,
whether the development be single residential, tract residential, commercial,
industrial or otherwise, shall be responsible as part of any development to
install curbs, gutters and sidewalks along the entire distance that the
property abuts the street. Property shall be considered as abutting even though
it may abut a state or city right of way, or even though the improvement may be
placed upon a state or city road right of way. The landowner whose property
abuts the curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the engineering, installation, maintenance, upkeep, repair and
replacement and shall assume all liability for the curbs, gutters and
sidewalks. The council may waive any part of this requirement after showing
that a waiver would be in the best interests of the city. (Ord. 341, 10-7-1997)
7-1A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; SURVEY:
Any person desiring or required to install cement curbs, gutters and sidewalks
shall secure a permit for construction from the city clerk-treasurer. As a
condition of granting the permit, the public works supervisor, or person
employed by the city with such authority, or his designee, shall review the
proposed project, and if, in the opinion of that city agent, a survey would be
required to properly establish property lines or properly establish a grade,
then a survey may be required for those purposes. In all other cases, before a
permit is issued, the public works supervisor, or person employed by the city
with such authority, or his designee, shall indicate on the application form
whether a survey is required or waived. (Ord. 341, 10-7-1997)
7-1A-5: COMPLETION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Time For Completion:
      1.   In all cases where curbs, gutters and sidewalks have been required,
completion of the same shall be prior to occupancy in the case of new
construction, and within ninety (90) days of notification of the landowner in
all other cases. Any landowner may petition the city for an extension of time
which may be granted upon good cause being shown to the city council.
      2.   Furthermore, should any landowner fail to construct any required
curbs, gutters and sidewalks within the time allowed, the landowner shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition, the city shall notify the landowner
of its failure to comply with the curb, gutter and sidewalk requirements.
   B.   Completion By City; Costs:
      1.   If a substantial beginning on the required curbs, gutters and
sidewalks is not made within thirty (30) days after the notice, and the work is
not completed within a reasonable time thereafter, then such required curbs,
gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed or completed, as the case may be, by
the city.
      2.   Upon completion of the construction of the curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, the costs thereof shall be paid by the city. As soon thereafter as
is possible, the city shall serve the property owner with an itemized statement
of costs of construction and all service costs incurred to that time. If the
costs are not paid within seven (7) days after such service, then the city
attorney shall collect such accounts, together with costs and attorney fees.
(Ord. 341, 10-7-1997)
7-1A-6: CITY RIGHTS; NONLIABILITY:
   A.   Nothing provided herein shall alter or amend the city's right to
proceed against the owner of the property for curb, gutter and sidewalk
construction as provided in section
7-1A-5 of this article. (Ord. 341, 10-7-1997; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Any and all liability in any way associated with the engineering,
installation, maintenance, upkeep, repair and replacement of any curb, gutter
or sidewalk shall be the exclusive liability of the adjacent landowner, and the
city shall not assume or become liable in any manner. (Ord. 341, 10-7-1997)
7-1A-7: SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   All construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall comply with
"Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction" SD-701, SD-702, SD-713, SD-714,
and SD-715, as enacted or hereafter amended.
   B.   1. Compliance shall be with the Americans with disabilities act,
compliance for curb, gutter or sidewalk construction and for modification of
curbs, gutters and sidewalks as it relates to building construction.
      2.   All curbs, gutters and sidewalks, either new construction or
substantial reconstruction, must comply with the Americans with disabilities
act accessibility guidelines (ADAAG) and/or the uniform federal accessibility
standards (UFAS).
      3.   In the event new or substantial reconstruction of any building is
accomplished, the appropriate curb, gutter and sidewalk modifications must be
undertaken to likewise qualify such building construction and appropriate
adjoining curbs, gutters and sidewalk under the federal guidelines above
concerning accessibility. (Ord. 341, 10-7-1997)
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
SECTION:
7-2-1: City Park
7-2-2: Alcohol Use At Boise Cascade Recreation Park Or In The Downtown City
Park Prohibited
7-2-3: City Fish Pond
7-2-1: CITY PARK:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the term "City Park" shall mean
the land owned, leased, controlled or maintained by the City for public
recreational purposes, and located at the corner of Illinois Street and
Michigan Street in the City.
   B.   Hours Of Operation: The City Park shall close at eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and open at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. daily. No person shall use, occupy or
conduct any activities in the City Park during such times as the park is
closed. (Ord. 278, 2-5-1991)
   C.   Use Of Utilities: Any person or organization using the City Park for
any reason requiring the use of the utilities within the park shall reimburse
the City in accordance with subsection D2 of this section. (Res. 284, 11-5-
1991; amd. 2015 Code)
   D.   Reservation For Park Use:
      1.   Request For Park Use: Any for profit or nonprofit organizations and/
or individual parties must contact City Hall to reserve the City Park for any
and all events. Authorization will be granted or denied at the next scheduled
City Council meeting to be held before the proposed event. All reservation
requests must be submitted in writing and include:
         a.   Date and time of the event.
         b.   The purpose of the event.
         c.   Name and contact number of the responsible party. (Ord. 436, 6-
10-2008)
      2.   Fee: The use of the park itself is free. A per day fee as
established by resolution of the City Council will be required if water and
electricity are used and must be paid at City Hall prior to the event. (Ord.
436, 6-10-2008; amd. 2015 Code)
      3.   Damage: Any damage that the park may sustain during the event will
be repaired at the cost of the event's responsible party. (Ord. 436, 6-10-2008)
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 278, 2-5-1991; amd. 2015 Code)
7-2-2: ALCOHOL USE AT BOISE CASCADE RECREATION PARK OR IN THE DOWNTOWN CITY
PARK PROHIBITED:
Except as provided below, the sale or use of alcoholic beverages on the
premises of the Boise Cascade Recreation Park and the downtown City Park is
hereby prohibited.
   A.   Catered Special Event: In the event a person, group, organization or
other entity desires to hold a special event in the Boise Cascade Park or in
the downtown City Park that will include the on-site sale and use of alcoholic
beverages, beer or wine, that person may designate the owner of a beer, wine or
liquor license to apply to the City for a catered special event permit.
      1.   Catered Special Event:
         a.   Only a person who holds a valid beer, wine or liquor license may
cater a special event in Boise Cascade Recreation Park or in the downtown City
Park. Catering shall only be done outside license holder's licensed
establishment in accordance with Idaho Code title 23 sections 934A, 934B and
934C.
         b.   Applications for catering a special event shall contain the
information set forth in chapter 9 of title 23 of the Idaho Code, shall be
verified and shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office no less than three
(3) weeks prior to the event. Failure to fully complete the application may
result in a denial of the application.
         c.   The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set by
resolution for each day the permit is to be in effect and such fee shall be
paid to the City and shall not be refunded for any reason.
         d.   Any alcohol catering permit for a special event issued by the
City, shall be valid only under the conditions and terms approved by the City
and is valid only within the City limits.
         e.   A catering permit issued pursuant to this section is
nontransferable.
         f.   The designated caterer is required to carry, display, or post the
original catering permit issued and one or all caterers must be personally
present at the approved catering premises at all times during the life of the
catering permit.
         g.   The caterer shall clearly designate an area in the park where
alcoholic beverages will be served and consumed and make that designated area
off limits to people under twenty one (21) years of age.
         h.   The right shall be, and at all times shall remain vested in the
Sheriff, the Fire Chief or their designee or any other designee of the City, to
suspend, revoke or cancel any permit issued to any person pursuant to this
subsection at any time, without notice, if the Sheriff, the Fire Chief or their
designee or another designee of the City has cause to believe that:
            (1)   The permit holder has violated or failed to comply with any
law, ordinance or regulation relating to beer, wine or liquor;
            (2)   The catered event presents a threat to the health or welfare
of the citizens of the City. The decision of the Sheriff and/or the Fire Chief
or their designee to suspend, revoke or cancel a permit may be appealed to the
City Council by the permit holder.
   B.   Private Special Event:
      1.   In the event a person, group, organization or other entity, herein
referred to as the applicant, desires to hold a special event in Boise Cascade
Recreation Park or in the downtown City Park that will include the use of
alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, at which people will be bringing or
providing their own beverages and alcoholic beverages are not being offered for
sale or transferred to other people, that applicant can apply to the City for a
private special events permit.
      2.   Applications for private special events permit shall contain the
information set forth in chapter 9 of title 23 of the Idaho Code, except any
information referring to a caterer shall be omitted. The application shall be
verified and shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office no less than three
(3) weeks prior to the event. Failure to fully complete the application may
result in a denial of the application.
      3.   The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set by
resolution for each day the permit is to be in effect and such fee shall be
paid to the City and shall not be refunded for any reason.
      4.   Any private special events permit issued by the City, shall be valid
only under the conditions and terms approved by the City and is valid only
within the City limits.
      5.   A private special events permit issued pursuant to this section is
nontransferable.
      6.   The person applying for and receiving the private special events
permit, the permit holder, shall carry, display, or post the original private
special events permit issued and must be personally present at the approved
event premises at all times during the life of the private special events
permit.
      7.   The permit holder shall clearly designate an area in the park where
alcoholic beverages will be served and consumed and make that designated area
off limits to people under twenty one (21) years of age.
      8.   The right shall be, and at all times shall remain vested in the
Sheriff, the Fire Chief or their designee or any other designee of the City, to
suspend, revoke or cancel any permit issued to any person pursuant to this
subsection at any time, without notice, if the Sheriff, the Fire Chief or their
designee or another designee of the City has cause to believe that:
         a.   The permit holder has violated or failed to comply with any law,
ordinance or regulation relating to beer, wine or liquor;
         b.   The event presents a threat to the health or welfare of the
citizens of the City. The decision of the Sheriff and/or the Fire Chief or
their designee or another designee of the City to suspend, revoke or cancel a
permit may be appealed to the City Council by the permit holder.
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section is deemed a misdemeanor punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 516, 11-15-2017)
7-2-3: CITY FISH POND:
   A.   Location: The Council City Fish Pond is located in the Recreation Park
in the 300 block west on North Galena.
   B.   Prohibited Activities: The following activities are hereby prohibited
on the Council City Fish Pond and the surrounding berm:
      1.   Swimming or floating with or without the use of swimming aids.
      2.   Use of watercraft of any description, both motorized and
nonmotorized.
      3.   Ice fishing, float tube fishing, ice skating, or any other activity
which involves human activity upon the ice.
      4.   Driving or riding any vehicle on the berm surrounding the pond.
      5.   Placing or discarding trash or any other objects or substances into
the pond.
   C.   Fishing Regulations: All Idaho fishing regulations shall be enforced at
the City Fish Pond. (Ord. 370, 5-8-2001)
   D.   Violation; Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be deemed an
infraction, and any person convicted of violating this section shall be
punishable in accordance with the General Infraction Statutes of the State of
Idaho. (Ord. 370, 5-8-2001; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
AIRPORT ZONING
SECTION:
7-3-1: Short Title
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Airport Zones Established
7-3-4: Airport Zone Height Limits
7-3-5: Use Restrictions
7-3-6: Nonconforming Uses
7-3-7: Permit Requirements And Exemptions For Various Uses
7-3-8: Administration And Enforcement
7-3-8-1: Airport Commission
7-3-8-2: Appeals (Rep. by Ord. 526, 5-9-2023)
7-3-8-3: Judicial Review
7-3-8-4: Violation; Penalty
7-3-9: Conflicting Provisions
7-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the COUNCIL AIRPORT ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AIRPORT: The Council airport.
AIRPORT COMMISSION: A board consisting of three (3) members appointed by the
city council of the city of Council, Idaho.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: Two thousand nine hundred sixty eight feet (2,968') above
mean sea level.
APPROACH SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
section
7-3-4 of this chapter. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides
with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES: These zones are set
forth in section
7-3-3 of this chapter.
CONICAL SURFACE: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of
the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal
distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION: An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth
in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level
elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which, in plan, coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use
of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment hereto.
OBSTRUCTION: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object,
which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section
7-3-4 of this chapter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a
receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway
has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred
feet (200') beyond each end of that runway. When the runway has no specially
prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at
each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in
section
7-3-3 of this chapter. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the
same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY: A defined area on the airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
man including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks,
earth formation, and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES: Those surfaces extend outward at ninety degree (90°)
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds'
maximum gross weight and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
7-3-3: AIRPORT ZONES ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the provision of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the
approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical
surfaces as they apply to the Council airport. Such zones are shown on the
Council airport zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the airport
commission, which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part
hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered
to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various
zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
   A.   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The inner edge of the utility
runway visual approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is two hundred fifty feet (250'). The approach zone expands outward uniformly
to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal
distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface. Its
centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
   B.   Transitional Zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
   C.   Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of
five thousand feet (5,000') radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines
tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
   D.   Conical Zone: The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom
a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
7-3-4: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each of the zones in question as follows:
   A.   Utility runway visual approach zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet
(5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
   B.   Transitional zones: Slope seven feet (7') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the airport elevation which is two thousand nine hundred sixty
eight feet (2,968') above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there
are established height limits sloping seven feet (7') outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface, and extending to where they interest the conical surface.
   C.   Horizontal zone: Established at one hundred fifty feet (150') above the
airport elevation or at a height of three thousand one hundred eighteen feet
(3,118') above mean sea level.
   D.   Conical zone: Slopes twenty feet (20') outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred
fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
7-3-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with
the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
   B.   The minimum standards for leases of land for private uses or for
commercial operations at the Council Municipal/Clint Yates Field Airport, dated
December 19, 2001, a copy of which is attached as exhibit A to the resolution
codified herein, and by this reference incorporated herein, are hereby adopted.
(Res. 379, 1-8-2002)
7-3-6: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by this chapter
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or
alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the
effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and is
diligently prosecuted.
   B.   Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the
owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to
permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and
lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport commission to indicate to
the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such
airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and
maintained at the expense of the city. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
7-3-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS FOR VARIOUS USES:
   A.   Future Uses:
      1.   Except as specifically provided in subsections A1a, A1b, and A1c of
this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure
shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any
zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the
permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations
herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit
shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with
subsection D of this section.
         a.   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
thirty five feet (35') of vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
         b.   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zone, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred feet (4,200')
from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than thirty five feet (35') of vertical height above the ground,
except where such tree or structure would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such approach zone.
         c.   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than thirty five feet (35') of vertical height above
the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such transition zones. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
      2.   Nothing contained in subsection A1 of this section shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration of
any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this chapter. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date hereof or any amendments hereto or than it is when the
application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for
such a permit shall be granted.
   C.   Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the City Council
determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more
than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from these regulations.
   D.   Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter may apply to the City Council
for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be
accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to
the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and
the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed
where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of these
regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation,
will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this
chapter. A completed application for a variance will be forwarded to the
Airport Commission for review and a recommendation before it is heard by the
City Council.
   E.   Obstruction Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter
and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain,
at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the airport commission, this condition may be modified to require the
owner to permit the city council, at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain the necessary markings and lights. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999; amd. Ord.
526, 5-9-2023)
7-3-8: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
7-3-8-1: AIRPORT COMMISSION:
   A.   Created; Appointment And Terms; Removals: There is hereby created an
airport commission. The commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed
by the city council, and each shall serve for a term of three (3) years until a
successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, one
shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two (2) years, and
one for a term of three (3) years. Members shall be removable by the city
council for cause upon written charges after a public hearing. The city council
will enforce this chapter.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Applications for permits, variances, and special exceptions as
governed by this Ordinance shall be upon a form published for that purpose and
made to the City Clerk for transmission to the City Council. Said applications
shall be promptly considered and approved or denied. The Airport Commission
shall review proposals and plans for airport space leases and proposals for the
use of airport space. The Airport Commission will furnish recommendations to
the City Council for their consideration.
   C.   Organization:
      1.   Rules: The airport commission shall adopt rules for its governance
and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Meetings: Meetings of the airport commission shall be held at the
call of the chair and at such other times as the airport commission may
determine. The chair or, in the absence of the chair, the acting chair may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the
airport commission shall be public.
      3.   Minutes And Records: The airport commission shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the city clerk- treasurer and on due cause shown.
   D.   Findings Of Fact: The airport commission shall make written findings of
fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999; amd. Ord. 526, 5-9-2023)
7-3-8-2: APPEALS:
(Rep. by Ord. 526, 5-9-2023)
7-3-8-3: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the city
council may appeal to the circuit court as provided in the public laws of the
state of Idaho. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
7-3-8-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; and each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999; amd. 2015 Code)
7-3-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 355B, 6-8-1999)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS AND ACCOUNTS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Public Works Supervisor
8-1-2: Water And Sewer Connections
8-1-3: Bills For Service
8-1-4: Identity Theft Prevention Program Adopted
8-1-1: PUBLIC WORKS SUPERVISOR:
The city council shall hire a suitable and competent person as public works
supervisor who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall
receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council in its annual
appropriation ordinance. The supervisor shall perform all his duties under
direction of the city council, or any executive committee thereof, and shall
have charge of the city water and sewer systems and their maintenance, repair
and operation. (2015 Code)
8-1-2: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Connection Fee:
      1.   Required: For the purposes of this subsection, a sewer and water
hookup fee shall be charged to each individual household or living unit. This
means a single-family residence, each unit in a mobile home park, each
apartment, and each and every dwelling unit. The concept is that there shall be
a separate sewer and water hookup for each household living unit, and each unit
shall be charged the same whether the unit is located in a residential single-
family subdivision, apartment house or complex, mobile home park, or any other
arrangement. As an example, the residence containing an apartment or a
residence wherein a portion is rented out would be considered two (2) units for
the purposes of this subsection. (Ord. 342, 10-7-1997)
      2.   Amount Established By Resolution; Reductions May Be Authorized:
         a.   A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be
charged for the hookup of any water or sewer connection into any main or
distribution line, and no hookup shall be made until the fee has been paid in
advance to the city clerk-treasurer and a receipt issued for the same. (Ord.
410, 5-9-2006; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
         b.   In multi-family or multi-unit developments, the city shall have
the ability to reduce the rate of each individual water or sewer hookup if the
developer designs the complex, installs all water and sewer pipes, installs
water mains and can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the
action would be beneficial to or save money for the city at the present or in
the future. (Ord. 342, 10-7-1997)
   B.   New Connections Or Services Outside City Limits Prohibited; Exception:
Effective January 16, 2007, there shall be no new water or sewer hookups nor
any water or sewer services provided by the city outside the city limits. This
prohibition shall not apply to any existing extraterritorial water or sewer
services nor to water or sewer services which have been committed to by the
city. (Ord. 421, 1-9-2007)
8-1-3: BILLS FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Responsibility For Bills; Discontinuance Of Service: All accounts will
be placed in the owner's or property management company's name only. The city
will not allow any account to be set up in a renter's name. The owner will be
responsible for all utility bills. When bills are delinquent more than sixty
(60) days, the services will be discontinued until payment is made in full.
   B.   Notice Of Delinquency: When an owner of the premises receiving service
is delinquent in payment and scheduled for shutoff, the city shall make a good
faith effort to notify said owner of the delinquency and the amount delinquent.
A notice of termination of service shall be sent to the owner of the premises
receiving such service.
   C.   New Services: In the event service to a property has been terminated or
a new owner seeks service to a property, before new service is provided to a
property, any balances owing shall be paid in full. (Ord. 469, eff. 7-13-2010;
amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-4: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the identity theft prevention program attached as
exhibit A to the resolution codified herein. The administrative staff of the
city is authorized to take all necessary steps to carry out the identity theft
prevention program provided by this section. (Res. 453, 2-10-2009)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Connections
8-2-2: Rates And Charges
8-2-3: Water Conservation Measures
8-2-4: Irrigation Systems; Cross Connection Control
8-2-5: Prohibited Acts
8-2-6: Violation; Penalty
8-2-1: WATER CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Supervision: All tapping of mains and distribution lines shall be done
by or under the immediate supervision of the public works supervisor. (Ord.
129, 7-17-1951)
   B.   Nonparticipation In System Construction Costs; Connection Procedures:
      1.   Any person owning property which can be served by the city water
system who has not participated in the construction costs of that portion of
the water system to which that person desires to connect, or who does not have
an affidavit of payment as provided herein, shall not be served by the water
system or connect thereto, unless a period of fifteen (15) years has lapsed
from the date of the completion of that portion of the water system to which
the person desires to connect, or unless said person, after the completion of
the water system, became a successor in interest to the owner of the property
who caused said water system or the affected portion thereof to be constructed.
(Ord. 346, 4-7-1998)
      2.   All persons desiring to connect to the city water system must make
an application to the city clerk-treasurer, and if such land description or
name is not included in the original certificate of completion, such
application must be accompanied by an affidavit of payment from the person
constructing the waterworks serving the applicant's property that the pro rata
share has been paid. If no affidavit of payment is filed with the application,
the city clerk- treasurer shall not issue such permit until the applicant has
received a receipt for payment of the pro rata cost from either the original
constructor or his assignees or from the city clerk-treasurer. The city clerk-
treasurer shall inform the applicant of the last known address of the original
constructor, and the applicant shall endeavor to obtain the required affidavit
of payment from the constructor. If, after ten (10) days, the applicant is
unable to contact the constructor and cannot obtain the required affidavit of
payment from the constructor or his assignees, the applicant can obtain a
permit to hook into the city water; provided, that the applicant first pays to
the city the pro rata cost for the property being connected as set forth in the
completion certificate. (Ord. 346, 4-7-1998; amd. 2015 Code)
      3.   The constructor shall inform the city clerk-treasurer of the cost of
construction and shall keep the city clerk- treasurer informed of his address
and of any changes of address. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
constructor to keep the city clerk-treasurer informed of any address where
waterworks applicants can contact him or where any funds which are collected
can be forwarded. (Ord. 346, 4-7-1998)
8-2-2: RATES AND CHARGES:
All water furnished or delivered by the city through its city water system
shall be delivered and measured through city owned meters, installed at or near
the property line of the consumer's or owner's premises, under the following
conditions and subject to the following schedule of rates and charges: (Ord.
490, 9-11-2012)
   A.   Deposit Requirements; Disconnection Of Service; Reconnection Fee: As a
condition of receiving city water service, each applicant for service shall
deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a sum as established by resolution of the
city council to be retained by the city. Upon termination of service or twelve
(12) months after such deposit is paid and if the applicant has not, during
such period, ever been delinquent in the monthly payments due under this
section, such deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon any default in
payment of water service charges, such deposit may be applied to the
applicant's account. Any default in payment of more than two (2) months will
cause the service to be disconnected with a charge as established by resolution
of the city council for reconnection of service.
   B.   User Rates:
      1.   Established: A minimum charge as established by resolution of the
city council per calendar month shall be made for each noncommercial, single
occupancy metered user, which base charge shall be in payment of the first one
thousand (1,000) cubic feet of water consumed and no less rate than such
minimum charge shall be fixed or charged; provided further, that the base
charge shall be separated into categories of use called classes with the base
category (class) being the equivalent user. Each of the classes will then be
compared to the base class on the basis of water usage and a numerical value
assigned representing the ratio of the categorized class to the base class.
User charges are to be calculated for the appropriate class with the numeric
values multiplied by the equivalent user charge as shown in the following:
(Ord. 490, 9-11-2012; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
Class Category Numeric Value
Class Category                                                  Numeric Value
1     Single-family dwelling units (apartments, trailers,       1.0
      residences)
2     Church                                                    1.0
3     Office, per 20 employees                                  1.0
4     Elementary/high school (based on average enrollment for   0.095
      previous year)
5     Restaurant or bar with kitchen, per seat                  0.025
6     Bar with no kitchen, per seat                             0.02
7     Car wash, per stall                                       1.0
8     Service station/auto repair                               1.0
9     Motel, per unit                                           0.15
10    Laundry (coin operated), per washer                       0.3
11    Hospital, per bed                                         1.0
12    Factory/shop, per 20 employees                            1.0
13    Barbershop/beauty shop, per 3 stations                    1.0
14    Public building (courthouse)                              6.0
15    Apartments without laundry facility and/or lawn or garden 0.25
 
      2.   Calculation Of Rate: A rate table shall be established to be used
for billing purposes. Each rate shall be calculated by multiplying the numeric
value assigned to the user class and the charge amount established for an
equivalent user. Said rate table shall be reviewed annually and adjusted as
necessary. (Ord. 490, 9-11-2012)
      3.   Use In Excess Of One Thousand Cubic Feet: For all water delivered in
excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic feet, charges shall be established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 490, 9-11-2012; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
   C.   Discontinuance Of Service; Reconnection Fee:
      1.   A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be
charged for any reconnection of water service after discontinuance for any
reason with the exception of a shutoff to replace or repair lines. (Ord. 263,
5-9-1989; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
      2.   Before any discontinuance of water service for any reason other than
to replace or repair line, the owner or person in charge of the metered
premises shall request in writing the shutoff and contract to pay a turn on fee
for this discontinuance as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
281, 9-16-1991; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
   D.   Request For Additional Service; Payment Of Current Fees Required: Any
water user requesting service at another location, either as an added service
or to move the service, shall pay any fees due before the service can commence.
(Ord. 429, 5-22-2007)
   E.   Payment Due Date; Delinquencies: All accounts or charges for the use of
city water shall be due and payable on or before the fifteenth day of the month
following the month of use, and if not so paid, a penalty of ten percent (10%)
shall be charged and collected. Delivery of water to any delinquent consumer
shall be discontinued and water turned off when the account is delinquent more
than sixty (60) days. The water shall not be turned on and service resumed
until such delinquent consumer has first paid the city clerk-treasurer a
reconnection fee as established by resolution of the city council and all sums,
with penalty, then owing on any such account. (Ord. 129, 7-17-1951; amd. Ord.
500, 9-10-2013)
   F.   Violation; Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the statutes of the state of Idaho.
(Ord. 490, 9-11-2012)
8-2-3: WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES:
   A.   Generally: It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to waste any water from the city water system, or to leave open and
unattended any pipe, valve or hydrant connected to the city water system, or to
use for irrigating or sprinkling any nozzle, pipe or other device having a
larger opening than one-fourth inch (1/4"), or to use city water at any time,
or for any purpose, when such use shall be in violation of any order or
resolution of the city council, regularly adopted and noticed, as follows:
(Ord. 129, 7-17-1951; amd. Ord. 271, 4-13-1990, eff. 4-13-1990)
Whenever the city council, in any regular or special session assembled, shall
determine that further control, limitation, regulation or prohibition of the
use of city water for any purpose other than domestic use is required in order
to provide an adequate supply of water for domestic use, or for conservation of
health, or for the safety of the inhabitants and property from the hazards of
fire, it may, by order or resolution, spread upon its minutes to:
      1.   Provide for use of city water for sprinkling and/or irrigation by
rotation of use, in equitable manner, at and for such period of time and in
such manner as may be determined necessary; or
      2.   Provide for the use of city water for sprinkling and/or irrigation
only during fixed hours or periods of time; or
      3.   Further restrict, or absolutely prohibit, the use of city water for
sprinkling and/or irrigation for such period or periods time as may be required
to restore an adequate reserve of water; or
      4.   Limit, regulate, or prohibit the use of any city water for any
commercial or other use not required by public health and safety;
and on the adoption of any such order or resolution, shall give one day's
notice thereof, either by publication in the official newspaper of the city, or
by notice mailed to each water user within the city, or by personal notice to
be given by the public works supervisor, or other city employee, to each water
user within the city, and from and after such notice, any violation of the
provisions of such order or resolution shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of the city code. If any fire, breakage of mains or failure of water
supply shall create any sudden emergency endangering persons, health or
property, the city council or public works supervisor may declare such
emergency condition and may forthwith make effective any regulation concerning
the use of city water as may be deemed necessary, and after notice thereof
shall be given by any of the means before provided, a violation of the terms of
such emergency order by any person having notice thereof shall constitute a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 129, 7-17-1951; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Outdoor Sprinkling:
      1.   Outdoor sprinkling with city water is to be limited to alternate
days from May 15 through October 15 annually, with houses having even numbers
sprinkling on even numbered days, and houses having odd numbers sprinkling on
odd numbered days. (Ord. 271, 4-13-1990, eff. 4-13-1990; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Outdoor sprinkling with city water is to be shut off for a four (4)
hour time limit when the fire alarm rings.
      3.   Outdoor sprinkling with city water is to be shut off during power
outage. (Ord. 271, 4-13-1990, eff. 4-13-1990)
      4.   A violation of this subsection B shall be deemed an infraction
subject to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first offense, twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for the second offense and forty dollars ($40.00) for each
subsequent offense. (Ord. 271, 4-13-1990, eff. 4-13-1990; amd. 2015 Code)
8-2-4: IRRIGATION SYSTEMS; CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
   A.   Every lot, parcel or piece of land upon which a residential unit will
be constructed shall construct, install, or connect to a pressurized irrigation
system. In the case of residential subdivision developments, a pressurized
irrigation system shall be constructed and installed simultaneously with the
domestic water lines, but not in the same trenches. There shall be no cross
connections between the domestic water lines and the irrigation lines.
   B.   All buildings, lots, or parcels of land within a subdivision which are
connected to a common landscape sprinkler irrigation system may be permitted to
utilize a single connection to the city's domestic water system. Any system
which is allowed a single connection shall have a backflow prevention device
which is approved by the city. This single or joint use connection shall be
limited to providing irrigation water during the time the common landscape
irrigation system has no water supply. However, a joint use connection shall
not be allowed for any subdivision, building, lot or parcel which is supplied
with irrigation water from a groundwater well. If irrigation water is available
from another source, city water will not be used for irrigation purposes. The
off-on control valve of this joint use connection shall be under the control of
the city public works supervisor.
   C.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed at any location on the
premises or in the system where, in the judgment of the city public works
supervisor, the nature and extent of the activities, or the materials stored on
the premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health and/or
be deleterious to the quality of the water should a cross connection occur.
Even though a cross connection may not exist at any particular time, backflow
prevention devices shall be installed under the following circumstances. This
list is meant to be illustrative and not exhaustive:
      1.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on premises having an
auxiliary water supply.
      2.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on premises having
internal cross connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross
connections exist.
      3.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on premises where
entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made
with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross
connections do not exist.
      4.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on premises having a
repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
      5.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on premises on which
any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public
water supply, or where a cross connection could reasonably be expected to
occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.
      6.   Backflow prevention devices required by this section shall be
installed at the meter, at the property line of the premises when meters are
not used, or at a location approved by the city public works supervisor. The
device shall be located where it is readily accessible for maintenance and
testing and where no part of the device will be submerged.
      7.   Backflow prevention devices required by this section shall be
installed under the supervision of and with the approval of the city public
works supervisor.
      8.   Any protective device required by this section shall be of a model
approved by the city public works supervisor. A device shall include a double
check valve assembly or a reduced pressure valve. A principal backflow
prevention device will be approved if it has successfully passed performance
tests of the state of Idaho or other testing laboratories satisfactory to the
state of Idaho and the city public works supervisor. These devices shall be
furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.
      9.   Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this section shall
be inspected and tested annually, or more often if necessary. Inspections,
tests and maintenance shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever the devices
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at
the customer's expense. Inspections, tests, repairs, and records thereof shall
be accomplished under the city's supervision by certified testers.
      10.   No underground sprinkling device shall be installed without
adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from which the water for
irrigation is taken from the public water supply.
      11.   Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation,
maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention devices required by
this section shall be grounds for terminating water service to the premises or,
in the alternative, the installation of an air gap separation at the customer's
expense.
   D.   Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with the misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 424, 4-
10-2007)
8-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the public works
supervisor to tap or make any connections with any water main or distribution
line of the city water system.
   B.   Except as authorized by the public works supervisor or city council, it
shall be unlawful for any person to molest, tamper with, obstruct, injure or
change any part of the city water system, including the springs, well, pump,
reservoir, mains, laterals, lines, meters or other parts thereof.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the flow of water in
the system, or to take, steal, conduct or carry away any of the waters thereof,
except as by this chapter expressly authorized. (Ord. 129, 7-17-1951)
8-2-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any order or
resolution shall be deemed a misdemeanor which shall subject the violator
thereof to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 204, 2-10-1976; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-3-3: Building Sewers And Connections
8-3-4: Use Of The Sanitary Sewer System
8-3-4-1: Discharges Into System
8-3-4-2: Interceptors
8-3-4-3: Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalization
8-3-4-4: Monitoring Stations
8-3-4-5: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
8-3-4-6: Agreements To Accept Industrial Wastes
8-3-5: User Rates And Charges
8-3-6: Fee To Dispose Of Septage
8-3-7: Private Construction Of Sewer Extensions
8-3-7-1: Nonparticipation In Construction Costs; Connection Procedures
8-3-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-3-9: Violation; Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams
per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from toilets, sinks, lavatories, baths, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewers which begin five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the
building walls.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any user of the city's treatment works who is identified in
the definition of "industrial wastes" in this section.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: A. The liquid wastes from any nongovernmental user of
publicly owned treatment works identified in the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office Of Management And Budget", as amended and
supplemented under the following divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, forestry and fishing.
Division B - Mining.
Division D - Manufacturing.
Division E - Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services.
         Division I - Services.
   B.   A user in the divisions listed above may be excluded if it is
determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER MONITORING STATION: The monitoring station required by
the USEPA and the city to determine the contribution of the industry to the
public sewer system. Monitoring equipment shall include composite refrigerated
sampler, recording pH meter and recording flowmeter. The city shall provide
plans and specifications for the construction of the station. Cost of the
construction of the station shall be at the industry's expense. Maintenance and
upkeep of the station shall be at the industry's expense.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface water or groundwater.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.21 cm) in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer over which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface
water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collection, pumping, treatment and disposing
of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A sewer which carries stormwater
and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERVISOR: The public works supervisor of the city or his authorized deputy,
agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
TC: A measurement of the total carbon content of the wastewater.
TOC: A measurement of the total organic carbon content of the wastewater.
USEPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988; amd. 2015 Code)
8-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It is unlawful for any person to
place or deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Treatment Required: It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet
within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with this chapter.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owner of all houses, buildings
or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right
of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required, at his expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that
said public sewer is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the owner's
property line. The owner shall be obligated to provide reasonable maintenance
of said facilities. If said owner fails, neglects or refuses within said time
period to comply with the connections required by this subsection at such
distances, under such regulations and in accordance with such specifications as
may be prescribed by the city, the whole cost of such connections shall be
assessed and collected against said property in the same manner as other city
taxes. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: for residential and commercial service and for service
to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. (Ord. 258, 6-14-
1988)
      3.   Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee shall be
established by resolution of the city council from time to time as it sees the
need for change. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
   B.   Separate Building Sewers:
      1.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, residential and commercial, except when, in the opinion of the
supervisor, it is advisable to connect two (2) or more buildings with the main
sewer line, and except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
      2.   Industrial wastes shall enter the public sewer at as many points as
is required by the industrial facility. Each point of entry shall have an
industrial monitor station at that point.
   C.   Use Of Existing Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
city, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Installation And Connection Requirements:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules,
regulations and requirements of the city. In the absence of code provisions or
in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF "Manual Of Practice No. 9" shall apply.
(Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
      2.   All sewers connected to the city sewer system shall have backflow
valves installed at the owner's expense. (Ord. 266, 10-3-1989)
      3.   a. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer, all at the owner's expense. (Ord.
258, 6-14-1988)
         b.   Any cost and upkeep of any lift stations required for the sewers
of the city are the responsibility of the developer. (Res. 337, 3-11-1997)
      4.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF "Manual Of Practice No. 9". All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before
installation.
      5.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. Excavations
shall be made in such a manner as to impede travel as little as possible and
for such time periods as the supervisor may direct.
   E.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a sanitary sewer, building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
   F.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the supervisor when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
supervisor or his representative.
   G.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incident to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-4: USE OF THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
8-3-4-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Waters:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial or commercial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the
city, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters and wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including, but not
limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) or cyanide
in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage,
entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground
by garbage grinders.
   C.   Prohibited Users: Public septage wastewater facilities are not to be
used by trucks with tanks larger than one hundred (100) gallons. Use of city
septage wastewater facilities by commercial users is prohibited.
   D.   Restricted Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if
it appears likely, in the opinion of the city, that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming this opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and
65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the city for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues or of dissolved
solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
         b.   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to. dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a
"slug” as defined in section
8-3-1 of this chapter.
      10.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   E.   Authority Of City Regarding Discharges:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsections A, B and C of this section and
which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of section
8-3-4-6 of this chapter.
      2.   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988; amd. Ord. 525, 9-
13-2022)
8-3-4-2: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-4-3: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment of flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-4-4: MONITORING STATIONS:
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install an industrial wastewater
monitoring station, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such stations, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
city. The station shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 258, 6-
14-1988)
8-3-4-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the station provided. Sampling shall be carried out by
an approved composite sampling device. The composite sample shall be used to
determine BOD and suspended solids values. The pH values shall be taken from a
continuous recording pH meter. Total organic carbon values may be substituted
for BOD values if the city so desires. A continuous recording flowmeter shall
be provided to monitor the flow. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-4-6: AGREEMENTS TO ACCEPT INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
No statement contained in this section
8-3-4 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-5: USER RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   All But Industrial Users:
      1.   Established By City Council: Owners of all premises now served by
the sanitary sewer of the city and of all premises to be furnished sewer
service by the sewage collection system, except industrial users, shall pay the
rates as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
258, 6-14-1988; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013; 2015 Code)
      2.   Modification Of Rates And Charges: The rates and charges established
in this manner shall be subject to modification upon application to the city
council by the owner in all cases where fees so established are unjust or
oppressive. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Industrial Users:
      1.   Monthly sewer service rates for industrial users shall be set by the
maximum percentage of wastewater plant capacity that is required to service the
industry during any one day in a calendar month.
      2.   The daily industrial percentage shall be determined using the values
from the industrial monitoring station composite samples, taken daily. These
values divided by the values determined from the influent composite samples
taken daily at the wastewater plant and multiplied by one hundred (100) are the
daily industrial percentages.
      3.   The maximum day for each calendar month shall be determined from the
summation of the BOD or TOC, suspended solids and flow percentage from each
day. The day having the largest summation shall be the maximum day for the
calendar month.
      4.   The cost for monthly sewer service shall be based on the sum of the
following costs:
         a.   The BOD or TOC percentage of industrial waste from the maximum
day divided by one hundred (100) and multiplied by one-third (1/3) of the total
actual cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater plant for that
calendar month.
         b.   The suspended solids percentage of industrial waste from the
maximum day divided by one hundred (100) and multiplied by one-third (1/3) of
the total actual cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater plant for
the calendar month.
         c.   The volume of flow percentage of industrial waste from the
maximum day divided by one hundred (100) and multiplied by one-third (1/3) of
the actual cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater plant for the
calendar month.
      5.   The city may require the industrial users to enter into a written
contract containing provisions that are set forth in this subsection B prior to
providing sewer service to industrial users. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
   C.   Bills For Service; Delinquent Payments:
      1.   Fees shall be carried on the water bills, wherever applicable, and
the public works supervisor is authorized and directed to discontinue services
to any premises where the entire water and sewer service bill is not paid in
the same manner that service is discontinued for nonpayment of water bills.
      2.   All fees shall be paid by the person responsible for the same at the
office of the city clerk-treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the month
following the month of use, and if not paid, the same shall become delinquent,
and after sixty (60) days' delinquency, a ten percent (10%) penalty shall be
added to the account. For failure to pay such charge, the city may levy a
special assessment against the premises in such amount and in such manner as
other special assessments are levied, and may foreclose the same in the manner
provided for the foreclosure and collection of other special assessments. (Ord.
258, 6-14-1988; amd. 2015 Code)
   D.   Disposition Of Revenues: All fees and charges provided in this section,
when collected, shall be placed in the utility fund of the city and paid into
the sewer fund of the city. All charges and expenses for operation and
maintenance of the sewage system and the sewage treatment and disposal plant,
and all payments required to be made, shall be made from the sewer fund of the
city. The city council may, from time to time, establish within the sewer fund
a reserve for the operation, maintenance, replacement and depreciation of such
works, and a reserve for improvements to such works, and may authorize
expenditures from such fund for such purposes. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-6: FEE TO DISPOSE OF SEPTAGE:
   A.   Established: Pursuant to the authority set out in title 50 of the Idaho
Code, the city council shall establish by resolution a fee structure for the
disposing of septage in the city wastewater treatment facility.
   B.   Determination Of Fee:
      1.   Any truck which dumps septage into the city wastewater treatment
facility shall have a meter attached thereto which shall monitor the number of
gallons of discharge into the city system.
      2.   In the event a truck is not equipped with a meter which measures
discharge, the charge shall be based upon the size of tank carried on the truck
which contains the septage. (Res. 417, 11-7-2006, eff. 11-7-2006; amd. Ord.
500, 9-10-2013)
8-3-7: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Construction Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: Any person desiring to construct a sewer in, on or
below any street or alley or desiring to construct any extension of the
sanitary sewer system in the city shall first obtain from the city clerk-
treasurer a permit for such construction upon application being filed with the
city clerk-treasurer. The application shall state the name of the person
applying, the approximate location of the sewer and the legal description of
the land or lots to be served by the sewer and the owners of the said lots so
served, together with the proposed size and type of pipe to be laid, and the
approximate cost.
      2.   Certificate Of Completion: Upon completion, the person constructing
the sanitary sewer and the city engineer must file a certificate of completion
with the city clerk- treasurer setting forth the location of the sewer, the
lots served, the owner of said lots, and the cost per lot or the cost per front
foot served by the sewer.
      3.   Affidavit Of Owners Participating In Cost: The person constructing
the sewer must file with the city clerk- treasurer an affidavit stating the
legal description of the lots and the owners thereof who have participated in
the cost of the construction of the sewer.
      4.   Drainage Requirements: No building drain or building sewer pipe
shall have an internal diameter of less than four inches (4"), and all sewers
and drains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the property they are
intended to drain. The owners shall install backflow preventers or check valves
on the drains and sewers located on said owner's property. Failure on the part
of any owner to properly maintain the backflow preventer or check valve, or to
cause such an installation to be made will relieve the city from all
responsibility for any and all damages suffered by said owner as a result of a
backflow of sewerage onto said owner's real property and appurtenant
structures. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
   B.   Connection To Public Sewer: All persons desiring to connect to the city
sewer system must make application to the city clerk-treasurer, and such
application must be accompanied by an affidavit of payment from the person
constructing the sewer that the pro rata charge has been paid, if such land
description or name is not included in the original certificate of completion.
If no affidavit of payment is filed with the application, the city clerk-
treasurer shall not issue such permit until the applicant has received a
receipt of payment of the pro rata cost from either the original constructor,
his assigns or the city clerk-treasurer. In the event the person desiring such
connection is unable to secure an affidavit of payment from the person
constructing the sewer, the connection can be made by the applicant tendering
to the city clerk-treasurer the pro rata cost for such lot as set forth in the
completion certificate to be payable to and delivered by the city clerk-
treasurer to the original constructor or his assigns. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988;
amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Existing Privately Constructed Sewers: All persons having constructed
sewers prior to the effective date hereof may file with the city clerk-
treasurer a certificate of completion as provided in subsection A2 of this
section, and the provisions of this chapter for connection of service shall be
effective on these sewers already constructed.
   D.   Extensions Exempt From Affidavit Of Payment: An affidavit of payment of
pro rata costs shall not be required for the extension of any sewer.
   E.   Interceptors, Mains Or Laterals: The provisions contained in this
chapter shall apply in cases and instances where the city has constructed or
will construct sewer interceptors, mains or laterals. All references to
construction of sewer interceptors, mains or laterals by private persons shall
include construction of sewer interceptors, mains or laterals by the city.
(Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-7-1: NONPARTICIPATION IN CONSTRUCTION COSTS; CONNECTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any person owning property which can be served by the city sewer system
who has not participated in the construction costs of that portion of the sewer
system to which that person desires to connect, or who does not have an
affidavit of payment as provided below, shall not be served by the sewer system
or connect thereto, unless a period of fifteen (15) years has lapsed from the
date of the completion of that portion of the sewer to which the person desires
to connect, or unless said person, after the completion of the sewer system,
became a successor in interest to the owner of the property who caused said
sewer or the affected portion thereof to be constructed. (Ord. 345, 4-7-1998)
   B.   All persons desiring to connect to the city sewer system must make an
application to the city clerk-treasurer, and if such land description or name
is not included in the original certificate of completion, such application
must be accompanied by an affidavit of payment from the person constructing the
sewer works serving the applicant's property that the pro rata share has been
paid. If no affidavit of payment is filed with the application, the city clerk-
treasurer shall not issue such permit until the applicant has received a
receipt for payment of the pro rata cost from either the original constructor,
his assignees or from the city clerk-treasurer. The city clerk-treasurer shall
inform the applicant of the last known address of the original constructor, and
the applicant shall endeavor to obtain the required affidavit of payment from
the constructor. If, after ten (10) days, the applicant is unable to contact
the constructor and cannot obtain the required affidavit of payment for the
constructor or his assignees, the applicant can obtain a permit to hook into
the city sewer; provided, that the applicant first pays to the city the pro
rata cost for the property being connected as set forth in the completion
certificate. (Ord. 345, 4-7-1998; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   The constructor shall inform the city clerk-treasurer of the cost of
construction and shall keep the city clerk- treasurer informed of his address
and of any changes of address. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
constructor to keep the city clerk-treasurer informed of any address where
sewer works applicants can contact him or where any funds which are collected
can be forwarded. (Ord. 345, 4-7-1998)
8-3-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   1. The supervisor and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The supervisor
or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. (Ord.
258, 6-14-1988)
      2.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in subsection A1 of this section, the supervisor or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   The supervisor and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 258, 6-14-1988)
8-3-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and is
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each occurrence. (Ord. 387, 4-8-2003; amd. 2015 Code)
ARTICLE A. USER CHARGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-3A-1: Definitions
8-3A-2: User Charges Established
8-3A-3: Disposition Of Revenues
8-3A-4: Violation; Penalty
8-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this article shall be as follows:
EQUIVALENT USER: A typical residential unit discharging an average of one
hundred fifty (150) gallons of sewage per day.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A single household of three (3) persons utilizing a toilet,
bath and laundry facilities.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
USER: Any entity serviced by a connection to the city sewer system.
USER CLASS: A user category established to show a numeric value relationship
between the estimated volume of sewage discharge by the user categorized and an
equivalent user. (Ord. 259, 6-14-1988)
8-3A-2: USER CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
There is established a fee known as a "user charge" to be collected from all
sewer users, except industrial users, within the city in connection with city
water billings as provided in subsection 8-3-5B of this chapter. All usage of
the sewer system of the city through its city sewer system, except industrial
users, shall be subject to the following schedule of rates and charges: (Ord.
259, 6-14-1988; amd. Ord. 490, 9-11-2012; 2015 Code)
   A.   Established: A minimum charge per calendar month as established by
resolution of the city council shall be made for each noncommercial single
occupancy use. The base charge shall be separated into categories of use called
classes with the base category (class) being the equivalent user. Each of the
classes will then be compared to the base class on the basis of water usage and
a numerical value assigned representing the ratio of the categorized class to
the base class. User charges are to be calculated for the appropriate class
with the numeric values multiplied by the equivalent user charge as shown in
the following table: (Ord. 490, 9-11-2012; amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
Class Category Numeric Value
Class Category                                                  Numeric Value
1     Single-family dwelling units (apartments, trailers,       1.0
      residences)
2     Church                                                    1.0
3     Office, per 20 employees                                  1.0
4     Elementary/high school (based on average enrollment for   0.095
      previous year)
5     Restaurant or bar with kitchen, per seat                  0.025
6     Bar with no kitchen, per seat                             0.02
7     Car wash, per stall                                       1.0
8     Service station/auto repair                               1.0
9     Motel, per unit                                           0.15
10    Laundry (coin operated), per washer                       0.3
11    Hospital, per bed                                         1.0
12    Factory/shop, per 20 employees                            1.0
13    Barbershop/beauty shop, per 3 stations                    1.0
14    Public building (courthouse)                              6.0
15    Apartments without laundry facility and/or lawn or garden 0.25
 
   B.   Calculation Of Rate: A rate table shall be established to be used for
billing purposes. Each rate shall be calculated by multiplying the numeric
value assigned to the user class and the charge amount established for an
equivalent user. Said rate table shall be reviewed annually and adjusted as
necessary. (Ord. 490, 9-11-2012)
   C.   Water And Sewer Bond Fee: Every water or sewer user shall pay an amount
set by resolution of the city council each month, which amount shall be set
aside and used for repayment of the water and sewer bond. (Ord. 490, 9-11-2012;
amd. Ord. 500, 9-10-2013)
   D.   Violation; Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be deemed an
infraction punishable in accordance with the statutes of the state of Idaho.
(Ord. 490, 9-11-2012; amd. 2015 Code)
8-3A-3: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
Monies collected in compliance with the provisions herein shall be disposed of
as provided in subsection
8-3A-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed an infraction and,
upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 259, 6-14-1988; amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
9-1-1: Plan Adopted
9-1-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The city comprehensive plan, as set out in resolution 309, is hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set out at length herein. Copies of the plan are on file
in the office of the city clerk-treasurer for public use and inspection. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 2
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
9-2-1: Impact Area Agreement
9-2-2: Impact Area Map
9-2-1: IMPACT AREA AGREEMENT:
The impact area agreement, dated April 19, 2010, a copy of which is attached to
the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein as if set out in full
verbatim, is hereby adopted by the city as the impact area agreement between
the city and the county for the area of impact surrounding the city. (Ord. 471,
9-14-2010)
9-2-2: IMPACT AREA MAP:
The impact area map, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated herein as if set out in full verbatim, is hereby
adopted by the city as the impact area map for that area of impact surrounding
the city. (Ord. 474, 9-14-2010)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Building Permit Fees
9-3-2: Barbed Wire Fences
9-3-1: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Permit fees set out in the international building code adopted in
section
9-4-2 of this title are specifically adopted.
   B.   There shall also be charged permit fees as established by resolution of
the city council for singlewide mobile homes, doublewide mobile homes, FHA/VA
approved prebuilt homes, mobile home roofs, and outbuildings.
   C.   There shall be no fees for demolition work. (Ord. 257, 5-12-1988; amd.
2015 Code)
9-3-2: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
No person within the limits of the city shall hereafter erect or maintain any
barbed wire fence or fence constructed partly of barbed wire along, facing or
abutting upon any sidewalk or public street or thoroughfare within the limits
of the city or within two feet (2') of the line of said street abutting any
private property. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 61, 5-16-1919; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-4-1: Intent
9-4-2: Codes Adopted
9-4-3: Enforcement
9-4-4: State Revisions Incorporated
9-4-5: Violation; Penalty
9-4-1: INTENT:
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the governing body of the city to aid
and assist in establishing consistency in application and enforcement of
building regulations among and between agencies of Idaho sharing such
jurisdiction that toward that end, adoption of the codes set out in section
9-4-2 of this chapter by the cities of Idaho is deemed a beneficial and
necessary means of assuring such uniformity within the state. (Res. 315, 1-10-
1995, eff. 1-10-1995; amd. 2015 Code)
9-4-2: CODES ADOPTED:
The most recent versions of the following codes, standards, appendices,
pamphlets and supplements are hereby adopted by the city as though fully set
forth herein for the purpose of regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings,
structures and signs in the city. One copy of each of said codes is on file in
the office of the city clerk- treasurer for public use and inspection.
   A.   International building code, including all rules promulgated by the
Idaho building code board to provide equivalency with the provisions of the
Americans with disabilities act accessibility guidelines and the federal fair
housing act accessibility guidelines.
   B.   International residential code, parts I through IV and IX.
   C.   International energy conservation code. (2015 Code)
9-4-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The city shall enforce its building codes, including the adopted codes in
section
9-4-2 of this chapter, under a building code enforcement program in compliance
with the provisions of Idaho Code section 39-4116, and may further contract
with a public or private entity to administer such building code enforcement
program. (2015 Code)
9-4-4: STATE REVISIONS INCORPORATED:
Insofar as the aforementioned building codes may hereafter be revised by the
Idaho legislature or revised or amended by the governing body, in a manner not
in conflict with this chapter, the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as a
resolution of the city as if fully set forth at length herein. (Res. 315, 1-10-
1995, eff. 1-10-1995)
9-4-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of any of the codes adopted in this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per violation. (Res. 315, 1-10-1995, eff. 1-10-1995; amd.
2015 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Purpose And Intent
9-5-2: Rules And Definitions
9-5-3: Development Standards for Manufactured Homes
9-5-4: Administration And Enforcement
9-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and regulations governing
the location and approval of manufactured housing in the City. It is the intent
of these regulations to allow a mix of housing types and living styles.
However, this should occur in a manner which will not adversely affect existing
neighborhoods. For this reason, standards have been set that will regulate the
appearance of the manufactured home, allowing only those that are acceptably
similar in appearance to site-built dwellings on individual lots in the
residence district. Any such manufactured home and the lot on which it is
placed to is subject to the same development standards to which any single-
family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject, including, but
not limited to, building setback standards, side and rear yard requirements,
standards for enclosures, access, and vehicle parking and architectural and
aesthetic requirements. (Ord. 533, 6-17-2024)
9-5-2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
 
                                      An assembly of materials constructed, not
                                      intended to be removed from its
FOUNDATION SYSTEM:                    installation site, which is designed to
                                      support the structure and engineered to
                                      resist the imposition of external natural
                                      forces.
                                      A dwelling unit which is fabricated in
                                      one or more sections at a location other
                                      than the homesite by assembly line type
                                      production techniques or by other
                                      construction methods unique to an off-
                                      site manufacturing process. Every section
MANUFACTURED HOME:                    shall bear a label certifying that it is
                                      built in compliance with the federal
                                      manufactured home construction and safety
                                      standards. A manufactured home is
                                      designed to be towed on its own chassis
                                      or be site delivered by alternative
                                      means. The home must also meet the
                                      criteria established in this section.
                                      A vehicle or structure constructed prior
                                      to 1976 with wheels for use on the public
                                      highways, which has sleeping, cooking and
                                      plumbing facilities, is intended for
                                      human occupancy and is being used for
MOBILE HOME:                          residential purposes. The term mobile
                                      home does not apply to any prefabricated
                                      section of a factory-built house to which
                                      wheels may be attached for the purpose of
                                      moving it to a permanent location where
                                      it becomes affixed to the real property.
                                      Mobile homes are prohibited in the City.
REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING The current edition of the Idaho
INSTALLATIONS:                        Manufactured Home Installation Standards
                                      shall apply. (Ord. 533, 6-17-2024)
 
9-5-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   Shall have a metallic, wood shake or asphalt shingle roof with a
minimum slope of sixteen percent (16%).
   B.   Shall have horizontal or vertical aluminum, simulated wood or wood
siding.
   C.   Shall have a foundation fascia or some facsimile thereof that is
similar in appearance and durability to masonry foundation of site-built
dwellings, as approved by the building inspector, which surrounds the entire
perimeter of the structure and completely encloses the space between the siding
and the finished grade.
   D.   Electrical, gas, water and sewer connections shall be made permanent.
Gas shutoff valves, meters and regulators shall not be located beneath the
manufactured home. Sewer and water connections shall comply with
   E.   Shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the zoning
district in which the manufactured home is located (such as lot size and
setback requirements) and shall have a minimum of 1,000 square feet of enclosed
living space.
   F.   Accessory Structures: Attached accessory structures, as permitted in
the zoning district in which the manufactured home is to be located, shall be
similar in material and integrated into the design of the structure. Accessory
structures must meet international building code standards or HUD standards.
   G.   Permanent Foundation: All manufactured homes placed on privately owned
lots which lie outside of manufactured home parks, shall comply with Idaho Code
section 44-2201 et seq., and shall be placed on a permanent foundation. The
permanent foundation shall comply with the requirements set forth in the
International Building Code. (Ord. 533, 6-17-2024)
9-5-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Prior to locating the manufactured home on a lot, a building
application shall be submitted to the building inspector on the standard
prescribed form. In addition to such information which is generally required
for building permits and which is necessary for administrative purposes, such
applications shall also include all information necessary to determine the
manufactured home's conformity with this section, including exterior siding,
foundation and any other applicable information. Building permit fees are set
forth in the International Building Code.
   B.   Conformity To Codes: All previously owned, used, significantly altered,
moved or rebuilt homes, modular homes and mobile homes placed within the City
limits shall meet all international building code requirements, all state
electrical codes, all state plumbing codes, and all City regulations for sewer
and water services.
   C.   Certificate Of Occupancy: No structures shall be occupied without an
occupancy certificate being issued by the building inspector or building
official.
   D.   A violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 533,
6-17-2024)
CHAPTER 6
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: Historic Preservation Commission
9-6-4: Statute Authority For Historic Preservation
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public through identification, evaluation,
designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, areas, structures, and
objects that reflect significant elements of the city's, the state's, and the
nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural heritage. (Ord.
353, 9-8-1998)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Council.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of Council.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the city, the state, or
the nation. (Ord. 353, 9-8-1998)
9-6-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   Created; Membership; Appointment: There is hereby created a historic
preservation commission which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council.
   B.   Qualifications: All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated
interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The
city council shall endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with
professional training or experience in the disciplines of architecture,
history, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law,
or other historic preservation related disciplines.
   C.   Terms Of Office; Vacancies: Initial appointments to the commission
shall be made as follows: one 1-year term; two (2) 2-year terms; and two (2) 3-
year terms. All subsequent appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms.
Commission members may be reappointed to serve additional terms. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, and the appointee
shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   D.   Compensation: The members of the commission may be reimbursed by the
city for expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
   E.   Organization:
      1.   Rules: The commission shall have the power to make whatever rules
are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this chapter.
Rules of procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be available for
public inspection.
      2.   Officers: The commission shall elect officers from among the
commission members. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the
commission. The vice chairperson shall, lacking the chairperson, perform the
duties of the chairperson.
      3.   Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public, and shall follow the requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws. The
commission shall keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its
resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
   F.   Powers, Duties And Responsibilities: The commission shall be advisory
to the council and shall be authorized to:
      1.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
      2.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest, or
donation.
      3.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
      4.   Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
      5.   Contract, with the approval of the council, with the state or
federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
      6.   Cooperate with the federal, state, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
      7.   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
county, the city, the state, or the federal government and the agencies of
these entities.
      8.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purposes of historic preservation in the city.
      9.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic preservation and historic properties in the city.
      10.   Commission members or employees or agents of the commission may
enter private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of its
official duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
      11.   Review nominations of properties to the national register of
historic places for properties within the city's jurisdiction.
   G.   Technical Advisors: The commission may recommend to the council, within
the limits of its funding, the employment of or the contracting with other
parties for the services of technical experts or other persons as it deems
necessary to carry on the function of the commission. (Ord. 353, 9-8-1998)
9-6-4: STATUTE AUTHORITY FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
Under the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-4612, the city may provide by
ordinance special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement
and preservation of historic properties. (Ord. 353, 9-8-1998)
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
9-7-1: Statutory Authorization
9-7-2: Findings Of Fact
9-7-3: Purpose
9-7-4: Methods Of Accomplishing Purpose
9-7-5: Definitions
9-7-6: Application And Interpretation
9-7-7: Duties And Responsibilities Of Building Inspector
9-7-8: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
9-7-9: Development Permit
9-7-10: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
9-7-11: Variances
9-7-12: Violations; Penalties
9-7-13: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
9-7-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The Idaho legislature has delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditure for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-3: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   A.   To protect human life and health;
   B.   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
   C.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   F.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   G.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
   H.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-4: METHODS OF ACCOMPLISHING PURPOSE:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this
chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'); a
clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as
sheet flow, and AH indicates ponding.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; also referred to as the "100-year flood".
Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might
be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools;
nursing homes; hospitals; police, fire and emergency response installations;
and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous
waste.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
hereof.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal
insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard
and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of subsection
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date hereof.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date hereof.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation of the property or accessory buildings
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
   B.   For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   C.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the state inventory of historic places.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
WATER DEPENDENT: A structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any
other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature
of its operations. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997; amd. 2015 Code)
9-7-6: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: This chapter shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-7: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance
with its provisions. Duties of the building inspector shall include, but not be
limited to:
   A.   Permit Review:
      1.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
      3.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of subsection
   B.   Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not
been provided in accordance with section
9-7-8 of this chapter, the building inspector shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer subsection
   C.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
      1.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study or required as in subsection B of this section, obtain and
record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement.
      2.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
         a.   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level);
         b.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection
         c.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
      1.   Notify adjacent communities and the department of water resources
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the federal insurance administration.
      2.   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   E.   Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where needed as
to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The persons contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in section
9-7-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-8: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance
administration in a flood hazard boundary map dated May 3, 1974, for Council,
Idaho, and as amended, with accompanying flood insurance maps, as amended, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
flood insurance study, when completed, will be on file with the Adams County
building inspector. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-9: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A development permit shall be obtained before
construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard
established in section
9-7-8 of this chapter. The permit shall be for all structures including
manufactured homes, as defined in section
9-7-5 of this chapter, and for all "development" including fill and other
activities, also as defined in section
9-7-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the building inspector and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-10: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
      1.   Anchoring:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
         b.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas"
guidebook for additional techniques).
      2.   Construction Materials And Methods:
         a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         b.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         c.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
      3.   Utilities:
         a.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
         b.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
         c.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      4.   Subdivision Proposals:
         a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
         b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
         c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
         d.   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
      5.   Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source
(subsection
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsection
      1.   Residential Construction:
         a.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot
(1') above the base flood elevation.
         b.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be either certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
         a.   Be floodproofed so that below one foot (1') above the base flood
level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
         c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection B2 based on
their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
         d.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed,
must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection B1b of this section.
         e.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
(1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base
flood level will be rated as 1 foot below).
      3.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within zones A1-A30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM on sites:
            (1)   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
            (2)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
            (3)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
            (4)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which
a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood;
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
         b.   Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the city's FIRM that are not subject to the above manufactured
home provisions shall be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation; or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      4.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM must either:
         a.   Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days; or
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
         c.   Meet the requirements of subsection B3 of this section and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
   C.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
section
9-7-8 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection C1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
   D.   Encroachments: The cumulative effect of any proposed development, where
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1')
at any point.
   E.   Critical Facilities: Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard
areas (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet (3') or more above the level of the base flood
elevation (100-year) at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Ingress and egress routes elevated to or above the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-11: VARIANCES:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission, as established by the city
council, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
      3.   In passing upon such applications, the planning and zoning
commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: (Ord. 335, 1-23-
1997; amd. 2015 Code)
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the city;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effect of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         k.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   B.   Certain Variances Permitted; Conditions:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one- half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, provided subsections A3a through A3k of this section have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set
forth in this section.
      3.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing of good and sufficient cause.
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (Ord. 335, 1-23-
1997; amd. 2015 Code)
      6.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece
of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      7.   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited
circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry
floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage
potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection B1 of
this section, and otherwise complies with subsection
      8.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
9-7-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute an infraction punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997; amd. 2015 Code)
9-7-13: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the federal insurance administration for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder. (Ord. 335, 1-23-1997)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2:    Purpose And Intent
10-1-3:    Scope And Content
10-1-4:    Applicability
10-1-5:    References
10-1-6:    Preservation Of Private Property Rights
10-1-7:    Amendments To Title
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the Zoning Regulations of the City of Council,
Idaho. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of this title shall be to:
      1.   Carry out the intent and purposes of the “local land use planning
act”, Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq., as amended;
      2.   Carry out the policies of the comprehensive plan by classifying and
regulating the uses of property and structures within the incorporated areas of
the city;
      3.   Establish districts within the city in accordance with the adopted
comprehensive plan, in conformance with Idaho Code section 67-6511;
      4.   Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the
city. As required by Idaho Code section 67-6511, such standards include, but
are not limited to, those regulating:
         a.   The height, number of stories, size, design, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair or location of structures.
         b.   Size, minimum lot dimensions, landscape buffers, size of required
yards and density of residential properties.
         c.   The use of structures and property;
      5.   Ensure the most appropriate use of properties;
      6.   Protect property rights and enhance property values;
      7.   Provide a method of administration and prescribe penalties for the
violations of regulations hereinafter described as authorized by the
constitution and laws of the state; and
      8.   Protect and promote health, safety and the general welfare.
   B.   Intent: The city council hereby declares that it is the intent of the
council that this title does not repeal any existing laws regarding fire
protection, building codes, health and sanitation, or other general nuisance or
any other laws. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-1-3: SCOPE AND CONTENT:
This title shall consist of the text adopted by ordinance, as amended from time
to time, and the official zoning maps, as amended from time to time. Copies are
available for review at the Council City Hall or on the City’s website. This
title and each and all of its terms are to be read and interpreted in light of
the designations of the official zoning maps. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations of this title shall apply and govern development and use of all
properties within the corporate limits of the city and outside the city limits
and within the city area of impact for which annexation has been requested, or
as otherwise permitted through written agreement with Adams County.
   A.   No person or public agency shall construct, alter, move or change the
use of, or occupy a structure or undertake any development unless:
      1.   The proposed use, structure or division of property complies with
this title.
      2.   Any required approval is first obtained as provided by this code,
and any applicable conditions of approval are met.
   B.   Nothing in this title shall eliminate the need for obtaining any other
required permits, including, but not limited to, building permits, plumbing,
electrical or mechanical permits, grading permits, or any permit, approval or
entitlement required by other titles of this code, other political subdivisions
of the state, or agencies of the state.
   C.   All properties within the city corporate limits shall comply with the
regulations of this title unless otherwise preempted by federal statute or
local law statutory ordinance.
   D.   The prosecution of violations that occurred under previous land use
regulations and that remain a violation under this title shall continue until
resolved.
   E.   Applications pending as of the effective date of this title:
      1.   Project With Pending Application: All applications shall be
processed according to the regulations and requirements in effect as of the
date the zoning administrator accepted the application.
      2.   Approved Project With Pending Request For Time Extension: Time
extension requests shall be consistent with the requirements that are in effect
when the original application was approved.
      3.   Approved Project Not Yet Completed: Any approved application may
still be completed as provided by the approval. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-1-5: REFERENCES:
References in this title to other ordinances or codes of the city and statutes
of the state are provided solely for the coordination of this title with such
other ordinances and statutes. Any amendments to cited codes that are adopted
subsequent to the adoption of this title shall be applicable to this title.
(Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-1-6: PRESERVATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY RIGHTS:
   A.   This title shall be interpreted to equally protect citizens from the
undue encroachment on their private property by their neighbors’ uses of their
private property and equally protect each citizen’s right to use their property
without creating undue burden upon their neighbors.
   B.   In the administration of this title, every person shall be secure in
their premises, and no employee of the city shall enter upon or search any of
the premises of any citizen without statutory authority or order issued by a
court of proper jurisdiction.
   C.   Every citizen of the city shall have the right to appear in person or
be represented by their agent before the city council in the proper order of
business to appeal a decision pursuant to the procedures contained in this
title.
   D.   In the enforcement of this title, it shall be deemed to apply equally
to each citizen and each property in similar circumstances, and shall not be
enforced to discriminate between one individual and/or another individual or
other group as compared to all others. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-1-7: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE:
The city council may amend the boundaries of the zoning districts or any
portion of this title in accordance with the notice provisions of Idaho Code
sections 67-6509 and 67-6511, as they now exist or hereafter are amended,
changed or replaced. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1:    Purpose
10-2-2:    Zoning Administrator
10-2-3:    Planning And Zoning Commission Duties To Be Exercised By City
Council
10-2-4:    Application Process
10-2-5:    Administrative Process
10-2-6:    Public Hearings
10-2-7:    Fees
10-2-8:    Appeals
10-2-9:    Mediation
10-2-10: Violations
10-2-11: Enforcement, Revocation And Penalties
10-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the roles, responsibilities and
processes associated with the administration of approvals and/or permits that
are authorized by this title. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment; Assistance: The city council shall appoint a zoning
administrator to act as the administrative official for this title. The zoning
administrator may be provided with the assistance of such other persons or may
designate other city officials to carry out the duties and responsibilities of
this title as the city council may authorize. In the absence of an appointed
zoning administrator, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall act as the zoning
administrator and may appoint or employ other city staff to assist as
authorized by the City Council.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The zoning administrator, or his or her staff, shall
administer and enforce this title and fulfill all the duties imposed by law,
including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Make interpretations in the enforcement and administration of this
title;
      2.   Advise interested persons and the public of the land use provisions;
      3.   Notify the news media regarding matters of public interest;
      4.   With the city clerk, receive and examine applications;
      5.   Aid applicants in the preparation of required applications and
transmit to the planning and zoning commission or city council any required
applications;
      6.   Issue zoning permits, certificates of zoning compliance, certificate
of occupancy permits, notifications, stop work orders and such similar
administrative duties, subject to the veto powers of the city council;
      7.   Conduct investigations of structures and use of property as are
necessary to determine compliance with the regulations of this title;
      8.   Order the abatement of violations of this title and aid in
prosecuting such violations;
      9.   Withhold any certificate of zoning compliance or administrative
design review approvals on any property where structures or uses are in
violation of this title;
      10.   Enforce penalties for violations in accordance with this title;
      11.   With the consent of the owner, enter upon any property to make
examinations and surveys;
      12.   Maintain records of all materials and correspondence related to
land use applications;
      13.   Transmit to outside agencies and provide written notice to
surrounding property owners on all planning and zoning commission and city
council hearings;
      14.   Maintain records of the planning and zoning commission and city
council hearings, and actions thereon;
      15.   Review and act on requests for alternative compliance as identified
in this title;
      16.   Assist and report to the city council regarding the provisions of
this title as directed. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION DUTIES TO BE EXERCISED BY CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-6504, the City Council shall exercise all
of the powers required and authorized by the Local Land Use Planning Act, in
lieu of appointing a Planning and Zoning Commission. Because the City Council
chooses to exercise the powers required and authorized by the Local Land Use
Planning Act, it need not follow the procedural requirements established solely
for planning and zoning commissions.
   B.   Duties: In addition to other duties prescribed under Idaho Code and
Council City Code, the duties of the City Council regarding implementation of
this title shall be as follows:
      1.   Provide for citizen meetings, hearings or other methods to obtain
advice on the planning process, comprehensive plan and implementation;
      2.   Conduct informational meetings and consult with public officials and
agencies, public utility companies and civic, educational, professional or
other organizations;
      3.   Promote a public interest in and understanding of the planning and
zoning commission activities;
      4.   Conduct public hearings and make decisions based on the required
findings and standards in accordance with this Title.
      5.   Approve or deny comprehensive plan amendments and land use
legislation, including annexation, rezone and variance requests, conditional
use permits, and subdivision applications. The city council shall serve as a
review authority on appeals of discretionary and administrative actions. (Ord.
536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-4: APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to outline the general
application process for a permit or decision under provisions of this title.
   B.   Application Requirements: All persons making application for permits
and decisions in accordance with this title shall submit an application to the
zoning administrator on forms provided by the zoning administrator.
   C.   Determination Of Completeness:
      1.   An application shall contain all information deemed necessary by the
zoning administrator to determine if the proposed permit or action will comply
with the requirements of the applicable district or regulation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the zoning administrator
shall begin processing the application.
   D.   Fee: All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount
established by city ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS:
   A.   Parties Of Record Defined: For purposes of this section, “parties of
record” shall include the applicant, property owners of record within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary of the application property, and
any person who, in writing, specifically requests such status as to a
particular application.
   B.   Procedure: Where the process specified by this Title is administrative:
      1.   Upon submission of a complete application, the zoning administrator
shall review such application and shall:
         a.   Prepare a final decision of denial, which decision shall be
supported by written findings of fact and conclusions of law; or
         b.   Prepare a final decision of approval, which decision shall be
supported by written findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall set
forth any and all conditions of approval; and/or
      2.   The zoning administrator shall provide to the applicant notice of
the final decision. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-6:   PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Hearings Based On Certain Standards: Decisions on permits and requests
for action requiring a public hearing are based on standards that require
substantial discretion and are matters having broad public interest.
   B.   Preapplication Meeting: Prior to submitting an application, applicants
for permits requiring a public hearing are required to conduct a preapplication
meeting with the zoning administrator.
   C.   Publishing Of Public Hearing Notice:
      1.   Legal Notice: In accordance with state code, at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing, the city shall publish a notice of the time
and place and a summary of the proposed action in the official newspaper of the
city.
      2.   Notice To Other Jurisdictions: The city shall send notice of the
application to other jurisdictions as required in Idaho Code.
   D.   Public Hearing:
      1.   The city council shall conduct the public hearing in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Section
10-2-6 -E of this code and Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6511.
      2.   If the decision making body finds that it does not have sufficient
information to make a decision, it may or may not continue the public hearing.
The decision making body may also choose to conduct a study session with all
parties of record to address questions and issues related to the application.
      3.   The decision making body may require or recommend conditions of
approval that it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and/or to prevent undue adverse impacts on surrounding properties.
      4.   After the conduct of the public hearing, the city council may
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application request.
   E.   Public Hearings, Rules Of Procedure: The following rules are hereby
established, shall be observed in the conduct of any public hearing before the
City Council, and shall be known as the City of Council rules of procedure:
      1.   No person shall be permitted to testify or speak before the City
Council at a public hearing unless such person has signed his or her name and
written his/her residential address thereafter on sign up sheets to be provided
by the City. This rule shall not apply to staff or technical witnesses directed
by the Mayor, the Hearing Officer, the City Council or their designee to give
evidence or information to the City Council.
      2.   No person shall be permitted to speak before the City Council at a
public hearing until such person has been recognized by the Mayor or the
Hearing Officer or their designee.
      3.   All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded electronically or
stenographically and all persons speaking at such public hearings shall speak
before a microphone in such a manner as will assure that recorded testimony or
remarks will be accurate and trustworthy.
      4.   At the commencement of the public hearing, the City Council may
establish a time limit to be observed by all speakers. If a time limit is
established, it shall be done on the basis of the number of speakers who sign
up for each public hearing and shall apply only to the speaker’s comments.
      5.   The speaker shall not be interrupted by members of the City Council
until his time limit has been expended or until he has finished his statement.
      6.   At the conclusion of a speaker’s comments, each City Council member,
when recognized by the Mayor, shall be allowed to question the speaker and the
speaker shall be limited to answers to the questions asked. The question and
answer period shall not be included in the speaker’s time limit, as
established.
      7.   When the public hearing is quasi-judicial in nature or one after
which the City Council is required by law to make findings of fact, each
speaker may be required to swear to affirm that his testimony will be true and
correct.
      8.   The Mayor may appoint a presiding officer to conduct any public
hearing. Either the Mayor or the presiding officer may appoint a Sergeant at
Arms who shall have the authority, upon the direction of the Mayor, to remove
or evict any person who is disruptive or interfering with the due order of
business.
      9.   The City Council may suspend or amend any one or more of these rules
by vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full City Council.
      10.   The Mayor shall have the authority to interpret and apply the
foregoing rules, subject to an appeal to the City Council, whose decision shall
be determined by a majority vote of the Council members present.
      11.   Any person who has knowledge of any time limit set at any public
hearing and who refuses to cease talking after reaching that time limit and
being requested to cease by the Hearing Officer, the Mayor, the City Council or
their designee, or any person who by loud, unruly, threatening or disruptive
behavior disrupts a public hearing, may be revoked by the Sergeant at Arms or
by any person appointed to act as a Sergeant at Arms by the Mayor, the Hearing
Officer or the City Council. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-7: FEES:
   A.   Fees Established By Ordinance Or Resolution: Applicant shall be
responsible for fees as established by ordinance or resolution.
   B.   Professional Contract Staff (PCS) Fees: Applicant shall be responsible
for PCS fees as described in Title 2, chapter 2 of this code, including
architect, attorney, and engineer fees.
   C.   Fees Not Refundable: Fees to be charged for the various procedures
stated in this title are not refundable, except where a petition or application
is withdrawn at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of its scheduled public
hearing. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-8: APPEALS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to standardize the appeal
procedure for any party from any adverse ruling of the city council, or zoning
administrator. All time limits set out herein shall be deemed controlling
unless a specific time limit is set out in another section. Any party aggrieved
by the final action of the zoning administrator or city council, may appeal in
accordance with the appellant procedures herein set forth. Time limits shall be
deemed jurisdictional
   B.   Appeals From Decisions Of Zoning Administrator:
      1.   Any aggrieved party may appeal to the city council from a final
adverse decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal must be filed in
writing with the zoning administrator or the city council within fifteen (15)
days after the decision is rendered.
      2.   Notice of appeal may be informal, but shall be in writing and shall
set out reasons why the appealing party is aggrieved and shall state why the
appellant believes the zoning administrator committed error.
      3.   The city council may hear the appeal either by receiving and
reviewing the record accumulated by the zoning administrator or by holding a
hearing. Should the city council choose to schedule a hearing, such a hearing
shall be held at the first regular city council meeting which falls after the
filing of the notice of appeal; provided, that at least five (5) days have
elapsed between notice of filing and meeting. If the regular meeting is less
than five (5) days after filing, said hearing may be scheduled at the next
regularly scheduled meeting. Should the city council choose to decide an appeal
strictly on the record presented by the zoning administrator, the city council
may do so at any time, but no later than the first regular meeting which occurs
fifteen (15) days after the filing of the notice of appeal.
      4.   Within sixty (60) days after the hearing or record review, the city
council shall render a decision, together with a summary of findings, setting
forth reasons why a particular decision was made.
      5.   Should the city council fail to take action within the allotted
time, the appeal shall be deemed denied and the aggrieved party may pursue
further appeal.
   C.   Appeals From Decisions Of City Council:
      1.   Any aggrieved party may appeal to the city council for
reconsideration of a final adverse decision of the city council. Such appeal
must be filed in writing with the zoning administrator or the city council
within fifteen (15) days after the decision is rendered.
      2.   Notice of appeal may be informal, but shall be in writing and shall
set out reasons why the appealing party is aggrieved and shall state why the
appellant believes the city council committed error.
      3.   The city council may hear the appeal either by receiving and
reviewing the record accumulated by the zoning administrator or by holding a
hearing. Should the city council choose to schedule a hearing, such a hearing
shall be held at the first regular city council meeting which falls after the
filing of the notice of appeal; provided, that at least five (5) days have
elapsed between notice of filing and meeting. If the regular meeting is less
than five (5) days after filing, said hearing may be scheduled at the next
regularly scheduled meeting. Should the city council choose to decide an appeal
strictly on the record presented by the zoning administrator, the city council
may do so at any time, but no later than the first regular meeting which occurs
fifteen (15) days after the filing of the notice of appeal.
      4.   Within sixty (60) days after the hearing or record review, the city
council shall render a decision, together with a summary of findings, setting
forth reasons why a particular decision was made.
      5.   Should the city council fail to take action within the allotted
time, the appeal shall be deemed denied and the aggrieved party may pursue
further appeal.
   D.   Appeals From Decisions Of City Council: Any person aggrieved by a final
decision of the city council may appeal to the district court within twenty
eight (28) days. For purposes of filing an appeal, an aggrieved person shall be
limited to a person whose permit has been denied in full or in part, or a
property owner whose property lies within three hundred feet (300') of the
property subject to city council action.
   E.   General Provisions:
      1.   Representation: Any party may be represented at any stage by legal
counsel licensed to practice law within the state of Idaho.
      2.   Quorum: The city council or planning and zoning commission shall act
by a simple majority of a quorum.
      3.   Stay Of Proceedings: Any appeal stays all work or all proceedings in
furtherance of the action unless the zoning administrator certifies to the City
Council, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in the application, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-9: MEDIATION:
An applicant may request mediation consistent with Idaho Code section 67-6510.
(Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-10: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Proper Permits Required: It is a violation for any person to initiate
or maintain or cause to be initiated or maintained the use of any structure,
land or real property within the city without first obtaining proper permits or
authorizations required for the use by this title.
   B.   Prohibited Use: It is a violation for any person to use, construct,
locate, demolish or cause to be used, constructed, located, or demolished any
structure, land or property within the city in any manner that is not permitted
by or is in violation of the terms of any permit or authorization issued
pursuant to this title or previous codes.
   C.   Noncompliance With Conditions Of Approval: It is a violation for any
person to not comply with specific conditions of approval as stated in a
conditional use permit, accessory use permit, final plat or land division plan
as set forth in this title.
   D.   Misrepresentation Of Facts: It is a violation to misrepresent any
material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to
obtain any land use authorization as set forth in this title.
   E.   Failure To Comply: It is a violation for anyone to fail to comply with
the requirements of this title, as set out in the specific sections of this
title.
   F.   It is a violation for any person, to use, or for an owner to allow any
person to use any property, whether a primary, accessory, or secondary use of
that property, in a manner inconsistent with the zoning regulations for the
zoning district in which the property lies, according to the official zoning
map of the City. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-2-11: ENFORCEMENT, REVOCATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide criminal as well as
civil sanctions against persons who violate this title. The remedies herein
contained shall not be deemed exclusive remedies and by choosing a criminal or
civil remedy does not amount to an election of remedies.
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of this title to place the obligation of
complying with its requirements upon the owner, occupier or other person
responsible for the condition of the land and buildings within the scope of
this title.
   C.   Private Covenants Excepted: Neither the city council nor any employee
or representative of the city council shall be required to enforce any private
subdivision covenants or restrictions.
   D.   Investigation And Notice Of Violation:
      1.   The zoning administrator, or a person designated by the zoning
administrator, shall investigate any structure or use which he or she
reasonably believes does not comply with the standards and requirements of this
title.
      2.   If, after investigation, it is determined that the standards or
requirements of this title have been violated, the zoning administrator, or a
person designated by the zoning administrator, shall serve a notice of
violation upon the owner, tenant or other person responsible for the condition.
The notice of violation shall state separately each standard or requirement
violated; shall state what corrective action, if any, is necessary to comply
with the standards or requirements; and shall set a reasonable time for
compliance. The notice shall state that any further violation may result in
criminal prosecution and/or civil penalties.
      3.   The notice served upon the owner, tenant or other person responsible
for the condition shall be addressed to the last known address of such person.
If no address is known, then notice may be made by publication in the newspaper
of record for the city. The zoning administrator, or a person designated by the
zoning administrator, will record all efforts made to effect service in person
or by mail as part of his investigative report.
   E.   Extension Of Compliance Date:
      1.   The zoning administrator may grant a reasonable extension of time
for compliance with any notice or order, whether pending or final, upon finding
that substantial progress toward compliance has been made and that the public
will not be adversely affected by the extension. Such extension of time shall
not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
      2.   An extension of time may be revoked by the zoning administrator if
it is shown that any of the following are true:
         a.   The conditions at the time the extension was granted have
changed;
         b.   The zoning administrator determines that a party is not
performing corrective actions as agreed; or
         c.   If the extension creates an adverse effect on the public.
      3.   The date of revocation shall then be considered as the compliance
date.
   F.   Revocation Of Permits:
      1.   Zoning, General: The procedure for revocation of permits for other
than commercial and industrial development is as follows:
         a.   In the event of any violation of any condition, term or
prerequisite which has been set as a requirement, basis or condition precedent
for the issuance, continuance or land use of a conditional use permit, a
hardship permit or any other permit which is subject to revocation, any person
may bring that violation to the attention of the zoning administrator. The
information presented to the zoning administrator may be informal in nature,
but it shall be in written form. After receipt of the information, the zoning
administrator shall commence a cursory investigation to determine if the
factual allegations made in support of the asserted violation are true, and if
the allegations are true, if the conduct complained of constitutes a violation
of the terms of the permitted use.
         b.   In the event the zoning administrator determines that the
allegations are not true or, that even if true, the facts do not constitute a
violation of the permitted use, the zoning administrator may dismiss the
allegations and notify the complaining party. The complaining party shall have
fifteen (15) days to file a notice of appeal with the City Council. In the
event the administrator determines that the allegations are true and constitute
a violation of the permitted use, the zoning administrator shall send notice of
the violation to the permit holder. The notice shall inform the permit holder
of the terms and conditions of the permit, the substance of the allegations
which constitute the violation and inform the holder that the matter shall be
placed on the agenda before the city council. At the time the matter is
scheduled before the city council, the permit holder shall appear and shall
either admit or deny the substance of the allegations. In the event the
allegations are denied, the city council may set a hearing on the matter. At
the public hearing, the city council shall hear evidence presented to support
the allegations that the holder has violated the terms of the permit and shall
hear evidence which rebuts the allegations. After the public hearing has been
conducted, the city council shall make a determination whether or not the facts
giving rise to the allegations of a violation of the permit are true, and if
true, whether the conduct complained of constitutes a violation of the permit.
In the event the city council makes a finding that there is no substance to the
allegations or that the permit holder’s conduct does not constitute a violation
of the terms of the permit, the matter shall be dismissed. In the event the
city council makes a finding that there has been a violation of the terms of
the permit, or in the event the holder admits to a violation thereof, the city
council shall take one of the following courses of action:
            (1)   The city council may revoke the permit.
            (2)   The city council may extend the permit for a set period on a
probationary status, subject to such terms and conditions as the city council
may deem appropriate, with the prerequisite that if there is a violation of the
conditions underlying the permit while it is in probationary status, the permit
may be revoked upon a showing by affidavit of any violation without the
necessity of further hearing.
            (3)   It may modify the terms and conditions of the permit and
allow it to continue subject to the new terms.
            (4)   It may allow the conditional use to continue under the same
terms and conditions.
         c.   All notices required by this section may be sent by regular U.S.
mail, postage prepaid. In the event a permit holder fails to appear at any
stage of any proceedings, a hearing or a decision can be made in the absence of
that person.
         d.   Any action pursued in accordance with this section does not
preclude the city from any other form of enforcement, which enforcement may
include criminal prosecution, civil abatement or injunctive relief.
         e.   Any decision rendered by the city council may be appealed to the
district court pursuant to the Idaho administrative procedures act, in the
manner and within the time limits set by Idaho Code section 67-5270.
      2.   Commercial And Industrial Development: The procedure for revocation
of permits for commercial and industrial development is as follows:
         a.   A conditional use or accessory use permit, or any other permit
which is subject to revocation, may be revoked or modified by the city council,
upon notice and hearing, for breach or violation of any condition of approval
or limitation of the permit.
         b.   If the city council decides to revoke a conditional use permit or
accessory use permit, or any other permit which is subject to revocation,
either on its own action or upon complaint to the city council, the city
council shall notify the permit holder of its intention to revoke the permit
and provide the permit holder with the opportunity to contest the revocation.
         c.   Fifteen (15) days’ prior notice of the hearing shall be given to
the permit holder and all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of
the boundaries of the land for which the permit was issued.
         d.   The city council shall make findings of fact and conclusions of
law supporting its decision to revoke the conditional use or accessory use
permit. If the city council does not decide to revoke the permit, no findings
of fact and conclusions of law shall be made.
         e.   An aggrieved permit holder or complainant may appeal the decision
of the city council under the administrative procedures act of the state, Idaho
Code section 67-5270.
   G.   Criminal Penalty: A violation of the provisions of this title is
declared a misdemeanor. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this title shall be subject to criminal prosecution and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day of noncompliance with any of the provisions of
this title shall constitute a separate offense.
   H.   Additional Remedies For Violations:
      1.   Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city council, or any
public official or any private citizen from taking any lawful action to
restrain, prevent or abate any act, proposed act or action which is in
violation of or which would violate any provision of this title. Should any
person successfully sue for the restraining, prevention or abatement of any act
or proposed act which would violate this title, that person shall be awarded
all costs and fees incurred in pursuing that action.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection G of this section, the
city attorney, at his or her sole discretion, may civilly prosecute any
violation of this title and seek all available remedies that may include, but
are not limited to, abatement of the noncompliant conditions, revocation of
existing permits for noncompliance, civil damages for enforcement, or any other
remedy as allowed by law.
      4.   The city may withhold any approval and/or permit for any and all
proposed activities or uses on any real property with outstanding violations of
this title, except that such approval and/or permit shall not be withheld where
such withholding would adversely affect health, safety or the general public
welfare. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Interpretation Of Terms Or Words
10-3-2:    Definitions
10-3-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS OR WORDS:
   A.   Language:
      1.   Terminology: When used in this title, all words used in the present
tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include
the plural number and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction
of the sentence indicates otherwise. The word “shall” is mandatory, and the
word “may” is permissive.
      2.   Number Of Days: Whenever a number of days is specified in this
title, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as
provided in this title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days,
except that such time limits shall extend to the following working day when the
last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or city holiday.
      3.   Minimum Requirements: When interpreting and applying the regulations
of this title, all regulations shall be considered to be minimum requirements,
unless stated otherwise. Proposed uses shall comply with all applicable
regulations and standards unless specifically exempt elsewhere in this title.
      4.   Defined Terms: Terms defined in section
10-3-2  of this chapter shall have their defined meaning when used elsewhere in
this title. For the purpose of readability and clarity, such terms are not
shown in initial caps.
      5.   Section Headings: Section headings or captions are for reference
purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this title.
      6.   References: All references to state or federal laws and/or
regulations shall refer to such laws and/or regulations as they may be amended
over time.
   B.   Measurements:
      1.   Structure height shall be measured in accordance with the adopted
building code, as set forth in this code.
      2.   Linear distance shall be measured in a horizontal line; it shall not
be measured along an inclined surface or line. For uses that have a separation
standard, the distance shall be measured from the nearest customer entrance of
the proposed use to the nearest property line of the specified use.
   C.   Conflicting Regulations:
      1.   In case of conflict between the text and the maps of this title, the
maps shall prevail.
      2.   If conflicts occur between different regulations of this title, or
between this title and other regulations of this code, the most restrictive
regulation shall apply.
      3.   It is not intended that this title interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; however, where
this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of structures or
premises, or upon the height of structures, or requires larger space than is
imposed or required by ordinances, rules or regulations, or by easements,
covenants or agreements, the regulations of this title shall govern.
   D.   Allowed Uses: If a proposed use of property is not specifically listed
in “district regulations” of this title, the use shall be prohibited, except as
follows: The zoning administrator may determine that a proposed use not listed
in “district regulations” of this title is equivalent to a principal permitted
or conditional use. In making the determination, the zoning administrator shall
consider the following:
      1.   The impacts on public services and activities associated with the
proposed use are substantially similar to those of one or more of the uses
listed in the applicable base districts as allowed;
      2.   The proposed use shall not involve a higher level of activity or
density than one or more of the uses listed in the applicable base districts as
allowed;
      3.   The proposed use is within the same three (3) digit category of an
allowed use listed in the latest edition of the “North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS)”, published by the United States Department of
Commerce;
      4.   The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the district in
which the use is proposed to be located; and
      5.   The proposed use is in substantial conformance with goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
   E.   Surveys: It is important when providing a control network for future
geo referenced mapping and surveying to establish accurate bench marks.
      1.   Geographic Information System (GIS): GIS will be used to store and
manipulate data obtained from NAD, SPC and NAVD88 measurements to provide
accurate surveying and mapping geographic information for analysis and
visualization purposes.
      2.   Survey References: Accepted survey references include:
         a.   North American Datum (NAD)(83) for horizontal control. It is used
to locate horizontal reference points. (83) is an accepted version, however
there are more current versions of the NAD that may be used.
         b.   Idaho State Plane Coordinates (SPC), West Zone. It is used in
coordination with NAD to specify locations in our local geographic zone for
more accurate horizontal control.
         c.   North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) - for vertical
control. This is a fixed elevation measurement used to define the height of a
topographic point.
      3.   New Mapping Or Surveying Plans: All new mapping or surveying plans
shall reference at least two (2) points on the NAD (83) or most current
version, and/or Idaho State Plane West Zone Coordinates for Horizontal Control
and shall be tied to the NAVD 88 or the most current accepted Vertical Control.
(Vertical Control is expected to be updated in the future.)
      4.   Control Monuments: All subdivisions shall have a minimum of two (2)
control monuments within the subdivision with NAD (83) coordinates and NAVD 88
elevations. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or structure attached to or detached
from the main building, located in or occupying not more than thirty percent
(30%) of the rear yard adjoining the main building, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building and the bulk of which is not more than
forty percent (40%) of the main building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is customarily incidental to that of the main
building or to the main use of the land and which is located in the same zone
or a less restrictive zone and on the same lot with a main building or use.
AGRICULTURAL USES: Activities that take place on a farm, including, but not
limited to, growing cultivated crops (e.g., grazing crop, pasture crop,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, fruit trees, berry bushes), raising
domestic livestock and aquaculture.
AIR BED & BREAKFAST (AIR B&B): See “Short term Rental”
AIRPORT, CITY: Council’s Municipal Airport
ALLEY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family structure which is
arranged, designated, used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for a
single family.
AREA, BUILDABLE: The space within the setback lines remaining on a lot, parcel
or tract after the minimum open space requirements of this title have been
complied with.
AREA, MINIMUM LOT: The minimum area, which is allowed within the property lines
of the lot, excluding adjoining streets or rights-of-way.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles
or equipment repair or parts thereof, including collision service and painting
and steam cleaning of vehicles.
AWNING: A projecting cover extending over a door, window or wall section with
support attached to the structures and used as cover, protection or as
decoration.
BASEMENT: That portion of a dwelling unit all or partly underground and having
at least one-half (1/2) of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST/ BOARDING ROOMS: An owner occupied dwelling providing
overnight accommodations and breakfast food and housekeeping service for no
more than ten (10) occupants, including the owner and owner’s family.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are placed signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to display official court or public office notices, or a
sign advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is
located.
BOND, PERFORMANCE OR SURETY: A financial guarantee by a third party on behalf
of a subdivider or developer with the city guaranteeing the completion of
physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the time
prescribed by the agreement.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ASSEMBLY: A building or portion thereof designated and used for the
gathering together of fifty (50) or more persons for such purposes as
deliberation, worship, entertainment, amusement or transportation.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and the top of
building walls for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city authorizing construction of a
structure.
CARPORT: A structure attached to or made a part of the main structure which is
open to the weather on at least two (2) sides, intended for the sheltering of
licensed and operable motor vehicles. For detached carports, see definition of
Accessory Use Or Structure.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such
cemetery for which perpetual care and maintenance is provided.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY PERMIT: A permit issued by the zoning administrator
and building official, which certifies that based upon the information provided
to the city, a structure is complete and ready to be used for the purpose
indicated in the original application for a building permit.
CITY: The city of Council, Idaho.
CITY AREA OF IMPACT: That zone designated by the city and county as an area
outside of the corporate boundaries of the Council city limits, containing
parcels that are very likely to be annexed to the city within the next five (5)
years and where municipal or public sewer and water are expected to be provided
within five (5) years, considering anticipated commercial and residential
growth, as governed by Idaho Code 67-6526.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Council, Idaho.
CLEAR VISION TRIANGLES:
   A.   That triangular portion of a corner lot between two (2) intersecting
roadways that must be kept clear of sight obstructions that might prevent
motorists from identifying potential traffic approaching the intersection on
the intersecting roadway.
   B.   The boundaries of an area at the intersection of: 1) two (2) streets;
2) the intersection of a public street and driveway; 3) the intersection of a
public street and alley; or 4) at the crossing of a railroad over a street,
where visual observations are limited and specified by this title for the
purpose of protecting public health and safety. Also known as a sight triangle
and sight vision triangle.
CLINIC: A building used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical and surgical
attention; but which building does not provide board, room or regular hospital
care and services.
CLINIC/MEDICAL (HUMAN): A building used for the care, diagnosis and treatment
of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical
and surgical attention; but which building does not provide board, room or
regular hospital care and services.
CLUB OR LODGE: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by
an organized association of persons for social, literary, political,
educational or recreational purposes, primarily for the exclusive use of
members and their guests; but not including an organization, group or
association, the principal activity of which is to render a service usually and
ordinarily carried on as a business.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The document, or any portion thereof, adopted by the city
council as the comprehensive plan pursuant to Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65.
CONDITIONAL USE: A special use permitted within a district, requiring a permit
and approval of the planning and zoning commission (city council) and as
regulated by chapter 10 of this title.
COUNTY ENGINEER (SURVEYOR): The registered surveyor or engineer appointed by
the Adams County board of county commissioners to check plats and make such
surveys, maps and plats ordered by the board.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder of Adams County, Idaho.
COURTYARD: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building.
COVENANTS: A written promise or pledge for a set of restrictions which, when
recorded, attaches to affected realty and which cannot be separated from the
land without the consent of all affected landowners.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street provided with turnaround space at its terminus.
CURB GRADE: The established elevation of the curb measured at the center of the
front of the building. Where no curb grade has been established, the city shall
establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this title.
DAYCARE/CHILD OR ADULT: A place or facility providing daycare for thirteen (13)
or more children for compensation.
DAYCARE, GROUP FACILITY: A home, place or facility providing daycare for seven
(7) to twelve (12) children for compensation.
DAYCARE, IN HOME: A home, place or facility providing daycare for six (6) or
fewer children for compensation.
DEAD END STREET: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not
having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated when accepted by the council as a public
dedication, either by ordinance or entry in the official minutes of the
council, or final subdivision plat approval.
DENSITY, GROSS: The total number of dwelling units within a development divided
by the total area and expressed in dwelling units per acre. Should that number
be a fraction, it shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
DENSITY, NET: The total number of dwelling units within a development divided
by the residential area (excluding roads and required open space) and expressed
in dwelling units per acre. Should that number be a fraction, it shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number.
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: The standard specifications for public works
of the city officially adopted by the council, and all subsequent amendments
thereto, including Idaho Department of Environmental Quality best management
practices, and Idaho public works construction standards.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A written commitment or contract which binds an owner or
developer of property which is subject to an annexation or development or
rezoning request, to a certain course of action when developing that parcel of
property, as used in condition for a specific zone designation or change, as
governed by this title and Idaho Code 67-6511A.
DIVIDE OR DIVISION: Any partition of a parcel of real property, whether by
deed, mortgage, deed of trust, sales agreement, will, trust, court order or
decree, or otherwise.
DWELLING (SINGLE-FAMILY, DUPLEX, MULTIPLE UNITS, ETC.): Any structure or
portion thereof providing independent living facilities for one “family”, as
defined in this section, including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and
sanitation.
EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for specific purposes.
ENGINEER: The city engineer.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY: An establishment that offers activities or events for
amusement, such as theaters or arcades, and where the selling of food or other
items is incidental to the principal use.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons related by consanguinity or affinity to the
first degree.
FENCE: An enclosure or barrier constructed of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal, plastic or other manufactured materials used to enclose, screen or
separate areas. Walls, latticework and screens are considered fences.
FENCE, CLOSED VISION: A fence that does restrict or impede vision or sight
through the fence by more than twenty percent (20%).
FENCE, NONSCALABLE: A fence erected as a barrier to unauthorized access by
persons or vehicles, usually six feet (6') in height and often made of wrought
iron or woven wire.
FENCE, OPEN VISION: A fence that does not restrict or impede vision or sight
through the fence by more than twenty percent (20%).
FENCE, SOLID: A fence that effectively conceals from viewers in or on adjoining
properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it.
FLOODPLAIN: Land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
CARPORT (RESIDENTIAL): A structure attached to or made a part of the main
structure which is open to the weather on at least two (2) sides, intended for
the sheltering of licensed and operable motor vehicles. For detached carports,
see definition of Accessory Use Or Structure.
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL DETACHED: A building for the storage of not more than three
(3) vehicles of which not more than one shall be a commercial vehicle of not
more than two (2) tons’ capacity.
GARAGE, SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where diesel, gasoline, oil,
grease, batteries, tires or motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail. Minor services may be performed.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: That area to which the general public is admitted for
transaction of retail trade.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: Southwest Idaho health district or Idaho department of health
and welfare, or their successors.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by the state or federal agency
responsible therefor.
HOME OCCUPATIONS: A full or part time business which is conducted entirely
within a dwelling unit and which does not change the character of the dwelling
unit.
HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION: An organization of landowners formed for the purpose
of administering public areas within a subdivision and/or for enforcing private
subdivision covenants, conditions or restrictions.
HOSPITAL: An institution open to the public, in which sick patients or injured
persons are given medical or surgical care.
HOSPITAL OR HOSPICE: An institution open to the public, in which sick patients
or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of more
than eight (8) incurable patients.
HOTEL/MOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public
for compensation.
JUNK: Discarded or used materials, including, but not limited to, used
machinery, equipment, scrap copper, brass, iron, steel, other metals, tools,
appliances, implements, vehicles or portions thereof, furniture, beds and
bedding, rags, glass, plastic, cordage, rubber, building materials (excluding
lumber), or other waste that has been abandoned from its original use.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any inoperative or non-roadworthy motor vehicle, trailer, other
wheeled or tracked motorized equipment, or recreational vehicle, any of which
are left standing for a period of more than thirty (30) days upon public or
private property.
JUNKYARD: Any land, property, structure or combination thereof upon which is
collected, stored, kept, dismantled or discarded any material or “junk” or
“junk vehicle”, as defined in this section.
KENNEL / ANIMAL BOARDING: Any premises or portion thereof on which three (3) or
more domestic pets are maintained, harbored, possessed, trained, bred, boarded
or cared for, but not including an animal clinic, animal hospital or veterinary
office.
LABORATORY: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and
analyzing, not including the manufacture of products.
LOADING SPACE: Space designated for pick ups and deliveries.
LOOP STREET: A minor street which forms a loop and returns to the same street
from which it originated. A street forming a connection between two (2) other
streets is not considered a loop.
LOT: A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements
for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as
are herein required; OR A portion of a recorded subdivision intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT AREA, MINIMUM: The minimum area, which is allowed within the property lines
of the lot, excluding adjoining streets or rights-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of roofed ground floor area of all structures on a lot
to the gross square footage of the lot expressed as a percentage.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, FLAG: A lot which has less footage when abutting a street than that
required by this title, but which expands away from the public street into a
lot which meets or exceeds lot width requirements.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot nearest the street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of
the county recorder; or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots,
interior lots and through lots is as follows:
   A.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets.
   B.   Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street.
   C.   Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to
the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner
lot.
   D.   Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the lot side lines.
MANUFACTURED HOMES: A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the
following characteristics:
   A.   Designed for long term occupancy and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a bathtub or shower and kitchen facilities with
plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems.
   B.   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or a
flatbed or other trailers or detached wheels.
   C. Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, usually
including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, such as location on
foundation supports and connection to utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land upon which two (2) or more
manufactured homes are parked on a permanent or semipermanent basis, either
free of charge or for revenue purposes; including any roadway, building,
structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the
facilities of such park.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: Any parcel of land which may be divided or
proposed to be divided in accordance with the definition of “subdivision”,
whereupon one or more manufactured homes shall be placed.
MANUFACTURING, EXTRACTIVE: Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing,
storing, separating, cleaning, crushing or marketing of any mineral natural
resource.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing
and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive
in character requiring large sites. Normally, they generate some nuisances such
as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, and air and water pollution, which pollution
may extend beyond the district boundary.
MANUFACTURING/ LIGHT/NOT OFFENSIVE...:Manufacturing or other industrial uses
which are usually controlled operations, relatively clean, quiet and free from
objectionable noise or pollution.
MEATPACKING FACILITIES: Includes meat canning, curing, smoking, salting,
packing and freezing, or other similar establishments in which meat products
are so processed for sale to the public and where the inspection of meat, meat
byproducts and meat food products are maintained.
NURSERY: Land, building, structure or combination thereof for the storage,
cultivation, container growing, transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants
for shipping or sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or
landscaping.
NURSING HOME/ RETIREMENT HOME: Any institution or facility which supplies all
of the functional needs of an individual in need of residence care and defined
as such for licensing purposes under state law or pursuant to the rules for
nursing homes, hospitals, residential care homes, whether proprietary or
nonprofit, and shall include, but not be limited to, healthcare facilities
owned or administered by the state government or any agency or political
subdivisions thereof.
OPEN SPACE: An uncovered area which may include natural or manmade
environmental features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
recreational facilities which the planning and zoning commission deems
permissive.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation
having sufficient proprietary interest in land to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings under the regulations of this chapter.
PACKING PLANT, COMMERCIAL: An establishment where fruits and vegetables are
graded and/or packed.
PARCEL: A contiguous quantity of land owned by or recorded as the property of
the same person.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open area for the parking of privately owned vehicles
and not for public use.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open area, other than a street, used for the temporary
parking of more than four (4) vehicles and available for public use, whether
free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, which has adequate access to a
public street or alley, sufficient in size to store one automobile.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT/ PUD: An area of land in which a variety of uses are
developed under a single ownership or control.
PLAT, FINAL: A plan of a subdivision, dedication or any portion thereof
prepared for filing and recording by the Adams County recorder and containing
those elements and requirements set forth in this title. A final plat, upon its
being filed and recorded by the Adams County recorder, shall thereafter be
known as an authorized plat, subdivision or dedication.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision or dedication
containing the elements and requirements set forth in this title.
PLAT, NONRESIDENTIAL: A plan of subdivision for nonresidential uses, dedication
or any portion thereof prepared for filing and recording by the County Recorder
and containing those elements and requirements set forth in this title for a
nonresidential subdivision. A final plat for a nonresidential subdivision, upon
its being filed and recorded by the County Recorder, shall be known as an
authorized plat, subdivision or dedication.
PORCH: A roofed entrance to a building, projecting out from the wall or walls
of the main structure and commonly open in part to the weather.
PORTABLE AUTOMOBILE CANOPY: A shelter structure not intended for habitation,
less than two hundred (200) square feet, without sidewalls or drops,
constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by a frame made of
lightweight metal or plastic, and used only to park operable vehicles which are
also licensed and registered.
PORTABLE CANOPY: A shelter structure not intended for habitation, less than two
hundred (200) square feet, constructed of fabric or pliable material supported
by a frame made of lightweight metal or plastic.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: The primary building or activity on a tract, parcel
or lot.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Offices and related spaces for use by medical
practitioners, lawyers, architects, engineers, accountants and other similar
professions.
PUBLIC SERVICE: Power plants or substations, water treatment plants or pumping
stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants, and other similar public service
structures owned by a public utility, a railroad, whether publicly or privately
owned, or by a Municipal or other governmental agency, including the furnishing
of electrical, gas, rail transport, communication, public water and sewage
services.
PUBLIC USE FACILITY: Parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and
other structures intended for use by the public.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic or nonprofit nature
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A portable structure primarily designed as
accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use and as defined in Idaho
Code section 49-119.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK, OVERNIGHTERS: A premises upon which two (2) or
more parking sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by
recreational vehicles for temporary recreation or vacation purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES SALES OR SERVICE: The sale, trade or lease of new or used
recreational vehicles in operating condition. Repair work and service shall be
minor and incidental.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A structure or portion thereof that provides
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation and that
provides twenty four (24) hour nonmedical care for more than eight (8)
individuals that are eighteen (18) years or older who need personal care or
assistance and supervision. A residential care facility shall include, but not
be limited to, assisted living facility, retirement home and respite care.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: An area or strip of land, either public or private, on or over
which an irrevocable right of passage or usage has been obtained and/or secured
for either public or private purposes.
ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale
of products.
SALES, TEMPORARY OUTDOOR: Intermittent sales of goods, such as yard or garage
sales, lemonade or food stands, conducted for not more than twelve hours in a
day and no more than two consecutive days, unless granted a permit under the
City’s business regulations.
SCREENING: A method to aid in protecting properties from undesirable views,
glare, dust, noise or other offensive or harmful materials.
SETBACK: The minimum required horizontal distance between a building or
structure and the nearest property line, alley, or public right-of-way, as
specified in this title. Setbacks are measured from the property line to the
closest exterior wall or structural component of the building, excluding
projections permitted under this title.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard.
SHALL: Designates a mandatory requirement.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL; VACATION RENTAL: means any individually or collectively
owned single-family house or dwelling unit or any unit or group of units in a
condominium, cooperative or timeshare, or owner-occupied residential home that
is offered for a fee and for thirty (30) days or less. Short-term rental or
vacation rental does not include a unit that is used for any retail,
restaurant, banquet space, event center or another similar use.
SIGN(S): Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of people.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The standard specifications for public works of the
City, officially adopted by the City Council and including all subsequent
amendments thereto.
STREET: A right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted by
the council. The term “street” includes also the terms highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, and other such
terms.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designated as an arterial street by the council. It
is the primary purpose of an arterial street to carry fast or heavy traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated as a collector street by the council. A
collector street has the primary purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets
to other collector streets and arterial streets.
STREET, COMMERCIAL: A street designated as a commercial street by the council.
It is the primary purpose of a commercial street to provide for traffic
movement in a commercial area.
STREET FRONTAGE: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street, which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
STREET, INDUSTRIAL: A street designated as an industrial street by the council.
It is the primary purpose of an industrial street to provide for traffic
movement in an industrial area.
STREET, MINOR: It is the purpose of a minor street to provide access to
abutting properties.
STREET, PARTIAL: A dedicated right of way which provides only a portion of the
required street width.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street not maintained, owned or dedicated to the City. Also
includes the terms “lane” or “loop”.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access
to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted.
The term “street” also includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road,
avenue, boulevard, place and other such terms.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures include, but are not limited to, buildings,
manufactured homes, walls, fences and billboards.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change to the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, individual, company, firm, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership or other entity who executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision or short subdivision of land in
accordance with the provisions of the City subdivision ordinance. The
subdivider need not be the owner of the property.
SUBDIVISION: Any land which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2)
or more lots, whether contiguous or not, for the purpose of sale, lease,
transfer or development as part of a common plan and where subdivided land is
offered for sale, lease, transfer or development by a single subdivider, or
designated or advertised as a common unit or by a common name. Such land shall
be presumed, without regard to the number of lots covered by each individual
offering, as being offered for sale, lease, transfer or development as part of
a common plan.
SUBDIVISION, NONRESIDENTIAL: Any nonresidential land which is divided or
proposed to be divided into five (5) or more lots for nonresidential use,
whether contiguous or not, for the purpose of sale, lease, transfer or
development as part of a common plan and where subdivided land is offered for
sale, lease, transfer or development by a single subdivider, or designated or
advertised as a common unit or by a common name. Any nonresidential land which
is proposed to be divided into four (4) or less lots for nonresidential use is
not considered a subdivision.
SUPPLY YARD: A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building
supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain and similar
goods.
TRACT, ASSESSOR’S: A tract drawn, platted, surveyed, recorded or created for
use by a taxing authority. Same as assessor’s plat.
USE: The purpose or manner in which land or a building is occupied, maintained,
or employed by the owner or occupant of said property.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot
coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setback, parking
space, height of buildings or other title provisions affecting the size or
shape of a structure or the size of a lot.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth, by dimension or other means, the
relationship of a proposed development to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
WRECKING YARD/AUTOMOBILE WRECKING AND SALVAGE: Any use of premises, excluding
fully enclosed buildings, whereon more than two (2) motor vehicles unlicensed
or registered, or not in operating condition, are standing sixty (60) days or
more, or on which such used motor vehicles or parts thereof, are dismantled or
stored.
YARD (FRONT, REAR, SIDE): A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied
and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure, to include:
   A.   Yard, Front: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front
of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
   B.   Yard, Rear: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of
a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
   C.   Yard, Side: A yard extending from the principal building to the side
lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing
the front and rear yards.
ZONE: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the City for which the
regulations and provisions governing the use of buildings and land are uniform
for each class or use permitted therein.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: A person who is appointed by the City Council to
administer this title.
ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the
veto powers of the City Council, authorizing the use of land and structures,
and the characteristics of the uses. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 4
LAND USE ZONES AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Zoning Districts Established
10-4-2:    Zoning Map Adopted
10-4-3:    Boundaries Established On Zoning Map
10-4-4:    Uncertainty Of District Boundaries
10-4-5:    Land Use Table
10-4-6:    Off Street Parking And Loading
10-4-7:    Fences
10-4-8:    Accessory Structures
10-4-9:    Treatment Of Lot Line Adjustments
10-4-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The City is divided into three zoning districts as established by the prior
code and existing official zoning map of the City. The three zones are as
follows:
   A.   Residential Zone (“R”): The purpose of the Residential zone is to
provide areas for residential neighborhoods containing single- and multi-
family dwellings, and to protect those uses from conflicts and nuisances
arising from commercial and industrial activities, and uses conducted in
violation of this Code. Uses permitted, permitted conditionally, or prohibited
in the Residence Zone are set forth in the Land Use Table in Section 2 of this
Chapter.
   Lot And Yard Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
      2.   Minimum Lot Width: Seventy five feet (75'). See title 11 of this
code.
      3.   Yards:
         a.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25') or the
established setback line. See title 11 of this code.
         b.   Side Yards: Seven and one-half feet (71/2') from eaves to
property line, with a combined total of both side yards of not less than
fifteen feet (15') from eaves to eaves.
         c.   Rear Yard: Not less than fifteen feet (15').
   Building Height: The height restrictions for the residence district shall be
two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not exceeding thirty five feet (35').
   B.   Commercial Zone (“C”): The purpose of the Commercial Zone is to provide
areas reserved for commerce, to fulfill the need for retail and service trade
area within the community, including along highway corridors, and to further
economic activity and development free from conflicts with residential and
industrial activities, and uses conducted in violation of this Code. Uses
permitted, permitted conditionally, or prohibited in the Commercial Zone are
set forth in the Land Use Table in Section 2 of this Chapter.
   Bulk And Area Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area shall be required.
      2.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width for buildings containing any
dwelling units shall be the same as in the residence district. No minimum lot
width for any other buildings shall be required.
      3.   Yards:
         a.   Front Yard: The front yard shall be not less than five feet (5')
from the property line or the established setback line, whichever is less.
         b.   Side Yards: Side yards are not required unless a lot adjoins any
residential district, in which case, a minimum ten foot (10') side yard shall
be required.
         c.   Rear Yard: No rear yard is required except where vehicular access
to or from an alley or required loading space requires same. In which case,
there shall be determined the necessary setback.
      4.   Minimum Open Space: Minimum open space shall be ten percent (10%).
      5.   Building Height: Height restriction for the C commercial districts
shall be four (4) stories but in no event to exceed fifty feet (50').
      6.   Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking and loading for
the C commercial district is required as provided in section 10-4-6 of this
chapter.
      7.   Sewer And Water: Sewer and water hookups to public sewer and water
lines shall be in accordance with the water and sewer hookup ordinance.
      8.   Public Ways: Street, sidewalk, curb and gutter regulations shall be
in accordance with the city sidewalk ordinance.
   C.   Industrial Zone (“I”): The purpose of the Industrial Zone is to provide
for an encourage suitable areas in which industrial uses may locate and
operate, substantially free from residential and commercial use conflicts. Uses
permitted, permitted conditionally, or prohibited in the Industrial Zone are
set forth in the Land Use Table in Section ___ of this Chapter. Industrial uses
of all types shall conform to the following performance standards:
      1.   Smoke: All of Idaho is subject to IDAPA 16.01.1000 et seq. (rules
and regulations for the control of air pollution in Idaho), the Idaho
environmental protection and health act, Idaho Code section 39-101 et seq., and
the applicable permits, orders and decrees to determine compliance with Idaho
air quality regulations.
      2.   Fly Ash: No particles from any flue or smokestack shall exceed two-
tenths (0.2) grain per cubic foot of the blue gas at a stack temperature of
five hundred degrees (500°).
      3.   Dust: No dust of any kind produced by the industrial operation shall
be permitted to escape beyond the confines of the building in which it is
produced.
      4.   Odor: No noxious odor of any kind shall be permitted to extend
beyond the lot lines.
      5.   Gases And Fumes: No gases or fumes toxic to persons or injurious to
property shall be permitted to escape beyond the building in which they occur.
      6.   Vibration: No intense earthshaking vibrations shall be created or
maintained by any industry beyond the property lines of the tract on which it
is located.
      7.   Noise And Sound: A maximum of seventy (70) decibels at the property
line is permitted. Noise is required to be muffled so as not to become
objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness. Sound may
equal but not exceed street traffic noise in the vicinity during a normal shift
work period.
      8.   Lot, Yard and Landscaping Requirements:
         a.   Lot Area: No minimum.
         b.   Minimum Lot Width: None.
         c.   Yards:
            (1)   Front yard: Same as the commercial districts.
            (2)   Side yards: None required except adjacent to a residential
district, in which case, it shall not be less than twenty five feet (25').
            (3)   Rear yard: None required except adjacent to a residential
district, in which case, it shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
         d.   Open Spaces: All parkway areas are to be landscaped and
maintained as open space except where access driveways and walks preclude such
landscaping. In no event should parkway areas be used to provide required
parking or loading space.
      9.   Building Height: None.
      10.   Off Street Parking And Loading: As required in section
10-4-6  of this Code. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-2: ZONING MAP ADOPTED:
This title shall consist of the text hereof as well as that certain map
identified by the approving signatures of the Governing Body, marked and
designated as “zoning map”, which said map, together with three (3) copies
thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Said map has been
heretofore examined in detail by the Governing Body, has been made available to
the public at public hearings and is hereby adopted as a part of this title,
but this title and said map shall be subject to change from time to time as may
be determined by the Governing Body. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-3: BOUNDARIES ESTABLISHED ON ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the zones as designated by this title shall be established
and clearly marked upon the zoning map as adopted in section
10-4-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-4: UNCERTAINTY OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists about the location of any district boundary shown on
the official zoning map, the following rules shall be used to resolve the
uncertainty:
   A.   Where a district boundary approximately follows a property line, such
property line shall be construed as the district boundary.
   B.   Where a district boundary approximately follows a street, alley or
railroad line, such street, alley or railroad centerline, or the extension of
such line, shall be construed as the district boundary.
   C.   Where a district boundary approximately follows a watercourse, the
centerline of the watercourse shall be construed to be such boundary. In the
event of a change in the watercourse shoreline, the boundary shall be construed
as moving with the actual shoreline. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-5: LAND USE TABLE:
The table below lists land uses and the columns to the right of the listed uses
represent the three zoning districts. If a listed use is permitted in the zone,
a “P” will appear in the box. If a use is conditional in a zone, a “C” will
appear in the box. If a use is prohibited in the zone, the box will be empty.
If a use is permitted as an accessory use to a principal use in the zone, “PA”
will appear in the box. If a contemplated use is not listed in this table, see
section
10-5-1 -A-1 for either interpretation of the use or procedures to seek
amendment to the table. For convenience only, uses are grouped under broader
heading category types, but those category type groupings are not controlling
for purposes of interpreting land use definitions in applying the provisions of
this Title.
LAND USE TABLE:
District abbreviations: R-Residential, C- Commercial, I- Industrial
Use abbreviations: P-Permitted, C- Conditional Use, PA- Permitted Accessory
Use
LAND USES R C I
District abbreviations: R-Residential, C- Commercial, I- Industrial
Use abbreviations: P-Permitted, C- Conditional Use, PA- Permitted Accessory Use
LAND USES                                                              R  C  I
Agricultural uses (as regulated by this title)                               C
Auction/livestock                                                            C
Dairy (not permitted)
Farm products and warehousing                                             C  P
Farm products/seasonal sales                                              C  P
Slaughter/meat packing (not permitted)
Stables/riding                                                               C
Stockyard/feedlot                                                            C
Abstract and title company                                                P
Accountants                                                            C  P  C
Adjusters                                                              C  P  C
Administrative offices                                                    P  C
Advertising agency                                                        P
Air cleaning equipment                                                    P  P
Air condition/refrigeration/heating sales and repairs                     P  P
Alarm systems                                                             P  C
Aligning service                                                          P  P
Siding and roofing contractor and sales                                   P  P
Amusement center/indoors (see Recreation facilities)                      P  C
Animal grooming                                                        C  P
Animal hospital and kennel, large animal                                  C  C
Animal hospital and kennel, small animal                                  P  C
Animals/small or domestic                                              PA PA PA
Answering service                                                      C  P  C
Antiques (with miscellaneous retail)                                      P
Appliance stores/repair                                                   P  P
Appraiser                                                              C  P
Architects                                                             C  P
Art galleries and supplies                                                P
Attorneys                                                              C  P
Auction houses                                                            P  C
Auctions/miscellaneous                                                    P  C
Audio visual sales and repair                                             P
Audiologist                                                            C  P
Auto body shop                                                            P  P
Automobile and light truck dealer with repair (new or used)               P  P
Automobile and light truck repair                                         P  P
Automobile storage, used or salvage, exceeding two vehicles               C  C
Automobile parts, retail new                                              P  P
Automobile parts retail or storage; used or salvage                       C  C
Bakeries (retail/product sold on site)                                    P
Bakeries (wholesale)                                                      P  C
Banks and savings and loans                                               P  C
Barber and beauty shop/1 chair                                            P
Barber and beauty shops                                                C  P
Bars, taverns, clubs                                                      P
Bed and breakfast/boarding rooms                                       C  P
Bicycle dealers and repair                                                P
Billiard and pool rooms                                                   P
Blacksmith shops                                                          C  P
Boat dealer sales and service                                             P  P
Book store with miscellaneous retail                                      P
Bowling alley                                                             P
Bridal shop                                                               P
Broadcasting tower for radio/TV                                           C  P
Building supply                                                           P  P
Bus company (charter or rental)                                           P  P
Bus terminal                                                              P
Business office equipment/sales and repair                                P  C
Call Center                                                               P  C
Car washes                                                                P  C
Caretakers/watchman sleeping quarters                                     PA PA
Carpet sales                                                              P
Casino / Gaming Facility                                                     C
Catalog stores                                                            P
Catering service                                                       C  P
Children’s shops, clothing, furniture, toys                             P
Chiropractors                                                          C  P
Church supplies/retail sales                                              P
Classes/piano, dance, ceramics, craft (more than 5 students)           C  P
Clinic/medical (human)                                                 C  P
Clothing stores/new and used                                              P
Communication tower/radio/TV (see Broadcasting tower)
Convenience stores                                                        P  C
Copying and duplicating service (no retail sales)                         P  C
Dance supplies/retail                                                     P
Delicatessen                                                              P
Dental lab                                                                P
Dentists and orthodontists                                             C  P
Department store                                                          P  C
Drive-up windows                                                          C  C
Drugstores/retail and prescriptions                                       P
Dry cleaners                                                              P  C
Electrical supply and repair                                              P  P
Employment agencies office                                                P
Engineers (office)                                                     C  P  P
Engravers                                                                 P
Entertainment facilities (see Recreation facilities)
Equipment dealer/sales or rental, truck, farm                             P  P
Equipment rental (small/miscellaneous)                                    P  P
Equipment storage/contractor, public agencies                             P  P
Equipment storage outdoor nonenclosed                                     C  C
Exercise facility/gym                                                     P
Fabric shop                                                               P
Flea market (indoor)                                                      P
Flea market (open air)                                                    P  C
Florist greenhouses                                                       P  P
Florist shop                                                              P
Food/grocery stores and supermarkets                                      P  C
Food processing                                                              P
Frame shop (art or photography)                                           P
Fuel station                                                              P  P
Fuel station with convenience store                                       P  P
Fuel station with repair garage                                           P  P
Funeral Home, including crematorium                                       C  C
Furniture and appliance (new or used)                                     P
Furniture refinishing/upholstering                                        P  P
Garage (parking)                                                          P  P
Garage, detached, accessory to principal use                           P  P  P
Garage or shop, detached, standalone                                   C  C  P
Garden shop/supplies                                                      P  P
Gift shop                                                                 P
Glass company (auto, plate, window)                                       P  C
Hardware store                                                            P  P
Health food store                                                         P
Heating and air conditioning                                              P  P
Helicopter/air ambulance landing pad                                   C  P  P
Helicopter service (permitted at city airport)                               C
Hobby shops/crafts                                                        P
Hospital                                                               C  P
Hotel/motel                                                               P
Ice cream shop                                                            P
Insurance agency                                                          P
Interior decorators with retail                                           P
Irrigation equipment and sprinklers                                       P  P
Janitorial services (office)                                              P
Janitorial supply and equipment                                           P  P
Jewelry store                                                             P
Kennels / Animal Boarding                                                 C  P
Laboratory                                                                P  P
Laundry and cleaners (commercial)                                         P  P
Laundry and cleaners (self-service)                                       P  C
Liquor store                                                              P
Lockers/food                                                              P  P
Lumberyards (see Building supply)
Machine shop                                                              C  P
Machine shop-light incidental to automotive repair                        P  P
Mixed use (commercial and residential)                                 C  C
Manufactured home/trailer/RV sales                                        P  P
Meat market (no processing)                                               P
Mortuary                                                               C  P  C
Motorcycle sales and repairs                                              P  P
Muffler and exhaust systems                                               P  P
Music stores (instrument and record)                                      P
Newspaper office                                                          P  C
Office, miscellaneous                                                     P  C
Ophthalmologist                                                        C  P
Optician/retail sales                                                     P
Optometrist                                                            C  P
Outdoor display/sales                                                     C  C
PUD/planned unit development                                           C  C  C
Paint store/miscellaneous retail                                          P  P
Park/commercial                                                           P  C
Park/playground private                                                P  C
Park/public                                                            P  C
Parking lot (public or commercial)                                     C  P  P
Parking area, accessory use, vehicle capacity not exceeding two        P  P  P
Parking lot, accessory to primary use, vehicle capacity in excess of   C  P  P
two
Pawnshop/secondhand                                                       P
Pet store and supplies/grooming small animals                             P
Pharmacy (prescriptions only)                                          C  P
Photographer’s studio                                                   P
Physical therapist                                                     C  P
Physicians                                                             C  P
Plumbing supplies and sales (enclosed)                                    P  P
Plumbing supplies/open storage                                            P  P
Podiatrist                                                             C  P
Pond(s), settling, etc., as connected to a specific business                 C
Pond(s), storm drainage                                                C  C  C
Power tools, machinery/sales and repairs                                  P  P
Print shop (small)                                                        P
RV park, overnighters                                                     C  P
Radio, television sales and repairs                                       P
Radio, television station (see Broadcasting tower)
Real estate sales office/on site                                       PA PA PA
Realtors                                                                  P  P
Recycling centers (indoors)                                               P  P
Recycling centers (outside)                                               C  C
Rental service/large equipment (outside)                                  P  P
Rental service/miscellaneous                                              P  P
Restaurant- drive-in                                                      C  C
Restaurant with dining room                                               P  C
Retail store (miscellaneous)                                              P
Rifle/pistol range                                                        C  C
Rock shop (enclosed) no rock crushing                                     P  P
Roofing sales or contractor shop                                          P  P
School/art, dance (see Classes)
School/trade or industrial                                                P  C
Secondhand or salvage goods sales (may require license)                   P
Sexually Oriented Businesses                                              P
Shoe repair and sales                                                     P
Shopping centers                                                          P  C
Sign shop                                                                 P  P
Snowmobile dealer and repair                                              P  P
Spa/health & wellness center                                              P
Sporting goods store                                                      P  C
Stone, marble, granite, rock grinding/cutting                             C  P
Storage: auto, boat, RV, bus/truck, farm equipment, etc.                  C  P
Storage: outdoor, not in enclosed building                             C  C  C
Storage: auto, boat, RV, not exceeding two total, accessory to         P  P  P
residential use
Storage buildings/large (see Warehouse)                                   C  C
Storage units/mini                                                        P  P
Tannery                                                                      C
Taxi service                                                              P  P
Taxidermy                                                                 P  P
Temporary outdoor sales                                                P  P  P
Tire shop/sales                                                           P  P
Tool and die shops                                                        P  P
Trucking/transit terminal with repair                                     C  P
Upholstering shops                                                        P  P
Vegetable/produce stands (seasonal/outside)                               P  P
Vending cart
Veterinary service/hospital, large animal                                 P  P
Veterinary service/hospital, small animal                                 P  P
Warehouse/storage                                                         P  P
Wholesale establishment/distribution                                      P  P
Wind Energy System (small)                                             C  C  C
Yard sales/garage                                                      PA PA PA
Zoo/petting zoo (permanent)                                               C  P
INDUSTRIAL
Acoustical contractors and materials                                      P  P
Aircraft charter, rental and lease office only                            P  P
Aircraft landing field                                                       C
Aircraft/parts and sales                                                  P  P
Asphalt mix and equipment                                                    C
Automobile wrecking and salvage                                              C
Batching equipment                                                           C
Bulk storage/acid or alkali, chemical, creosote, fertilizer,                 C
fireworks, gas, flammable or combustible petroleum products
Cabinet shop/manufacturing                                                C  P
Cement plants and gravel (no pit)                                            C
Chemical storage and manufacture                                             C
Composting                                                                   C
Concrete block and shapes/manufacturing or sales                          C  P
Contractor’s shop and yard                                              C  P
Energy production facility                                                   P
Fuel/bulk storage/distribution (flammable)                                P  P
Gravel, cement, sand                                                         P
Hazardous/toxic materials facility                                           C
Incinerators                                                              C  C
Junkyard                                                                     P
Manufacturing/light/not offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust,    C  P
smoke, gas, light, noise, electrical. Compatible with adjoining uses.
Manufacturing/outside storage                                                P
Mining/dredging, loading, processing                                         C
Planing mill/sawmill                                                         C
Power plant (see Energy production facility)
Public utility transmission facility, i.e., power/water lines          P  P  P
Public utility yard/structures/service facility                           P  P
Salvage yard; wrecking yard                                                  C
Sanitary landfill (not permitted)
Sheet metal fabrication shop                                              C  P
Smokestack                                                                   C
Well drilling company and equipment storage                                  P
Waste Transfer station                                                       C
PUBLIC / SEMI PUBLIC / ASSEMBLY / RELIGIOUS
Amphitheater (Outdoor)                                                    C
Auditoriums (public/private)                                           C  P
Cemetery                                                                  C  C
Churches/religious facilities                                          P  P  C
Clubs and lodges/no liquor/nonprofit                                   P  P
Clubs and lodges with liquor (see Bars, taverns, clubs)                   P
Daycare/child or adult                                                 C  P
Golf course                                                            C  C  C
Government building/industrial character                                  C  P
Government office/nonindustrial character                                 P
House church, congregation not exceeding ten persons                   P  P
Jail / Detention Facility                                                 C  P
Outdoor assembly                                                       C  P  C
Public buildings/uses                                                     P  C
Recreation facilities/enclosed                                            P  C
Recreation facilities/outside                                             P  C
Recreation facilities/public                                           C  C  C
Schools and accessory/public, private, parochial                       C  P  C
Senior citizen center                                                  C  P
Theaters (inside)                                                         P
Theaters (outside)                                                        P
Welfare/charitable institutions (nongovernment)                           P
Youth center                                                              P
RESIDENTIAL
Apartments (see Dwellings)
Dwelling/conversions                                                   C
Dwellings/commercial (mixed use/single unit)                           C
Dwellings, duplex and attached single-family                           P
Dwellings, multiple with more than 4 units                             C
Dwellings, multiple with 3-4 units and townhouses                      C
Dwelling, single-family                                                P
Garage/carport (residential)                                           PA
Group care facility                                                    C  P
Group home/no more than 8                                              C  P
Handicapped residence                                                  P  C
Halfway house                                                          P  P
Manufactured comm. units (individual lots/temporary)                      C  C
Manufactured home park                                                 C
Manufactured home subdivision                                          C
Manufactured homes (class A/individual lots)                           P
Nursing home/retirement home                                           P  P
Short-term or vacation rental                                          P  C
OTHER
Accessory buildings to principal use                                   PA PA PA
(Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Parking Requirements:
      1.   All home occupations and retail shops, conditionally approved in
their respective zones, shall provide off street parking areas.
      2.   Use Restrictions: Parking facilities shall be used for operational
vehicle parking only. No sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or
servicing of any kind shall be permitted;
      3.   Design:
         a.   Ingress and egress of parking structures shall be designed with
due regard for visibility and safety;
         b.   Parking structures shall be served by a service drive so that no
backward movement or maneuvering of a vehicle within a street/alley shall be
required. In no case shall one-way and two-way driveways be less than twelve
feet (12') and twenty feet (20') wide, respectively;
         c.   Each off street parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet
(9') wide and twenty feet (20') in length; and
      4.   Number Of Parking Spaces: The following requirements are hereby
established for determining the number of parking spaces required:
Type Of Use Number Of Parking Spaces
Type Of Use                            Number Of Parking Spaces
Churches                               1 for each 5 seats or each 90 inches of
                                       pew length
Hospitals, nursing homes and clinics   1 for each patient bed
Manufacturing                          1 for each 800 square feet of gross
                                       floor area
Motels/hotels                          1 per unit and 2 for manager and
                                       registering guests
Multiuse structures                    1 for each 100 square feet of gross
                                       floor space
Restaurants/bars                       1 for each 3 seats or each 72 linear
                                       inches of booth space
Retail stores (with bulky merchandise) 1 for each 600 square feet of gross
                                       floor space
                                       11/2 for each teaching station, plus 1
Schools                                for each 10 seats in the auditorium and/
                                       or gymnasium
Other businesses                       1 for each 300 square feet of gross
                                       floor area on the first floor
 
The term “gross floor area” shall mean that area to which the general public is
admitted for transaction of retail trade.
   B.   Parking Area Improvements:
      1.   All parking lots and areas shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete
or crushed rock and compacted. All parking areas shall be graded so as not to
drain stormwater over public sidewalks onto any adjoining private property or
public thoroughfare;
      2.   Provisions must be made by the owner of the parking lot for snow
removal. Snow shall not be plowed into a windrow that interferes with clear
vision triangles regarding ingress and egress from said lot; and
      3.   Any lights provided to illuminate any public or private area or
vehicle sales area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from any
abutting or adjacent residential land use zone.
   C.   Loading Facilities: All businesses requiring complete new construction
shall provide for loading space off street. This space shall be logically and
conveniently located for bulk pick ups and deliveries and scaled to the
delivery vehicles expected to be used, and all off street loading spaces shall
be located totally outside any street/alley right of way. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-7: FENCES:
The following regulations shall apply to all zones unless specifically
designated otherwise:
   A.   Front Yard: No sight obscuring fence, hedge, wall, latticework or
screen shall be erected over thirty six inches (36") in height in the front
yard.
   B.   Maximum Height: No sight obscuring fence, hedge, wall, latticework or
screen shall be erected which exceeds a height of seven feet (7') on any lot,
unless authorized by a conditional use permit.
   C.   Conditional Uses Abutting Residential: A sight obscuring fence may be
required by the planning and zoning commission for any conditional use which
abuts any lot zoned for residential purposes.
   D.   Condition And Maintenance: Where any sight obscuring fences are
required by this title to protect adjacent properties, said fence shall be
painted or stained a single solid color, and shall be kept free from
advertising and shall be maintained in good repair.
   E.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
   F.   Barbed Wire Fences:
      1.   Barbed wire fences will not be allowed in any residential
subdivision, except by conditional use.
      2.   Barbed wire may be permitted in commercial or industrial zones only
when used as the top section for security fences and shall be a minimum of six
feet (6') above grade. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-8: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures, except as otherwise permitted in this title, shall be
subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Where an accessory structure is attached to a main building, it shall
be subject to and conform with regulations of this title which are applicable
to the main building.
   B.   Accessory structures shall not be located nearer than five feet (5')
from an interior lot line and not nearer than five feet (5') to the rear lot
line, unless otherwise provided herein.
   C.   No detached accessory building shall be located closer than five feet
(5') to any main building or other structures.
   D.   An accessory building may be erected prior to the establishment or
construction of the principal use or building if a conditional use permit is
obtained.
   E.   Unless a conditional use permit is obtained, no accessory structure
shall exceed the principal structure in height and square footage.
   F.   Swimming pools shall be considered as accessory structures when
constructed on private lots where a main building exists. No swimming pool
shall be placed in use until a proper fence with locked gate is erected, a
proper fence being one which will exclude young children from the area of said
pool unless accompanied by a responsible older person. Owners of swimming pools
must accept responsibility for any liability incurred due to the presence of
such pools.
   G.   A portable canopy is considered an accessory structure and requires a
siting permit, pursuant to this section. Portable canopies are only allowed in
the rear yard of residential properties. They are not allowed in the front or
side yard.
   Portable canopies may encroach into the rear setback areas of the property
provided a site-obscuring fence of six feet (6') in height from established
grade is constructed to shield the canopy from neighboring properties and
public streets.
   Portable canopies must be anchored to withstand normal weather patterns. The
owner of a portable canopy or the owner of real property on which any portable
canopy is located shall maintain such portable canopy in a state of good
appearance, safety, and repair, including, but not limited to, supporting
framework, and covering materials. Any portable canopy that has been damaged
shall be repaired or removed immediately.
   The temporary use of a portable canopy, not to exceed forty eight (48)
hours, is exempted from this section.
   H.   A portable automobile canopy is considered an accessory structure and
requires a siting permit, pursuant to this section.
   Portable automobile canopies may encroach into the rear setback areas of the
property provided a site-obscuring fence of six feet (6') in height from
established grade is constructed to shield the canopy from neighboring
properties and public streets. Portable automobile canopies may encroach into
the front setback area of the property provided they do not obstruct traffic
line of sight or encroach into the sidewalk.
   Portable automobile canopies must be anchored for normal weather patterns.
The owner of a portable automobile canopy or the owner of real property on
which any portable automobile canopy is located shall maintain such portable
automobile canopy in a state of good appearance, safety, and repair, including,
but not limited to, supporting framework, and covering materials. Any portable
automobile canopy that has been damaged shall be repaired or removed
immediately.
   I.   A siting permit for any accessory structure which structure shall have
less than two hundred (200) square feet of roof area shall first be obtained
and the fee, set by resolution of the Council, be paid. Any person who
constructs an accessory building without first obtaining a siting permit as
required by this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this Code. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-4-9: TREATMENT OF LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Definition: A “lot line adjustment” is a readjustment of lot lines as
shown on a recorded plat which does not reduce the area, frontage, width or
depth of each building site below the minimum prescribed by any City ordinance
or any covenant pertaining to said plat.
   B.   Applicability: The lot line adjustment procedure may be used:
      1.   Where parcels or lots are being combined, or
      2.   Where the adjustment of lot lines is requested and no new buildable
lot will be created, or
      3.   Where the reorientation of existing lots does not increase the
number of buildable lots.
      4.   The procedure may not be used where it creates or expands
nonconformity with land use ordinances.
   C.   Application: The application for a lot line adjustment shall consist of
the following:
      1.   Applicant Name, Owner Name, Purchaser Name, Representative Name,
Applicant Name and Phone Numbers, Email Addresses, Mailing Addresses for all
names. If the signature on the application is not the owner of the property, a
notarized statement (Affidavit of Legal Interest) from the owner stating the
applicant is authorized to submit the application.
      2.   Proof of Ownership.
      3.   Record of Survey including the following:
         a.   A heading and narrative stating the purpose of the survey.
         b.   Subdivision, Lots, and Blocks affected.
         c.   Existing Lot and Block numbers and new parcel numbers shown.
         d.   Existing and new property lines shown and labeled.
         e.   Square footage and acreage of the new parcels.
         f.   Existing easements and any proposed easements.
         g.   Abutting road names and rights-of-way, including alleys.
         h.   Existing buildings and new setbacks.
         i.   A signature line for City Engineer Certification.
         j.   Signatures of all owners of record.
      4.   Legal descriptions for the new parcels.
      5.   Three (3) copies of the lot line adjustment plat on 11" x 17" sheets
drafted with black ink at a legible scale and stamped by a Licensed Land
Surveyor.
      6.   Surveyor verification of closures on all new parcels prior to
application submission.
   D.   Installation Of Utilities: In the event utilities have been installed,
lot line adjustments shall not be allowed unless written approval is obtained
from all affected utilities.
   E.   Utility Easements: If utilities are not in place, the property owner
shall provide adequate utility easements before a lot line adjustment will be
granted. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 5
CONDITIONAL USES, VARIANCES, REZONING, AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Conditional Uses
10-5-2:    Variances
10-5-3:    Rezoning; Zoning Map Amendments
10-5-4:    Development Agreements And Conditional Rezoning
10-5-1: CONDITIONAL USES:
The term “conditional use”, as used in this chapter, means a use within a
district, identified by the letter “C” in the Land Use Table in Section
10-4-5  of this Code, and allowed only after public hearing and after issuance
of a permit approved by the city council after following the procedures set
forth in this Section.
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of uses
frequently appear, and that many of these and some other more conventional uses
possess characteristics of such unique and special nature relative to location,
design, size, method of operation, circulation and public facilities that each
specific use must be considered individually. The zoning administrator will
consult with the City Attorney and the City Engineer to interpret existing
definitions regarding proposals to determine whether an amendment to the Land
Use table or definition section would be required to consider the proposed use,
or if the proposed use is sufficiently similar to listed uses or definitions to
proceed without amendment.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for a conditional use permit
shall be filed with the zoning administrator. At a minimum, the application
shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
      2.   Legal description of the property;
      3.   Description of the existing use;
      4.   Zone classification;
      5.   Description of the proposed conditional use;
      6.   Names and addresses of adjoining property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the land being considered;
      7.   A plan of the proposed site for the conditional use showing the
location of all the building, parking and loading areas, traffic access,
traffic circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas,
utilities, signs, yards and other such information as the commission may
require to determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and
requirements of this chapter;
      8.   A description of surrounding uses and a narrative statement
evaluating the effects on adjoining property of such elements as noise, glare,
odor, fumes and vibration; a discussion of the general compatibility with
adjacent and other properties in the zone; and the relationship of the proposed
use to the comprehensive plan; and
      9.   A filing fee shall accompany the application. (See section
10-5-1 -C of this chapter.)
   C.   Permit Fees: A fee as established by resolution of the city council and
as provided by Section
2-2-1  of the Council City Code shall accompany an application for a permit,
which fee will not be refunded if the application is denied.
   D.   General Standards Applicable To All Conditional Uses: The city council
shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed
conditional use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate
evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
      1.   Will not be in conflict with the general objectives or with any
specific objectives of the comprehensive plan or this title;
      2.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same areas;
      3.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or neighboring uses;
      4.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools;
      5.   That persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the
proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services;
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odor;
      8.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create any interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
      9.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural,
scenic or historic feature of major importance.
   E.   Public Sites And Open Spaces: Public sites and open spaces shall
conform to the following:
      1.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park,
playground, school or other public use is located in whole or in part within a
proposed development, the city council shall notify the appropriate public
agency concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of
the date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to suspend
consideration on the permit for sixty (60) days from the date of the request;
however, if an agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days, the city
council shall resume consideration of the conditional use application.
      2.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community such as
trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets shall be
preserved in the design of the development.
   F.   Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any conditional
use, the city council may prescribe appropriate conditions, bonds and
safeguards which are in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such
conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   G.   Hearing And Notice Requirements: Prior to granting a special use
permit, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place, and a summary of the
proposal shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. Notice shall
be posted on the premises not less than one week prior to the hearing.
Notwithstanding jurisdictional boundaries, notice shall also be provided to
property owners or purchasers of record within the land being considered, three
hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered,
and any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed
special use as determined by the commission; provided, that in all cases,
notice shall be provided individually by mail to property owners or purchasers
of record within the land being considered and within three hundred feet (300')
of the external boundaries of the land being considered; and provided further,
that where a special use permit is requested by reason of height allowance,
that notice shall be provided individually by mail to property owners or
purchasers of record within no less than three (3) times the distance of the
height of the allowed height of a structure when more than one hundred feet
(100') and within no less than one mile when the peak height of a structure in
an unincorporated area is four hundred feet (400') or more, and when four
hundred feet (400') or more, the structure’s proposed location and height shall
be stated in the notice. Any property owner entitled to specific notice
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall have a right to participate in
public hearings before the planning and zoning commission. Denial of a special
use permit or approval of a special use permit with conditions unacceptable to
the landowner may be subject to the regulatory taking analysis provided for by
Idaho Code section 67-8003, consistent with requirements established thereby.
   H.   Procedure For Approval Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   After holding its public hearing, the city council may approve,
conditionally approve or deny a conditional use permit under the conditions as
herein specified and considering such additional safeguards as will make the
use consistent with the objectives of this title and not in conflict with the
comprehensive plan. If the application is approved or approved subject to
conditions, the council shall direct the city clerk-treasurer to issue a
conditional use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the council
as prerequisites for approval.
      2.   Conditions Of Permit: Upon the granting of a conditional use permit,
conditions may be attached to the permit including, but not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Minimizing adverse impact on other developments;
         b.   Controlling the sequence and timing of the development;
         c.   Controlling the duration of the development;
         d.   Assuring that the development is maintained properly;
         e.   Designating the exact location and nature of the development;
         f.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities
or services;
         g.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally
required in this chapter; and
         h.   Minimizing the impact on schools, irrigation districts or water
delivery systems.
      3.   Additional Information: Prior to making a recommendation or granting
a conditional use permit, the city council may require additional information
concerning social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed
conditional use.
      4.   Statement Of Standards: Upon granting or denying an application, the
council shall specify:
         a.   The provisions and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
      4.   Takings: Denial of a special use permit or approval of a special use
permit with conditions unacceptable to the landowner may be subject to the
regulatory taking analysis provided for by Idaho Code section 67-8003
consistent with requirements established thereby.
   I.   Notice To Applicant; Right to Appeal: Within thirty (30) days after a
decision by the city council has been rendered, the zoning administrator shall
provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request. The
applicant or any adversely affected person who appears in person or in writing
before the city council may appeal the decision of the city council.
   J.   Automatic Termination For Nonuse: In the event the use which is
permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit as granted by the city council
is not commenced within one year from the date of issuance, the conditional use
permit shall terminate automatically, as a stated condition of approval on the
face of the permit, and shall become null and void and without any force or
effect one year from the date of issuance. In addition, in the event that the
use which is permitted pursuant to the conditional use permit is abandoned for
a period of one year, the provisions of Idaho Code 67-6538(2) shall apply.
   K.   Violation; Penalties: Any person who violates any term of a conditional
use permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punishable in accordance
with the general misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. In addition, any
work done in violation of a conditional use permit shall be subject to
abatement. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-5-2: VARIANCES:
The City Council may authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms
of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures or buildings in the same zone and not permitted or nonconforming use
of lands, structures or buildings in other zones shall be considered grounds
for issuance of a variance. A variance shall not be considered a right or
special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon showing of
undue hardship.
   A.   Application And Standards For Variances:
      1.   Information Required: A variance from the terms of this title shall
not be granted by the City Council unless and until a written application for a
variance is submitted to the Zoning Administrator, which application contains
the following information:
         a.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
         b.   Legal description of property.
         c.   A filing fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council.
         d.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
            (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the zone;
            (2)   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same zone under the terms of this title;
            (3)   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant; and
            (4)   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same zone. A variance attaches to the realty and
is transferable with the title to the property.
      2.   Findings Required: A variance shall not be granted unless the City
Council makes specific findings of fact based directly on the particular
evidence presented to it which support conclusions that the above mentioned
standards and conditions have been met by the applicant.
   B.   Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: Under no circumstances shall
the City Council grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the
terms of this title in the zone involved, or any use expressly or by
implication prohibited by the terms of this title in said zone. In granting any
variance, the City Council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards
and, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, any
deviation shall be deemed a violation of this title.
   C.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the application for a variance, the
City Council shall publish notice in the official newspaper of the City, and
give written notice to all parties as required by this title, and hold a public
hearing.
   D.   Decision; Appeal:
      1.   After the public hearing, the City Council shall either approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the request for a variance.
      2.   Upon granting or denying an application, the City Council shall
specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit
      3.   Within thirty (30) days after a decision has been rendered, the
Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the
action on the request. The applicant or any affected person may appeal the
decision of the City Council, in accordance with section
10-2-8  of this title. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-5-3: REZONING; ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the procedure for securing a zone
change.
   A.    Zone Changes: Any change, modification or reclassification of zones
may be initiated by the city council or by application of one or more property
owners, purchasers, or holders of valid options to purchase property. When the
application for change, modification, or reclassification is initiated by a
property owner, purchaser, or holders of valid options to purchase property,
the procedure set forth herein shall be followed, except that the City Council
may, subject to the provisions for notice and publication of hearing, enlarge,
expand and amplify a petition for change in reclassification of a zone or
planned use classification.
   B.   Application Required: Every person seeking a reclassification of any
land regulated by this title shall file with the zoning administrator an
application therefor, upon a form prescribed by the planning and zoning
commission, accompanied by a filing fee as specified by the schedule of fees.
All applications for rezone shall conform to the requirements of Idaho Code
section 67-6511, as it may be amended, modified, altered or changed.
   C.   Content: Every application shall contain or be accompanied by all
information, plans and maps to scale and other data necessary to assure full
presentation of pertinent facts for the records and to assist in making a
determination in harmony with the objectives of this title. No application
shall be accepted by the zoning administrator unless it is complete and in
compliance with all such requirements and contains a designation of the
proposed zone classification.
   D.   Notice And Publication of Hearing: Notice of time, place and purpose of
each public hearing held by the City Council shall be given by publication in
the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to such
hearing. When the public hearing is before the planning and zoning commission
on a proposed change, modification or reclassification, notice shall be given
by the zoning administrator to the last known owners of each parcel of land
within three hundred feet (300') to the exterior boundary, by regular U.S.
mail. In any hearing before the planning and zoning commission or the city
council, where notice must be given to more than two hundred (200) persons,
notice by publication, published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing, setting out the time and place and a summary of the action requested
to be taken, shall be published in the official newspaper or a paper of general
circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice shall also be posted on the
premises not less than one week prior to the hearing. In the event the planning
and zoning commission originates, enlarges, extends and amplifies the
application for the change, modification or reclassification of property, zone
or land use classification, the zoning administrator shall be required to
ascertain the names and addresses of the last known owners as the same appear
on the records of the county assessor’s office of each parcel of land within
three hundred feet (300') to the exterior boundaries of the land area sought to
be enlarged, extended or amplified. The notice shall give the date, time and
place of hearing, the name of the applicant and relief sought, and
identification of the property, and such other facts as may be prescribed by
the planning and zoning commission. In any public hearing, the presiding
officer may order the hearing to be continued by publicly announcing the time
and place of continuance, and no further notice thereof shall be required.
   E.   Standards Applicable To Zone Changes: The city council shall review the
particular facts and circumstances of each proposed zone change and take the
following factors into consideration:
      1.   The compatibility of the proposed zone with surrounding uses and
zones.
      2.   Availability of power, water, sewer, fire protection, police
protection and school facilities.
      3.   Access to highways.
      4.   Burdens imposed upon taxing entities for services which will have to
be provided.
      5.   Location in relation to floodplain and airport approaches.
      6.   Easements, encumbrances, adverse interests.
      7.   The opinions of surrounding landowners entitled to notice.
      8.   Availability of drainage structures and refuse disposal.
      9.   Opinions of other local or state agencies required to provide
services or issue permits.
      10.   Zone change will not set a precedence for future uses incompatible
with existing uses.
      11.   Compatibility or conflict with the comprehensive plan.
      12.   Any other factors relevant to the suitability of rezoning the
property.
   F.   Action By City Council: The city council shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with this chapter. At every hearing before the City Council, the
Council shall hear all persons interested in the subject matter. Not later than
sixty (60) working days after the conclusion of the hearing, city council shall
act upon the application by either approving, disapproving, or approving as a
conditional rezone with a development agreement as provided in Section
10-5-4  of this Title.
   G.   Ordinance Required: In the event the city council shall have approved
or modified the application, the city council shall cause to be prepared the
appropriate ordinance of amendment.
   H.   Resubmittal: No application for the change or reclassification of any
property, zone or land use classification, which has been denied by the city
council, shall be resubmitted in either the same or substantially the same
form, with reference to substantially the same premises or the same purpose,
within one year from the date of final action thereon. Any party adversely
affected by any action of the planning and zoning commission or city council
may appeal pursuant to the appellant procedures contained in section
10-2-8  of this title. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
10-5-4: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS AND CONDITIONAL REZONING:
The purpose of a development agreement is to provide a vehicle for development
in areas and for uses where, in the opinion of the city council or the planning
and zoning commission, approval of a requested rezone by itself does not
satisfy the requirements set forth in this title for rezone approval; but, that
use of a development agreement will assure compliance with the required rezone
findings and conclusions. Development agreements can be used after a
determination has been made that the proposed rezone by itself is not
appropriate, unless the use of a development agreement could allow development
to proceed under stricter restrictions than those imposed generally in the
proposed zoning district. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
relieving the property which is subject to development agreement restrictions
from further compliance with all other permit and code requirements applicable
because of the zoning designation of the property. Restrictions imposed upon
property as a result of a development agreement are in addition to all other
requirements of this title.
   A:   Submittal: After an application for rezone has been received by the
zoning administrator, a request to enter into a development agreement for that
parcel may be submitted by the rezone applicant; or a development agreement may
be required by the city council at the city council’s rezone hearing.
      1.   In the event of the City Council determines that a development
agreement should be entered into, the City Council may remand the matter back
to the applicant requiring an application for a development agreement to be
submitted by the applicant, unless the applicant has already done so and a
public hearing was held under this section. If the applicant agrees to submit
an application for a development agreement, then the City Council shall defer
its decision on the rezone application until a public hearing is held on the
development agreement application. After the public hearing on the development
agreement application is held, the City Council shall render its decision on
both the rezone and development agreement requests.
      2.   In the event of a determination by the city council that a
development agreement should be entered into, the city council shall remand the
matter back to the planning and zoning commission, with the city council
requiring an application for a development agreement to be submitted by the
applicant, unless the applicant has already done so and a public hearing was
held under subsection A of this section. The city council shall, upon remand,
direct the planning and zoning commission on the specific issues to be
addressed by the development agreement. The planning and zoning commission
shall then proceed as specified in this section.
      3.   In the event a developer seeks to enter into a development
agreement, the developer’s application for a development agreement shall be
taken up by the City Council at the time of the scheduled rezone hearing. The
City Council shall, following consideration of the rezone and development
agreement applications, render its decision regarding each of the applicant’s
requests.
   B.   Time Limits: Upon request for a development agreement, all time limits
required by this title may be stayed upon affirmative vote of the city council.
   C.   Form Of Development Agreement Application: All applications for
development agreements shall be in a form as required by the city clerk or the
zoning administrator. No application shall be accepted which does not include
the following:
      1.   An affidavit by the owner of the property agreeing to submission of
the use and property for a development agreement.
      2.   The specific use or uses of the property upon which the development
agreement is sought.
      3.   The concept plan, which shall include at a minimum:
         a.   Three (3) site plans and eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x
17") reduction showing:
            (1)   Existing structures which will remain, labeled as to existing
and proposed uses.
            (2)   Building footprint, height, number of stories, proposed uses
(office, retail, restaurant, etc.), and square footage of proposed structures.
If residential, overall density and number of dwelling units per building. (If
single-family residential, information on proposed structures is not
necessary.)
            (3)   North arrow.
            (4)   Scale.
            (5)   Property boundary.
            (6)   Names of applicant, owner (if different than applicant), plan
preparer and project.
            (7)   Size of project.
            (8)   Existing vegetation, labeled as to remain or be removed.
            (9)   Existing and generalized proposed grades for hillside
developments.
            (10)   Parking areas with total number of parking spaces shown.
            (11)   Locations and widths of rights of way, easements, canals,
ditches and property lines.
            (12)   Drainage features.
            (13)   Conceptual landscape plan.
      4.   The time period for which the agreement is requested to be valid,
including the time period with which the development or use must commence and
the time period within which the development and the terms of the agreement are
to be completed.
      5.   A statement that failure to comply with all commitments in the
approved development agreement shall be deemed a consent to rezone the property
to the preexisting zone, or in the case of an initial zone at annexation, a
zone deemed appropriate by the city council.
      6.   If the development agreement is being requested by the rezone
applicant, as opposed to having been required by the city council, a statement
must be included that all time limits required by this title are waived.
      7.   Phasing plan and proposed phasing schedule.
   D.   Process: Upon receipt of an application for development agreement, the
zoning administrator shall work with the applicant to prepare a development
agreement. The development agreement shall include the requirements of section
10-5-4 -C of this chapter and any other matter which, in the discretion of the
zoning administrator, would address the concerns for the development which has
been proposed by the applicant. Such concerns addressed may include, but shall
not be limited to, density, bulk, site design, mitigation of impacts on the
surrounding neighborhood, appearance, provision of utilities or public
facilities, and restrictions on use. The draft of the development agreement
shall be reviewed by the city attorney and design review committee prior to
being sent to the planning and zoning commission.
   E.   Approval: The city council shall hold a public hearing on the draft
agreement and the rezone request, and shall review the recommendation from
staff, and consider any relevant testimony and evidence provided at the public
hearing. The city council may approve, deny, and may add conditions, terms,
duties or obligations to the development agreement. Development agreements may
be approved at the sole discretion of city council.
   F.   Recording: Upon approval of a development agreement or any modification
thereto by the city council and the applicant, it shall be recorded at the
expense of the applicant and prior to the rezone approval. Proof of recording
must be submitted by the applicant prior to the adoption of the rezone
ordinance by the city council. The development agreement, or any modification
thereto, and all conditions, terms, duties or obligations included therein,
shall run with the land and shall be considered continuing obligations of the
owner, co-owners and each other person acquiring an interest in the property.
An owner, co-owner, each subsequent owner or other person acquiring an interest
in the property which is restricted by a development agreement or modification
adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall comply with the terms, conditions,
obligation and duties contained in the development agreement or modification.
   G.   Modification: Development agreements may only be modified after public
hearing by the city council.
   H.   Termination:
      1.   Development agreements may be amended or terminated by the city
council, after public hearing, for failure to comply with the commitments
expressed in the development agreement.
      2.   Upon termination of the development agreement, the city council
shall revert the property to the prior zone, or in the case of an initial zone
at annexation, to a zone deemed appropriate by the city council. All uses of
the property which are not consistent with the subsequently designated zone
following termination of the development agreement shall cease. The owner of
the property shall apply for a conditional use permit for the property if the
use is conditionally allowed within the subsequently designated zone.
      3.   Development agreements may be enforced by the city through any means
deemed to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, specific enforcement,
injunctive relief, damages or criminal penalty for violation of this chapter.
The enforcement options available to the city shall not be considered
exclusive. (Ord. 536, 6-10-2025)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Application Of Provisions; Exemptions
11-1-4: Variances And Modifications
11-1-5: Amendments
11-1-6: Fees And Costs
11-1-7: Penalties
11-1-8: Validity
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
In order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of present
and future residents and to bring about a coordinated and efficient development
of the city, the regulations of this title for the subdividing of land within
the city are hereby adopted. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALLEY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property.
CITY: The city of Council, Idaho.
COMMISSION: City of Council planning and zoning commission.
COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN: The proposed comprehensive plan for the city.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
COUNTY ENGINEER (SURVEYOR): The registered surveyor or engineer appointed by
the Adams County board of county commissioners to check plats and make such
surveys, maps and plats ordered by the board.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder of Adams County, Idaho.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street provided with turnaround space at its terminus.
DEAD END STREET: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not
having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated when accepted by the council as a public
dedication, either by ordinance or entry in the official minutes of the
council.
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: The standard specifications for public works
of the city officially adopted by the council and including all subsequent
amendments thereto.
EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for specific purposes.
ENGINEER: The city engineer.
FLOODPLAIN: As defined by the FFIA.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by the state or federal agency
responsible therefor.
IMPACT AREA: That zone designated by the city and county as an area of joint
jurisdiction of those lands so designated which lie in Adams County, but
outside of the corporate boundaries of the Council city limits.
LOOP STREET: A minor street which forms a loop and returns to the same street
from which it originated. A street forming a connection between two (2) other
streets is not considered a loop.
LOT: A portion of a recorded subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for development.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot, parcel or tract as recorded on any plat of
record on file in the office of the county recorder; each one-sixteenth (1/16)
of a section or any unplatted contiguous parcel or parcels of land held in one
ownership and of record at the effective date hereof.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation
having sufficient proprietary interest in land to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings under this title.
PLAT, FINAL: A plan of a subdivision, dedication or any portion thereof
prepared for filing and recording by the Adams County recorder and containing
those elements and requirements set forth in this title. A final plat, upon its
being filed and recorded by the Adams County recorder, shall thereafter be
known as an authorized plat, subdivision or dedication.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision or dedication
containing the elements and requirements set forth in this title.
PUBLIC STREET: A right of way providing vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted by
the council and does not include roads, lanes and similar ways which have not
been dedicated of record or accepted by the city council.
SHALL: Designates a mandatory requirement.
STREET: A right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted by
the council. The term "street" includes also the terms highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, and other such
terms.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designated as an arterial street by the council. It
is the primary purpose of an arterial street to carry fast or heavy traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated as a collector street by the council. A
collector street has the primary purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets
to other collector streets and arterial streets.
STREET, COMMERCIAL: A street designated as a commercial street by the council.
It is the primary purpose of a commercial street to provide for traffic
movement in a commercial area.
STREET FRONTAGE: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street, which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
STREET, INDUSTRIAL: A street designated as an industrial street by the council.
It is the primary purpose of an industrial street to provide for traffic
movement in an industrial area.
STREET, MINOR: It is the purpose of a minor street to provide access to
abutting properties.
STREET, PARTIAL: A dedicated right of way which provides only a portion of the
required street width.
SUBDIVIDER: An individual, corporation, firm or group which undertakes the
subdividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or development, and including dedicating of streets or changes in
street or lot lines.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into more than two
(2) parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for the construction of
improvements thereon.
UTILITIES: Installation for conducting water, sewage, irrigation water, storm
drains, gas, or electricity and similar facilities providing service to and
used by the public. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. Ord. 242, 8-7-1984; 2015 Code)
11-1-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   This title shall apply to the subdividing of all land within the
corporate limits of the city, including the following:
      1.   The dividing of land into more than two (2) tracts, lots, or parcels
for transfer of ownership for building development, any part of which, when
subdivided, contains less than five (5) net acres.
      2.   The dedicating of any street or alley through or along any tract of
land.
      3.   The subdividing of a lot or parcel into more than two (2) sublots
except as provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   This title shall not apply to any of the following:
      1.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent
or a court decree for the distribution of property thereunder, provided the
parcels thus formed do not violate the minimum lot sizes defined in this title.
      2.   When a piece of land is given to a blood relative with no money
exchanged, said parcel can be deeded once in a lifetime without platting.
      3.   Lot line adjustments that do not change the number of lots in the
plat, provided the new lines do not create lots below the minimum size required
under this Code and that all structures on the adjusted lots comply with
setback requirements for the district in which they lie.
      4.   Lot line adjustments that combine lots into a single parcel,
provided the new parcel meets the minimum size and all existing structures
comply with setbacks for the districts in which they lie, and that all lots to
be combined have the same zoning designation.
      5.   Adjacent parcels with differing zoning designations may not be
combined into a single parcel until the parcels are rezoned into the same
zoning designation, and applications for rezoning must meet the standards set
forth in Title 10 of this Code. (Ord. 242, 8-7-1984; amd. Ord. 537, 6-10-2025)
11-1-4: VARIANCES AND MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever a tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or
shape or is surrounded by such developments or unusual conditions that the
strict application of this title would result in substantial hardship or
inequity, the council may vary or modify such requirements so that the
subdivider may develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so, at the same
time, the public welfare and interests of the city are protected, the general
intent and spirit of this title is preserved, and conformity to achievement of
the comprehensive general plan is assured. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
   B.   Request For Variance: In requesting any such modification or variance,
a subdivider or his engineer shall make written request to the planning and
zoning commission. Such request, together with such related data and maps as
necessary to fully illustrate the relief sought, shall be referred by the city
engineer in writing to the planning and zoning commission.
   C.   Hearing; Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendations: The planning
and zoning commission shall act upon such request by holding public hearings in
compliance with the Idaho Code, and make recommendations to the city council at
its next regular meeting or within thirty (30) days. If no recommendation is
made within such time, the approval of the request shall be considered to have
been recommended.
   D.   Council Action: The council, after receiving the recommendations of the
planning and zoning commission, shall act upon such request at its next regular
meeting. Approval of such modifications shall require a majority vote of the
regular membership of the council. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   E.   Conditions Of Variance: In granting variances from and/or modifications
to this title, the council may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or requirements
so varied or modified.
   F.   Appeals: Any person, firm or corporation may appeal the decision of the
council to the district court in the same manner and within the same time as
other appeals may be taken from orders of the council. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-1-5: AMENDMENTS:
The commission may recommend amendments to this title, and the council, in
acting on such recommendation or on its own motion, may amend this title from
time to time; provided, however, that the procedure followed in such
modifications shall be the same as in the original adoption of this title.
(Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-1-6: FEES AND COSTS:
   A.   The council shall require, at the time of submission of a preliminary
plat, that there shall be paid to the city clerk- treasurer a fee as
established by resolution of the city council.
   B.   The council may require that, upon submission of the final plat of the
area or any part thereof, there shall be paid to the city clerk-treasurer a fee
as established by resolution of the city council.
   C.   The city engineer shall be required to check plats and construction
drawings for conformance with the standards contained herein and/or for
accuracy. The council shall require that the cost of such checking be borne by
the applicant in addition to the fees provided in subsections A and B of this
section.
   D.   Services provided by the city in checking the plat or construction
drawings, for which a charge is made, shall be charged for on a time and
materials basis at rates to be established from time to time by the council.
(Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
11-1-7: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title
shall not be entitled to the issuance of any building permits for construction
of buildings or otherwise on the land being subject to subdivision under the
provisions of this title, and existing building permits shall be subject to
forfeiture thereof in addition to any other penalties imposed. (Ord. 228, 12-
15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
11-1-8: VALIDITY:
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
title, or any particular application thereof, be declared unconstitutional or
invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this title. (Ord.
228, 12-15-1981)
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Procedures
11-2-2: Drafting And Contents Of Plats
11-2-1: PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be followed for all cases of subdividing within
the scope of this title:
   A.   Plat Approval Required: A plat shall be drawn for each subdivision of
land and submitted to the commission and council as provided in this section.
   B.   Official Recording: No plat or description of land subdividing shall be
filed in the office of the county recorder until same shall have been acted
upon by the commission and approved by the council in preliminary and final
plat form as required herein. No lots shall be sold from any plat until same
shall have been recorded in the office of the county recorder.
   C.   Agenda: Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be
placed on the commission's agenda only after fulfilling the appropriate
requirements of this title. However, a plat not meeting all the requirements
may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a letter
requesting any specific exceptions and enumerating in detail the reasons
therefor.
   D.   Application Forms: Any application for preliminary plat or subdivision
approval, or total or partial vacation of an existing subdivision, or
dedication of a street, or grant of right of way or easement for the benefit of
the public shall be made on forms obtainable from the city engineer and the
accuracy of the data provided thereon certified thereto by the subdivider.
   E.   Preapplication Submission Of Plans:
      1.   Filing Procedure: Prior to the filing of an application for approval
of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the
plans and data as required in section
11-2-2 of this chapter; provided, however, that such plans may be general in
nature and that such submission shall not require the official filing of a
subdivision application.
      2.   Review By City Engineer: The city engineer shall review said plans
and data as submitted or modified and, within thirty (30) days, advise the
subdivider in writing as to the general conformance or nonconformance with this
title.
   F.   Preliminary Plat: The following procedures shall apply to the filing
for preliminary approval of any subdivision.
      1.   Application: Any owner desiring to subdivide a piece of land within
the city shall file with the city engineer copies of the preliminary plat as
required, together with a letter requesting that said preliminary plat be
placed on the commissioner's agenda for consideration.
      2.   Proof Of Ownership Required: In making application, the owner shall
submit current title report.
      3.   Consent For Rerouting Water Sources: In the event the plat requires
the rerouting of a drainage course or irrigation facilities, the subdivider
shall furnish documentary evidence of consent to the rerouting of such
facilities by all parties interested in such uses or authorized representatives
thereof. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
      4.   Certification By City Engineer: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat
and all other required data as provided herein, the city engineer shall certify
the application as complete and shall affix the date of application acceptance
thereon. He shall, thereafter, place said preliminary plat on the planning and
zoning commission agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting of the
commission which is held not less than fifteen (15) days after said date of
certification. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
      5.   Review By Agencies: The city engineer shall transmit one copy each
of the preliminary plat to the following agencies for review and
recommendations and may request recommendations from such other agencies as he
may deem necessary. If no written recommendation from any agency listed herein
is received within ten (10) days after such notification, the approval of the
preliminary plat by such agency will be considered to be granted. (Ord. 228,
12-15-1981)
         a.   Council Independent school district.
         b.   Idaho Public Utilities Commission.
         c.   Idaho Power Company.
         d.   Cambridge Telephone Company.
         e.   Irrigation district appropriate to the area being platted.
         f.   Southwest district health department.
         g.   Cable Television Company. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
      6.   Commission Action:
         a.   The commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or
disapprove the plat within thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting
at which said plat is first considered. If the preliminary plat is disapproved
or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in
writing, a copy of which, signed by the chair of the commission, shall be
attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the applicant.
         b.   If no action is taken by the commission at the end of said thirty
(30) days, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved unless stipulation
for additional time is agreed to by the applicant and commission.
         c.   Upon such approval or disapproval by the commission, the plat,
together with a complete copy of commission findings and report of action,
shall be transmitted to the council, and notice of this action shall be sent to
the subdivider.
      7.   Council Action:
         a.   The council shall act upon the report within ten (10) days, or at
its regular meeting next succeeding receipt of the report. The subdivider, at
his request, shall be entitled to at least one continuance of the hearing until
the next regular meeting of the council.
         b.   At the hearing, the council shall hear testimony of the
subdivider and any witnesses in his behalf, and the testimony of
representatives of the commission, and any witnesses in its behalf.
         c.   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the council shall base its
findings upon the testimony produced before it and, within seven (7) days,
declare its findings. It may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any
recommendations or rulings of the commission, and may make such findings as are
not inconsistent with the provisions of Idaho state law and/or of this title.
      8.   Extension Of Time Limits: The time limits for acting on the
preliminary plat as herein specified may be extended by mutual consent of the
subdivider and the council or commission, as the case may be. If no action is
taken within the time limits as so extended, the preliminary plat, as filed,
shall be deemed approved, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk-treasurer
to certify such approval.
   G.   Final Plat: The following procedures shall apply to the filing for
final approval of any subdivision:
      1.   Filing By Subdivider:
         a.   After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be
surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the preliminary plat as
approved.
         b.   The final plat, prepared in accordance with title 50, chapter 13
of the Idaho Code and the provisions set forth herein, shall be filed with the
commission, through the city engineer, together with a letter requesting that
it be placed on the commission agenda for consideration.
         c.   Such final plat, when submitted, shall be accompanied by prints
thereof as required and two (2) sets of prints of the plans and specifications
for all proposed improvements as required by this title.
      2.   Time Limit On Filing:
         a.   Filing of the final plat shall be made within one year after
action by the council on the preliminary plat.
         b.   Failure to file a final plat within one year after the action by
the council approving said preliminary plat shall cause all approvals of said
preliminary plat to have been voided; provided, however, that upon application
of the subdivider, the council may grant an extension of the one year period
for a time not to exceed ninety (90) days. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
      3.   Certification By City Engineer: Upon receipt of the final plat, and
all other required data as provided herein, the city engineer shall certify the
application as complete and shall affix the date of application acceptance
thereon. He shall, thereafter, place the final plat on the planning and zoning
commission agenda for consideration at the regular meeting. (Ord. 228, 12-15-
1981; amd. 2015 Code)
      4.   Review By Agencies: The city engineer may transmit one copy each of
the final plat for review and recommendation to the agencies listed in
subsection F5 of this section and/or to such other agencies as he deems
desirable. If no written recommendation from any agency to which a copy is
transmitted is received within five (5) days, the approval of the final plat by
such agency will be considered to be granted.
      5.   Commission Action: Within thirty (30) days after the date of the
regular meeting at which the final plat is first considered by the commission,
the commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such final
plat and shall recommend its findings to the council; provided, however, that
said time for consideration may be extended with the consent of the subdivider.
      6.   Council Action: The council, at its next meeting following receipt
of the commission report, shall consider the plat and any changes from the
preliminary plat recommended by the commission. If said plat conforms to the
requirements of Idaho state law and of this title applicable at the time of the
preliminary plat and all rulings made by the council on the preliminary plat,
the council may approve said plat or the council may reject changes from the
preliminary plat recommended by the commission and/or require changes in
addition to those recommended by the commission.
      7.   Acceptance Of Dedications: At the time of approval of the final
plat, the council shall accept offers of dedication to the public shown thereon
and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or
easements, require that the subdivider, at its option, either improve, or agree
to improve, the streets and easements in accordance with standards established
under this title, and as more particularly set forth herein. (Ord. 228, 12-15-
1981; amd. Ord. 537, 6-10-2025)
11-2-2: DRAFTING AND CONTENTS OF PLATS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') and shall include the following:
         a.   The scale, north point arrow, and date.
         b.   The name of the proposed subdivision.
         c.   The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider, the
surveyor, or the person preparing the plat.
         d.   The names, with locations of intersecting boundary lines, of
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of the city limits if falling within
or immediately adjoining the tract.
         e.   The land contours with appropriate vertical intervals referenced
to datum and at intervals acceptable to the city engineer; provided, however,
that where authorized by the city engineer, contour data may be provided in the
form of elevations at street intersections and in drainage channels.
         f.   The location of existing buildings, water bodies or watercourses,
and the location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent; provided, that actual measured distance shall not be
required.
         g.   The boundaries of the tract, as determined by a legal survey,
area of the tract, the proposed location, approximate grade, right of way width
and pavement width of streets and alleys, the proposed location and width of
easements and setback lines, the proposed lot lines, the radius of all curves
and approximate lot dimensions.
         h.   The existing zoning boundary lines defining the proposed use of
all portions of the subdivision.
         i.   The proposed street names and system of numbering lots and
blocks.
         j.   The location, approximate size and proposed use of all land
intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property
owners within the proposed subdivision.
         k.   The location, size, and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other surface and subsurface structures existing within or
immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout,
type and size of any proposed water mains and storage facilities, sanitary
mains and laterals, storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures, street
improvements and any other proposed utilities.
         l.   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements
relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside the proposed plat.
      2.   In addition to subsection A1 of this section, a preliminary plat of
the proposed subdivision shall be submitted at a scale of the current city map.
Said plat shall show the location of the proposed subdivision referenced to
existing or proposed arterial and collector streets and to government section
lines; the size and location of all proposed streets and roads; all lots drawn
to scale; the numbering of all lots and blocks; and the names, if available, of
all streets. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
   B.   Final Plat:
      1.   The final plat shall be drawn at such scale and contain lettering of
such size, including reference to indication and affidavit of survey, as to
enable the same to be placed upon a single sheet eighteen inches by twenty
seven inches (18" x 27") in size with a three and one-half inch (31/2") margin
at the left end and with no part thereof nearer to other edges of said sheet
than one-half inch (1/2") and shall be in full accordance with the provisions
of state law, Idaho Code sections 50-1301 through 50-1334. The back of said
plat shall not be used for any portion of the drawing but may contain written
matter as to dedication and other information. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015
Code)
      2.   The final plat shall clearly show the following:
         a.   Primary control points, approved by the city engineer, or
description and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. Such control points
must include any two (2) of the following: 1) section corner; 2) quarter
section corner; 3) quarter-quarter section corner; and 4) meander corner,
according to government survey. All corners are to be part of the quarter
section containing the proposed subdivision.
         b.   Location and description of monuments.
         c.   Tract boundary lines, property lines, lot lines, right of way
lines of streets, easements and other rights of way with accurate dimensions,
bearings, or deflection angles; and radii, arcs, and center angles of all
curves.
         d.   Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions.
         e.   Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way.
         f.   The length of all lot lines, dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees and minutes and seconds.
         g.   The location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
         h.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with
areas to be excluded from platting marked "Reserved" or "Not a Part".
         i.   The outline of any property, other than streets or alleys, which
is offered for dedication to public use fully dimensioned by length and
bearings, with the area marked "Public" and showing the proposed use.
         j.   A title which shall include the name of the subdivision, name of
the city, county and state, and the location and description of the subdivision
referenced to section, township and range.
         k.   Scale, north arrow, and date.
         l.   Locations, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within the proposed development and other important features
such as the general outline of the following: existing buildings, watercourses,
power lines, telephone lines, railroad lines, any existing easements, municipal
boundaries, section lines and restrictive covenants as required or assured.
         m.   Certification by a professional surveyor, preparing said plat
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
         n.   Certification by the owner including dedication of all streets,
rights of way and any sites for public use, and grant of any existing or
proposed easements.
         o.   Certification and signature of the county engineer, verifying
that the accuracy of the survey complies with the requirements of Idaho state
law.
         p.   Certification and signature of the city engineer verifying that
the final plat complies with Idaho Code title 50 and with this title.
         q.   Certification and signature of the mayor and city clerk-
treasurer verifying city council approval of the final plat and acceptance of
streets, alleys, easements, and public land dedications. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Scope
11-3-2: General Requirements
11-3-3: Blocks
11-3-4: Lots
11-3-5: Streets
11-3-6: Alleys
11-3-7: Easements
11-3-1: SCOPE:
Standards contained in this chapter shall be followed in all subdividing within
the scope of this title. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-3-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
In order that the subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the city will
contribute to the development of safe, convenient and attractive residential,
commercial and other areas, and advance the public welfare, the commission and
council, in reviewing and acting upon any subdivision plat, shall ensure that
full consideration and weight is given to the following: (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
   A.   The intent and design of the proposed plat shall be in accord with the
provisions of the comprehensive general plan. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015
Code)
   B.   Street patterns in residential neighborhoods shall be designed to
create areas free of through traffic but readily accessible to adjacent
arterial streets.
   C.   In the subdivision of land along arterial and collector streets, the
block length shall be increased so as to limit driveway or other vehicular
access compatible with good design and a reasonable use of land.
   D.   Street intersections in residential areas may be of a "T" rather than a
"+" design wherever such design will not unduly restrict a free movement of
traffic.
   E.   All natural drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or improved in a
manner which will improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the
channel.
   F.   Reserve strips controlling access to public streets shall be permitted;
provided, that the control and disposition of land comprising such strip is
placed within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions specified by the
council and shown on the plat. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-3-3: BLOCKS:
   A.   Length And Width: No block shall be longer than six hundred sixty feet
(660') nor less than three hundred feet (300') between street intersections and
shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots, except as
provided in section
11-3-4 of this chapter or a special exception approved by the council.
   B.   Crosswalks: Pedestrian crosswalks, located on a public right of way not
less than ten feet (10') wide shall be required where deemed essential by the
council to provide pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds, shopping areas,
transportation, or other community facilities. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-3-4: LOTS:
   A.   Area, Dimensions And Street Frontage: Lot area, dimensions and minimum
street frontage shall be established in the zoning ordinance or as established
by this title.
   B.   Property Return For Corner Lots: For corner lots, a property return
with a radius of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided; however, a
larger radius may be required when, in the opinion of the council, such is
necessary to serve an existing or future need.
   C.   Side Lot Lines And Side Yards:
      1.   Side lot lines shall be at approximately right angles or radial to
the street line unless a variation from the rule will provide a more desirable
street and lot plan in the opinion of the commission.
      2.   For interior lots, the sum of the side yard clearances for both
sides of the lot shall be not less than fifteen feet (15') with no side being
less than five feet (5').
      3.   For corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot away from the
side street shall be not less than five feet (5'), and the side yard next to
the side street shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
   D.   Front Yard: The front setback for all lots shall be twenty five feet
(25') from the front property line.
   E.   Rear Yard: The rear yard distance for all lots shall be not less than
twenty five feet (25') from the rear property line.
   F.   Minimum Areas And Frontages:
      1.   Corner Lots: The minimum area of a corner lot shall be not less than
eight thousand (8,000) square feet and must have a minimum street frontage of
seventy five feet (75') at the setback line.
      2.   Inside Lots: The minimum area of an inside lot shall be not less
than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet with a minimum street
frontage of seventy five feet (75') at the setback line.
   G.   Certain Lots To Be Avoided:
      1.   Butt or key lots shall be avoided whenever possible.
      2.   Double frontage lots are prohibited; except, that where a showing is
made that unusual topography or other conditions make it impossible to meet
this requirement, an exception may be approved by the council. (Ord. 228, 12-
15-1981)
11-3-5: STREETS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of
all streets shall conform to the comprehensive general plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographic
conditions, and public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land served. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd.
2015 Code)
      2.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the council may require frontage streets, reverse frontage
streets or similar treatment for the purpose of creating desirable neighborhood
character and enhancing the movement of traffic.
      3.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way
or limited access highway right of way, the council may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land.
   B.   Widths: There shall be provided rights of way of such widths in no case
to be less than those defined in the comprehensive plan for the city; provided,
however, that the width of said rights of way shall in no case be less than the
following:
 
Regional arterial route 90 feet and up
Arterial street         60 feet to 90 feet
Collector street        60 feet minimum
Minor street            50 feet
 
   C.   Grades: Street grades shall be such as to provide for the safe movement
of traffic in all weather and for adequate drainage of both streets and
abutting properties. Street grades, whenever feasible, shall be not less than
three- tenths percent (0.3%) and not more than ten percent (10%).
   D.   Partial Street Dedications: In general, partial street dedications
shall not be permitted; provided, however, that the council may accept a
partial street dedication when such street forms the boundary of the property
being subdivided and, in addition, is shown on the comprehensive general plan
or is designated by the council as an arterial or collector street or is
otherwise officially designated as of major importance as a present or future
trafficway, or such other conditions or restrictions exist or are imposed by
the council so that the eventual completion of such street to its full required
right of way is assured; and further provided, that when a dedicated partial
street exists adjacent to the property to be subdivided, the other portion may
be platted within such subdivision.
   E.   Cul-De-Sacs, Courts And Similar Streets: A cul-de-sac, court or similar
type street may be permitted; provided, that the maximum length for a cul-de-
sac shall be four hundred feet (400') as measured from the entrance to the
center of the turnaround, and all cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a
turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') at the property line,
and not less than forty five feet (45') at the curb lines. (Ord. 228, 12-15-
1981)
   F.   Dead End Streets: Dead end streets shall not be permitted, with the
exception that such streets terminating at the boundary of a subdivision may be
approved when such a street and its extension are shown on the comprehensive
general plan when, in the opinion of the council, the future extension of such
a street is feasible and necessary to the proper development of the city street
pattern. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   G.   Loop Streets: The maximum length of a loop street shall be one thousand
feet (1,000'), and a loop street over this length, though otherwise meeting the
definition of a "loop street", shall be required to conform to the standards of
a minor street in its subdivision type; provided, however, that a loop street
of up to one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length containing frontage
of no more than twenty four (24) building lots may be permitted.
   H.   Angle Of Intersections: Streets shall be designed and laid out in order
to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall
intersect any other street at less than seventy degrees (70°).
   I.   Connecting Curves: Where any street deflects an angle of five degrees
(5°) or more, a connecting curve having a minimum radius of three hundred feet
(300') for arterial and collector streets and one hundred fifty feet (150') for
minor streets may be required by the commission.
   J.   Street Jogs: Except under exceptional circumstances, no street jog
shall have a centerline offset of less than one hundred twenty five feet
(125'). (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
   K.   Street Names: Proposed streets which are a continuation of an existing
street shall be given the same name as the existing street. All other street
names used shall not duplicate or be of a spelling or pronunciation of existing
streets within the city or within the adjacent county area. The subdivider
shall obtain approval of all street names within the proposed subdivision from
the city planning and zoning commission before submitting same to the council
for final approval. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   L.   Street Trees: Street trees, where provided, shall be of the variety,
size and location allowed by the city council. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-3-6: ALLEYS:
   A.   Alleys may be required at the rear of all business lots and shall be at
least sixteen feet (16') in width. Alleys, when provided in residential blocks,
shall be not less than sixteen feet (16') in width.
   B.   At the intersection of two (2) alleys, the corners of the abutting
property shall be provided with a property line return having a radius of not
less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Except under unusual circumstances, alleys shall not terminate in a
dead end, and in no case shall a dead end alley be accepted unless turnaround
facilities are provided to the satisfaction of the council. (Ord. 228, 12-15-
1981)
11-3-7: EASEMENTS:
Easements shall be provided wherever required for utilities or other public
service of such size and location as approved by the council. (Ord. 228, 12-15-
1981)
CHAPTER 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Compliance With Provisions
11-4-2: Plans; Guarantee Of Improvements
11-4-3: Public Ways
11-4-4: Water Lines And Hydrants
11-4-5: Sewers
11-4-6: Drainage
11-4-7: Stream Easements
11-4-8: Reservation Of Land For Parks And Schools
11-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   The improvements described in this chapter shall be shown on the
construction plans of any subdivision and installed in accordance with the
procedures and requirements hereinafter designated. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
   B.   All improvements shall be in accordance with all elements of the
comprehensive plan of the city and the requirements of the Idaho Code, and
shall further be in accordance with the design and development standards of the
city and with all requirements of this chapter. Construction shall be under the
supervision of the city engineer and subject to his approval. The City hereby
adopts the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality’s Idaho Catalog of Storm
Water Best Management Practices, and the Idaho Standards for Public Works
Construction. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code; Ord. 537, 6-10-2025)
11-4-2: PLANS; GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Filing Plans:
      1.   At the time of filing of the final plat, the subdivider shall file
with the public works supervisor construction drawings for all improvements
required in the subdivision. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by a
professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
   B.   Guarantee Of Improvements:
      1.   Surety Bond Or Other Guarantee: At the time of filing the final
plat, the subdivider shall file with the city clerk- treasurer a surety bond or
other guarantee acceptable to the council to secure to the city the actual
construction of such improvements, according to specifications, within a period
of time not to exceed one year from the date of approval of the final plat;
provided, however, that the council may extend the allowed period of
construction for one year upon the showing of just cause by the subdivider.
Such bond or other guarantee shall be in the amount of one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the estimated cost of the improvement as determined by the council.
      2.   Letter Of Credit:
         a.   The only other guarantee (other than a surety bond) will be an
irrevocable letter of credit from an acceptable bank, licensed to do business
in the state of Idaho. Said letter of credit shall be in an amount equal to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of construction of the
development for the entire subdivision. The letter of credit shall name the
city of Council, Idaho, as administrator of the account with access to use of
the funds for completion of the development work in the event that the
developer fails in his obligation to complete the work within the time frame
agreed to upon acceptance of the final plat. Costs of completing any unfinished
work may include all administrative, material or incidental costs incurred by
the city in its pursuit of completion of the work.
         b.   Said letter of credit shall state that the city shall be held
harmless from all causes in completing the work and shall in no way be liable
for payment of costs of any kind or for repayment of any loans connected with
the letter of credit for the project. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
   C.   As Built Plans: Prior to the acceptance by the city of any improvement
installed by the developer, two (2) sets of prints of the as built plans and
specifications for all improvements, one set of which shall be certified and
signed by the engineer preparing such plans, shall be filed with the public
works supervisor, and the second set shall be filed with the Idaho department
of environmental quality by the developer. In addition to the prints, an
electronic copy compatible with city systems shall be filed with the city.
(Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   D.   Certificate Of Completion; Release Of Guarantee: Within ten (10) days
after the completion of improvements, the completion of which is guaranteed by
a surety bond or other guarantee as provided in subsection B of this section
and the filing of the "as built" plans as provided in subsection C of this
section, the city engineer shall certify in writing the completion and
acceptance of said improvements and shall transmit a copy of such certification
to both the city clerk- treasurer and the subdivider. The city shall thereafter
release said surety bond or other guarantee upon application by the subdivider.
(Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-4-3: PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   Street type, whether arterial, collector or minor, shall be
determined by reference to the comprehensive general plan of the city and to a
map of the entire area the street serves. When classification of minor street,
cul-de-sac or loop street is claimed, the entire length of that street shall be
shown on the subdivision plat being proposed or on a previously approved plat.
      2.   The pavement width of all streets shall conform to those widths
defined in the comprehensive plan.
      3.   The paving design of the intersection of any new street with an
existing state or federal highway shall be in accordance with the standard
specifications of the Idaho state transportation department, but in no case
shall be less than the applicable specifications contained herein. (Ord. 228,
12-15-1981)
      4.   Pavement, base, and leveling coarse gravel shall be constructed in
accordance with city design and development standards.
      5.   In general, the centerline of street pavement shall coincide with
the centerline of the right of way in which the pavement is located.
   B.   Curbs And Gutters: All subdivisions shall be constructed with vertical
curbs and gutters in accordance with city design and development standards
unless otherwise required by the council. A roll curb may be substituted for a
vertical curb on a minor residential street subject to council approval.
   C.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks five feet (5') in width shall be provided on both
sides of any residential collector and other minor residential streets.
Sidewalks shall also be provided along any other street in a subdivision where
deemed by the council to be essential to public convenience or safety.
   D.   Driveways: Driveway curb cuts and driveway approaches shall be made in
accordance with the design and development standards of the city.
   E.   Street Lighting: Street lighting, where provided, shall be in
accordance with the design and development standards of the city.
   F.   Alleys: Alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the design and
development standards of the city.
   G.   Underground Utilities: All utilities shall be placed underground. (Ord.
228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
11-4-4: WATER LINES AND HYDRANTS:
Central water lines and fire hydrants shall be provided in all subdivisions.
(Ord. 228, 12-15-1981)
11-4-5: SEWERS:
   A.   Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers shall be provided in all subdivisions;
with the exception, that in any subdivision served by central water wherein
sanitary sewer facilities are not installed and the extension of such
facilities to serve such subdivision is not feasible because of location,
topography or other considerations, a subdivision not providing sanitary sewers
may be approved; provided, that such subdivision makes alternate provision for
sewage disposal in accordance with the requirements of the Idaho state
department of health and welfare and the Southwest district health department
and to the satisfaction of the city council. In considering such alternate
provisions, the council may require an increase in minimum lot size and may
impose any other requirements which it deems necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Future Sewage Hookup: In the event that a future sewer hookup is
approved by the city, the lot owner shall file with the city an agreement to be
recorded to pass with title to the land stating that when sewer trunk lines
become available, the property will be connected to the sewer, and that all
costs generated by extension of mains, laterals and service lines shall accrue
to the land and be paid by the then current recorded owner of the land. (Ord.
228, 12-15-1981)
11-4-6: DRAINAGE:
   A.   Improvement plans providing for the drainage of stormwater shall
include a drainage plan relating the draining of the proposed subdivision to
the drainage area of which it is a part, a calculation of the runoff for a
maximum one hour rain occurring in a fifty (50) year period for the
watercourses lying within or running through the subdivision as set forth in
the design and development standards of the city, and a demonstration of the
method for disposing of runoff from the subdivision including the size,
location and dedication of drainage easements.
   B.   Drainage structures, channel improvements and storm sewers shall be
constructed in accordance with the design and development standards of the
city, and the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality’s Catalog of Storm
Water Best Management Practices, which is hereby adopted as a design and
development standard of the City. (Ord. 228, 12-15-1981; amd. 2015 Code; Ord.
537, 6-10-2025)
11-4-7: STREAM EASEMENTS:
   A.   The reservation of an easement along any stream or important surface
drainage course located in an area being subdivided may be required by the
council for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or
protecting the stream or drainage course.
   B.   No ditch, pipe or structure for irrigation water or irrigation
wastewater shall be constructed, rerouted or changed in any way unless such
obstruction, rerouting or change has first been approved in writing by the
ditch company officer in charge; provided, however, that where such ditch, pipe
or structure is held in mutual ownership, said approval in writing shall be
obtained from the city engineer.
   C.   A copy of such written approval by the ditch company officer and/or the
city engineer shall be filed with the construction drawings as provided. (Ord.
228, 12-15-1981)
11-4-8: RESERVATION OF LAND FOR PARKS AND SCHOOLS:
Whenever the subdivider desires or proposes to reserve area for schools or
parks and to be so designated on the subdivision plans, such reservation shall
meet the standards of the city and/or school district, respectively. (Ord. 228,
12-15-1981)
