TITLE 11
See separate binder for Planned Developments
Code current through:
Ord. 924, passed 8-27-2024
PREFACE
   This planned developments code of the City of Eagle, as supplemented,
contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 924, passed 8-27-2024.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this planned developments code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether
any particular provision of the planned developments code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
TITLE 11A
SPRING VALLEY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11A-1-1: Short Title
11A-1-2: Purpose
11A-1-3: Applicability
11A-1-4: Interpretation, Scope Of Regulations
11A-1-5: Definitions
11A-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the SPRING VALLEY
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-1-2 PURPOSE:
Generally, this title is enacted with the purpose and intent of promoting, on
behalf of the citizens of the city of Eagle and the Spring Valley development,
public health, safety, comfort and general welfare; to conserve and control the
population, density and facilities adequate and economical provision for public
improvements, all in accordance with Spring Valley preannexation and
development agreement, for the desirable physical development of Spring Valley;
and to provide a method of administration, all as authorized by the Eagle
comprehensive plan, the Eagle zoning ordinance, the state legislature and the
constitution of the state of Idaho.
Specifically, the purpose and intent of this title is to set forth the
development standards and administrative procedures for implementing the land
use policies of the PADA. Furthermore, it is the purpose of this title:
   A.   To support the city's annexation and rezoning of Spring Valley to
ensure a high quality development that ensures orderly, controlled, and quality
growth in the city;
   B.   Provide for a mixture of land uses within the Spring Valley planned
development;
   C.   Provide distinctive, efficient and effective regulations to guide
development in Spring Valley;
   D.   Encourage flexibility and creativity in Spring Valley's design and
development in order to respond to market demand and site specific conditions
while enhancing the economic viability and quality of Spring Valley;
   E.   Encourage creative and innovative land planning and design processes
throughout Spring Valley which are sensitive to existing environmental
conditions;
   F.   Ensure significant planning and economic benefit to the city and the
developer without limitations by: 1) encouraging investment in and commitment
to comprehensive planning for effective utilization of municipal and other
public resources to secure quality planning, growth and protection of the
environment; 2) requiring development of Spring Valley consistent with the
Eagle comprehensive plan, ordinances, and the PADA; 3) providing for the
planning, design, engineering, construction, acquisition, and/or installation
of public infrastructure to support anticipated development of both Spring
Valley and the larger land areas that includes mitigation impacts by and to
Spring Valley; 4) creating employment through development of Spring Valley; and
5) creating quality housing, employment, recreation and other land uses in
Spring Valley;
   G.   Establish responsibility for the development of essential public
services throughout Spring Valley and the specific mechanisms by which they
will be provided, created and financed;
   H.   Provide for phased and orderly development of Spring Valley utilizing
consistent criteria;
   I.   Establish the permitted uses and minimum standards for each category of
residential and nonresidential use;
   J.   Identify and define standards for uses which may occur in each of the
land use categories;
   K.   Ensure that development and subdivision are consistent with the PADA,
this title, Eagle city code in effect as of December 21, 2012, and not
superseded by this title, and the Eagle comprehensive plan; and
   L.   Establish a review and approval process for the development of Spring
Valley. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-1-3 APPLICABILITY:
This title governs the development and administration of Spring Valley, as
shown in the PADA. Any amendments to this title must be consistent with the
PADA. Where uses arise that are not covered in this title except as provided in
the PADA, the use shall be prohibited. This title shall not apply to land not
incorporated within the PADA.
   A.   Scope And Content: This title shall consist of the text hereof.
   B.   Flexibility: The PADA, and this title are intended to depict the
general nature and relative intensity of residential and nonresidential
development in the Spring Valley development, while allowing flexibility at the
time of detailed planning and platting so that the overall goals, policies,
purpose, and intent of the PADA and the Eagle comprehensive plan as provided
within the PADA and this title can be achieved.
   C.   Conflict Of Laws: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title shall be exclusive requirements under Eagle city code
for development within Spring Valley.
   D.   Phased Development: This title is intended to regulate all development
and improvement of Spring Valley, but is not intended to regulate the bulk sale
and conveyance of raw land to subdevelopers. Subdevelopers intending to develop
land within Spring Valley, or any portion thereof, are subject to the PADA and
this title.
   E.   Changes To Spring Valley Property Boundary: From time to time, the
Spring Valley property boundary may change due to additions of property into
Spring Valley. Such changes shall be governed by the PADA, subject to approval
of an amendment by the city of Eagle and this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-1-4 INTERPRETATION, SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations for each land use district set forth by this title shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
   A.   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the land use district in which it is
located;
   B.   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
      1.   To provide for greater height or bulk,
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families,
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area,
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to
the provisions of this title; and
   C.   No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or
constructed except where the following conditions have been satisfied:
      1.   All streets to be dedicated to the Ada County highway district as
public streets, as defined in section 11-1-2 of this chapter and section
11A-13A-6 of this title, shall be constructed as required by ACHD or as
required by this title, whichever holds the higher standard;
      2.   Sanitary restrictions are removed pursuant to Idaho Code 50-1326;
      3.   Fire hydrants and water mains are provided, and operable, pursuant
to section
11A-13D-1-11 of this title; and
      4.   Street signs are installed which adequately identify the location of
such building for emergency purposes. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-1-5 DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Interpretation And Implementation: The definitions set forth below
shall be used in the interpretation and implementation of this title:
      1.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
      2.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
      3.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
      4.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended",
"designed" or "arranged" to be used or occupied.
      5.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel" and "tract".
   B.   Terms Defined:
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or detached independent dwelling unit
on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate
to, the principal dwelling unit that has separate kitchen, sleeping, and
bathroom facilities.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE/ BUILDING: A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. In
agricultural, residential, and non-residential zones, accessory structures/
buildings include, but are not limited to, accessory dwelling units, detached
carports and garages, pool houses and cabanas, amateur radio and satellite dish
antennas, barns, corrals, stables, and similar uses and structures, including
accessory storage buildings. Cargo containers, railroad cars, converted mobile
homes, camp trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles, and similar
prefabricated items and structures originally built for purposes other than the
storage of goods and material or not constructed in accordance with building
code are not permitted as accessory structures.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use that occurs on the same lot as the principal use.
   ACHD: Ada County highway district.
   ADMINISTRATOR: An official having knowledge in the principles and practices
of zoning who is appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council,
to administer this title.
   ADMINISTRATOR, FLOODPLAIN: An official having knowledge in the principles
and practices of flood control regulations who is appointed by the zoning
administrator, to administer flood control regulations and title 10 of Eagle
city code.
   ADULT BUSINESS: Establishments based primarily on materials or performances
that depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities.
   AFFECTED PERSON: One having an interest in real property which may be
adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing the
development.
   AGGREGATE PROCESSING PLANT: A temporary facility or area for processing
aggregate or batching concrete or asphalt.
   AGRICULTURE: The use of land for crop production, pasturage, animal and
poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for parking, treating or
storing of produce. Agriculture does not include dairying or the maintenance of
a commercial feedlot or stockyard where large numbers of livestock are fed
concentrated feeds, particularly for the purpose of fattening for market, or
uses defined as feedlots, stockyards, dairy farms or CAFOs as defined by city
code or Idaho state law.
   ALLEY: A right of way or common lot inclusive of an easement which provides
vehicular access to the rear or side of a property and is primarily intended to
provide access for alley load garages and designated parking.
   AMBULANCE SERVICES: Provision of nonemergency medical care transportation,
including incidental storage, maintenance and parking of medical transport
vehicles.
   ANTENNA: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
   APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has complete
kitchen facilities permanently installed.
   ARCHITECT: A professional individual registered in the state of Idaho to
practice in the field of architecture.
   ART GALLERY: An establishment for the display and/or retail sale of artwork
and may include studio facilities for creation of artistic works.
   ARTIST STUDIOS: Workspace for artists and artisans, including individuals
practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied
art or craft.
   ARTS AND CRAFTS SHOWS: Display and sale of painting, sculpture, handicrafts
and similar objects.
   AUTO AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES: The sale of new and used motor
vehicles, motor homes, and travel trailers, including repair work, incidental
warranty repair of same, to be displayed and sold on the premises.
   AUTO BODY SHOP: A facility for collision service, repair and painting.
   AUTO FUEL ISLANDS: A retail fuel sales facility typically including a small
kiosk building covered by a canopy.
   AUTO GAS STATION/SERVICE SHOP: A building and premises where gasoline, oil,
grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail. Incidental minor automotive repair and maintenance and an
automatic car wash facility are also permitted.
   AUTO WASHING FACILITY: An establishment or area that provides facilities for
washing and cleaning vehicles, which may use production line methods with a
conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and that may employ some hand
labor. The facility may include vacuums and drying areas as accessory uses.
   AUTOMOTIVE EMISSION TESTING FACILITY: A lot, structure, or vehicle where
emissions are tested or evaluated to determine compliance with law.
   AUTO REPAIR AND SERVICE SHOP (MAJOR): A facility for the repair, rebuilding
or reconditioning of any type of motor vehicle or parts thereof, in addition to
the types of repair and service authorized to be performed in a minor auto
repair garage, but excluding collision service, painting and steam cleaning of
vehicles. The term includes a facility which performs any repairs to vehicles
with a gross vehicle weight over ten thousand (10,000) pounds.
   AUTO REPAIR AND SERVICE SHOP (MINOR): A facility for the performance of
minor repairs and service on vehicles of ten thousand (10,000) pounds' gross
vehicle weight or less; such repairs and service are limited to electronic tune
ups, brake repairs (including drum turning), air conditioning repairs,
generator and starter repairs, tire repairs, front end alignments, battery
recharging, lubrication, selling/installing minor parts and accessories, other
similar activities and repairing and installing other minor elements of an
automobile such as windshield wipers, hoses, windows, etc., but excluding
engine, transmission and differential repair or installation.
   AUTO/TRUCK RENTAL AGENCY: A facility for the rental of new or used
automobiles and/or trucks. Vehicles kept on the lot for rental purposes are not
considered to be outside storage.
   B TYPE DRAINAGE: Drainage that flows toward the side or rear of a lot or
parcel instead of the front.
   BALCONY: A nonlivable exterior space that is accessible from an upper story
of a residence or building.
   BANK/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An establishment that provides retail banking
services to individuals and businesses. This classification includes those
institutions engaged in the on site circulation of cash money and businesses
offering check cashing facilities.
   BAR/PUB/NIGHTCLUB: An establishment for which a license under title 3,
chapter 2, articles A, B, and/or C of Eagle city code is required and the
principal business of which is the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed
on premises and where food may be available for consumption.
   BAR, WINE/TASTING ROOM: An establishment for which a license under title 3,
chapter 2, articles A and B of this code is required where the principal
business is devoted to the sale of wine, beer, and cider whereby the product is
produced by one or multiple facilities licensed and located in the State of
Idaho for the consumption on or off premises. Food may be served; provided,
that: (1) food items are produced off premises; (2) food items provided for
consumption on site are limited to cheese, crackers, charcuterie and similar
items made available strictly in conjunction with and ancillary to the wine
tasting experience; and (3) the establishment is not a restaurant.
   BEAUTY/BARBER SHOP: Establishments where services are provided for
hairdressing, but which may also offer tanning beds, facials, manicures,
pedicures, massages and the like.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: An owner occupied residence providing overnight
accommodations and breakfast food service to guests for compensation and where
guest lodging is subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the
dwelling.
   BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well-defined boundaries,
usually streets.
   BOARD, DESIGN REVIEW: The design review board of the city of Eagle, Idaho.
   BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, DORMITORY: A building other than a hotel or
motel where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation to three (3) or
more unrelated persons, but less than twelve (12) persons, who are not
transients, and kitchen facilities are not provided in the individual rooms.
   BOND, PERFORMANCE OR SURETY: A financial guarantee by a subdivider or
developer with the City in the amount of the estimated construction cost
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements, according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the agreement.
   BUILDING: A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or
more families, or a structure designed for use as an accessory to a structure
used for living quarters or a structure designed for commercial or industrial
uses.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE: The portion of each property or lot within which all
improvements are built including, but not limited to, structures, flatwork, and
swimming pools, but excluding planting, driveways and boundary fencing.
   BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the finished floor
elevation closest to the finished grade to the top of the roof. "Top of roof"
means ridgeline or the highest point of any architectural element concealing
rooftop equipment, excluding chimneys and vents. The height restrictions are
not intended to limit the number of stories.
   BUILDING MATERIALS/LUMBER YARD: A facility for the sale of home, lawn and
garden supplies and construction materials such as brick, block, masonry,
lumber and other similar materials.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is situated.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The required distance from a building to a property
line or site improvements, including streets, curbs, parking lots, various site
driveways and access roads, walkways, hardscape, and walls, and in which no
building or structure may be located above ground except as may be provided
herein.
   BUILDING SITE: An area proposed or provided and improved by grading,
filling, excavation or other means for erecting pads for buildings.
   BUILDING/STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY: A building or structure on the same lot with,
and incidental and subordinate to, and detached from, the principal building or
structure. Accessory buildings/structures include, but are not limited to:
detached carports and garages, pool houses and cabanas, guardhouses, barns,
corrals and stables, storage sheds, outdoor storage structures, workshops,
greenhouses, and similar structures, but do not include accessory dwellings.
Also see definition of Dwelling, Accessory.
   CAR WASH: An establishment that provides washing and cleaning of passenger
or recreational vehicles by hand, by use of automated equipment operated by one
or more attendants, or by self-service facilities.
   CARNIVAL AND CIRCUS: The provision of games, eating and drinking facilities,
live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities, which may be
conducted outdoors, or in a tent or other temporary structure. This
classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility.
   CATERING SERVICE: Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off
site consumption without provision for on site pick up or consumption.
   CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains
and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery purposes include columbaria,
crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries operated in conjunction with the
cemetery.
   CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
   CHECK CASHING/PAYDAY LOAN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that provides
immediate cash for checks (payroll, personal, cashier, business, money orders,
etc.) for a fee or provides loans.
   CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any facility where children regularly receive care and
supervision, usually unaccompanied by the children's parents, guardians or
custodians, and regardless of whether the facility does or does not provide any
instruction. This use excludes the case of: 1) the operator's children or legal
wards or children related by blood or marriage, 2) occasional personal guests,
and 3) children aged twelve (12) years and over. Any home, place, or facility
providing overnight custodial services for lodging or boarding for the
occupants therein shall not be considered a childcare facility.
   There are four (4) types of childcare facilities:
      Daycare Center: A childcare facility for thirteen (13) or more children.
      Family/Home Daycare Facility: A childcare facility for six (6) or fewer
children and where childcare is subordinate and incidental to the main
residential use of the dwelling. Baby sitting services are an accessory use to
residential uses.
      Group Daycare Facility: A childcare facility for seven (7) to twelve (12)
children.
      Preschool: A facility for children, usually between the ages of three (3)
and five (5), staffed by qualified teachers and other professionals who
encourage and supervise educational play rather than simply providing
childcare. The maximum number of children will be regulated by state code based
on the number of children listed above.
   CITY: The city of Eagle, Idaho.
   CITY CODE: The municipal code of the city of Eagle, Idaho.
   CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Eagle, Idaho.
   CLINIC/URGENT CARE FACILITY: A building used for the care, diagnosis and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons or those who are in need
of medical and surgical attention; but which building does not provide board,
room or regular hospital care and services.
   CLUB OR LODGE: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated
by an organized association of persons for a social, literary, political,
educational or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members
and their guests, and whose principal activity is to render a service not
usually and ordinarily carried on as a business.
   COFFEE ROASTING FACILITY: A facility in which unprocessed, green coffee may
be sorted, roasted and processed, or packaged for use and consumption.
   COMMISSION, HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The historic preservation commission of
the city of Eagle, Idaho.
   COMMISSION, PARKS, PATHWAYS AND RECREATION (PPRC): The parks, pathways, and
recreation commission of the city of Eagle, Idaho.
   COMMISSION, PLANNING AND ZONING: The planning and zoning commission of the
city of Eagle, Idaho.
   COMMON AREA: Land within a development that is not individually owned or
dedicated for public use but which is designed and intended for the common use
or enjoyment of the residents of the development. The common area may include
complementary structures and improvements.
   COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: A community room, clubhouse,
recreation center or similar area for use by the residents of a residential
development.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A document adopted by the City Council that herein may
be referred to as a comprehensive plan or comprehensive development plan.
   COMMUNITY INFORMATION CENTER: A facility that provides information on the
community to the public and prospective residents or buyers and may include a
sales office. Such information may include location and nature of various land
uses, facilities and amenities, price ranges of homes in various neighborhoods,
future plans and timing, and information about the master developer, builders,
and the Spring Valley Community Association.
   CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted within a district, other than a principally
permitted use, requiring a permit and approval of the council. Uses permitted
in each land use district are listed in section
11A-2-3, "Land Use Standards", of this title.
   CONDOMINIUM: One of a group of dwelling units within a building or complex
of buildings in which each dwelling unit is individually owned and the common
parts of the property, such as the buildings, grounds, and other areas of
common use are owned jointly by the unit owners.
   CONFERENCE CENTER: A facility used for holding conventions, trade shows,
exhibitions, seminars, workshops, social and special events, and similar
activities and may include exhibit halls, meeting rooms, ballrooms, and dining
and lodging facilities for use by participants as well as compatible accessory
facilities. A conference center may be freestanding or part of a hotel/resort.
   CONSTRUCTION OFFICE: A mobile home, travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or
other structure used as a temporary office in conjunction with a construction
project.
   CONSTRUCTION YARD: Any area used on a temporary basis for the storage or
processing of materials and supplies used in the actual construction of a
project.
   CONVENIENCE STORE: An establishment providing retail sales of food,
beverages and small convenience items typically found in a store with long or
late hours of operation and may include twenty four (24) hour facilities. A
convenience store operation may also include fuel sales, but shall then be
regulated as a gas station. Such establishment is typically open between six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. An establishment that is
open before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. is
subject to a conditional use permit.
   COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the Ada County recorder.
   COVENANT: A written promise or pledge.
   CULVERT: A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or
driveway.
   DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the
public by ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes as by the
recording of a plat. Dedicated land becomes public upon the acceptance by the
city or affected agency.
   DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land
contained within a master plan, planning unit master plan, parcel, preliminary
plat or final plat including public right of way, private streets, and common
area open space, excluding floodway.
   DENSITY, NET: The number of dwelling units per acre of land within a master
plan, planning unit master plan, parcel, preliminary plat or final plat
including only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding public right of
way, private streets, common area open space, and floodway.
   DESIGN THEME: The conceptual theme established for Spring Valley, a Spring
Valley planning area, a residential neighborhood, or nonresidential project
which forms the basis for all design decisions that are made toward realizing
the character of the area. The design theme provides a visual basis for
architecture, engineering, site planning and landscape architecture.
   DEVELOPER: Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
   DEVELOPMENT: Alterations to the project, including, but not limited to,
grading, landscape improvements, or construction, for which a planning
application has been approved.
   DITCH: An open channel artificially constructed.
   DRAINAGE: Water that runs off the surfaces of a site or development.
Synonymous with "runoff" as used herein.
   DRAINAGE CHANNEL: A natural channel, ditch, pipe or other conduit for
liquid, naturally or artificially situated to receive storm drainage at an
inlet point or multiple inlet points and then convey such storm drainage to an
outlet point.
   DRAINAGE FACILITY: An artificially constructed or naturally occurring
drainage channel, detention or retention facility, or partial retention
facility.
   DRAINAGE RECEIVER: A government entity, canal company or special taxing
district which maintains a drainage facility adjacent to the development and
agrees, as evidenced by a signed and dated public document, to accept a defined
quantity of storm drainage from the development. This definition also applies
to Ada County highway district, with regard to any runoff from any development
to any street.
      Notice is particularly given that the presence of a natural drainage
channel does not relieve the developer from the requirement that any drainage
must be retained unless discharged at the predevelopment rate or it is formally
accepted by a drainage receiver.
   DRAINAGEWAY: A drainage channel or drainage ditch.
   DRIVE-THROUGH USE: An establishment which by design, physical facilities,
service, or by method of sale encourages or permits customers to receive
services or obtain goods while remaining in their vehicles. The term "drive-
through use" also includes automated tellers, banks, cleaners, pharmacies,
restaurants and other establishments providing food or beverages, car washes,
gasoline service stations, and quick lubrication.
   DRUGSTORE: A store where the primary business is the filling of medical
prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies and
nonprescription medicines but where nonmedical products may be sold as well.
   DRY CLEANER/LAUNDRY: A business that provides cleaning services or
facilities for clothing and other fabric articles and may include drive-through
service. Dry cleaning and laundry plant operations may be located off site.
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY: A dwelling located on the same lot as, and is
subordinate to, the principal residential dwelling, and which may be attached
or detached from the principal dwelling, and which provides living quarters
with provisions for cooking (220V wiring), eating, sanitation, and sleeping for
occupants or guests of occupants of the principal dwelling, their domestic
employees, tenants or caregivers. An accessory dwelling may include a
guesthouse, casita, or caretaker/domestic unit and may be located in the front,
side or rear yard of the lot or may be above a garage. Direct access from the
principal dwelling is not required. Accessory dwellings are considered dwelling
units and count toward maximum density calculations within the PADA. Accessory
dwellings require a zoning permit when modified or developed separately from
the principal dwelling.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) or more dwelling
units where all such units are located on the same lot with varying
arrangements of entrances and party walls and including units that are located
one over the other. This definition includes condominiums and apartments.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building consisting of two (2) or more
dwelling units separated by a party wall, with each dwelling located on a
separate lot and having its own address and water meter. This definition
includes duplexes, triplexes and townhomes.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A building on a single lot consisting of
one dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling, other than an
accessory dwelling, by any means, and having only one address and water meter.
   DWELLING UNIT: A principal (not accessory) structure, building or portion
thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation including living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public
to use land for specific purposes. Also, a right acquired by prescription.
   ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION: A structure that is part of an electric generation,
transmission, and distribution system that:
      A.   Converts electric energy to a lesser voltage for the purpose of
subregional or localized distribution;
      B.   Functions as a transition point from overhead to underground
electric transmission lines; or
      C.   Acts as the point of convergence for two or more transmission lines.
   EMERGENCY: Occurrence or imminent threat of a disaster or condition
threatening life or property that requires immediate action to save lives and
protect property or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster.
   EMERGENCY HEALTHCARE FACILITY: A facility that provides emergency medical
services with no provision for continuing care on an inpatient basis. Such
facility may include incidental storage and maintenance areas and parking of
emergency and emergency related vehicles.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES: Provision of emergency medical care transportation, fire
protection and police protection, including incidental storage and maintenance
and parking of emergency and emergency related vehicles.
   ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional
engineering.
   ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY: An indoor or outdoor commercial facility or area for
sport, entertainment, games of skill, or recreation to the general public for a
fee. Examples include, but are not limited to, bowling alleys, roller and ice
skating rinks, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges (not associated with
a golf course), shooting ranges and gun clubs, game courts, movie theaters,
concert halls, amphitheaters, and video game arcades.
   EQUESTRIAN CENTER: A facility for the care, training, riding or boarding of
horses and may include one or more barns, riding arenas, show rings, exercise
areas, tack rooms, pastures, meeting rooms, staff lodging and other accessory
structures or facilities associated with such use. Such facility may be public
or private and may provide for resident or private boarding for a fee.
   EQUESTRIAN LOT: A residential lot upon which horses may be kept and may
contain a barn, riding area, pasture, and other ancillary facilities for the
sole use of the lot owner.
   FAMILY:    A.   A person living alone or two (2) or more persons related by
blood or marriage;
         B.   A group of not more than ten (10) persons who need not be related
by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit;
         C.   Eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically
handicapped or elderly persons residing in a dwelling under staff supervision,
provided that no more than two (2) staff members reside in the dwelling at any
one time. (Resident staff shall not be counted toward the "8 or fewer"
criterion.)
   FARM: Buildings and premises used for the raising and processing of farm
products in an agricultural setting by an individual or an association which
operates and manages the farm either as owner or tenant, at a site used for a
farm residence and associated farm accessory buildings.
   FARMERS' MARKET: A commercial event, typically held outdoors periodically or
on a recurring basis, where farmers and other vendors sell fresh agricultural
products and similar merchandise directly to the public. Food and beverages may
also be sold. Such use shall require a city vendor's permit. This use does not
include a flea market or swap meet.
   FLEX SPACE: A space within a building that provides flexibility for several
uses in accordance with its underlying land use district. Such space typically
contains a use or uses that generally require substantial amounts of storage
and working area as well as for an office and/or showroom. Examples include,
but are not limited to, custom bookbinding, ceramic studios, candlemaking
shops, custom jewelry manufacture, laboratories, lighting/plumbing fixture
showrooms, research and development, small merchandise assembly, and low
intensity sales and distribution facilities. Buildings may be comprised of
several flex spaces. This use is not intended to permit warehousing or
manufacturing that has high levels of truck activity.
   FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by
water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The floodplain includes the channel,
floodway or floodway fringe, as established pursuant to engineering practices
of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as follows:
   Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bend and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
   Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by
overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
   Flood of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
   Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway.
Such areas include those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by
a flood of 100-year frequency.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The ratio of the total floor area of a building (or
buildings) to the area of the lot or parcel on which the building stands. The
total square footage on all floors of all buildings on a certain lot or parcel
(building area) is divided by lot or parcel gross square footage (site area).
As a formula, FAR = (building area)/(site area). For purposes of this
definition, the total floor area (square footage) is measured from outside wall
to outside wall and includes the area of all floors of the main structure and
accessory structures, but excludes underground garages, uncovered terraces,
patios, atrium porches or balconies, covered porches, patios and balconies
enclosed on not more than two (2) sides, and chimneys.
   FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES: Retail sales of food and beverages for off site
preparation and consumption. Typical uses include grocery stores, liquor
stores, delicatessens, or bakeries and exclude convenience stores and catering
services.
   GOLF COURSES/CLUBHOUSES (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE): A tract of land laid out for
playing the game of golf that may include a clubhouse, restaurant, bar, locker
rooms, banquet facilities, meeting rooms, lounge areas, snack bars, pro shop,
practice facilities and other uses customarily associated with a golf course.
   GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Eagle, Idaho.
   GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS/ OFFICES: Administrative, clerical, or public contact
offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with
incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.
   GRADING GUIDELINES AND HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Those certain grading
guidelines and hillside development standards, approved by the city for Spring
Valley on November 24, 2009, in connection with Eagle city file number RZ-19-
6 MOD, and attached to the development agreement as exhibit M.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA): The total amount of floor area within a building, as
measured from the inside surface of the exterior walls, but excluding any floor
area devoted to the following:
      1.   Mechanical, electrical, or communication equipment or uses as may be
required for the operation of the building, including elevators and stairwells.
      2.   Parking and circulation space for motor vehicles.
      3.   Exterior balconies.
   HABITAT MITIGATION PLAN: That certain habitat mitigation plan, dated
November 12, 2010, reviewed and provided with an adequacy statement by city's
consultant and presented to city's council on January 11, 2011, which habitat
mitigation plan is attached to the development agreement as exhibit N.
   HARDSCAPE: Hard surfaces such as sidewalks, pavers, patios, courtyards, and
planters consisting of concrete, tile, stone, brick and other similar manmade
materials used in lieu of, or in conjunction with, landscape.
   HARDWARE STORES: Sales of home and commercial building supplies. This use
does not include building supply outlets.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY: The local district health department or state department
of health and welfare that has jurisdictional authority.
   HEALTH CLUB, SPA, AND WEIGHT REDUCTION SALON: Establishments offering
services including, but not limited to, exercise and physical conditioning, spa
related services and weight counseling.
   HEIGHT, BUILDING: The height of a building as measured from the finished
floor elevation closest to the corresponding finished grade to the top of the
roof. The height of the building may follow the same slope as the contour of
the lot (grade adaptive architecture). Top of roof means ridgeline or the
highest point of any architectural element concealing roof top equipment.
   HEIGHT, PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES, SPIRES, POLES, ANTENNAS, STEEPLES,
TOWERS, AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES: The height of personal wireless facilities,
spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and similar structures shall be
determined by measuring the vertical distance from the point of contact with
the ground to the highest point of the structure, including any vertical
projection thereof. When mounted upon other structures, the combined height of
the personal wireless facility, spire, pole, antenna, steeple, tower, and/or
similar structure, including the height of the structure mounted upon, shall be
used to determine height.
   HELIPORTS: Pads and facilities enabling takeoffs and landings by
helicopters.
   HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or federal
agency.
   HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision, or portion thereof, having an average
slope of ten percent (10%) or more.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration
and rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and
sites significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this
community, the state, or the nation.
   HOLIDAY/SEASONAL SALES: A onetime, temporary sale that is conducted for up
to thirty (30) days customarily prior to or in conjunction with a specific
holiday and/or seasonal event.
   HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a dwelling unit and property that is:
      1.   Used for gainful employment or commercial purposes that involves the
provisions, assembly, processing or sale of goods and/or services; and
      2.   Incidental and secondary to the residential use of the structure and
land and does not change the essential residential character of the dwelling
unit/property; but
      3.   Excludes uses that provide shelter or lodging to persons who are not
members of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
   HOSPITAL: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation
of facilities for the medical or surgical care of patients for twenty four (24)
hours or more. This classification includes incidental facilities for
outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative
services for patients and employees.
   HOTEL, MOTEL: Establishments offering rooms as temporary lodging to guests.
Hotels typically have eating and drinking service and a dining room where meals
are served and may contain meeting/conference facilities. Hotels and motels are
considered a nonresidential use and are thus not considered residential
dwelling units within the context of any density calculations or allowable
densities set forth in the preannexation and development agreement.
   IBC: International building code most recently adopted by the city.
   IDWR: Idaho department of water resources.
   IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical construction
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
   ITD: Idaho transportation department.
   JUNKYARD: An indoor or outdoor space where waste and discarded or salvaged
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or
handled, including auto salvage yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards
and places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
building, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations.
   KENNEL (For Hobby, Commercial Or Boarding Purposes): Any lot or premises or
portion on which three (3) or more dogs, cats and other household domestic
animals are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in
return for compensation or kept for sale including privately or publicly owned,
operated or managed dog pounds.
   LABORATORIES: Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory
services; or establishments with less than two thousand (2,000) square feet
providing photographic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are
classified as industry limited.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A professional individual registered in the state of
Idaho to practice in the field of landscape architecture.
   LAUNDROMAT: A business providing self-service cleaning facilities for
clothing and other fabric articles.
   LIBRARY: Any establishment or building set aside for the repository or
retrieval of information available for the public or patrons to make use of for
all kinds of research and reading, including rooms for meetings.
   LIQUOR STORE: An establishment for the retail or wholesale sales of packaged
liquor and alcohol and where no consumption takes place on the premises. Such
use shall be regulated by Eagle city code and Idaho Code.
   LIVE ENTERTAINMEN T EVENTS: Temporary concerts and other cultural events
lasting less than seven (7) days or ongoing occasional events such as barn
dances, square dances, weddings and receptions; temporary events such as corn
mazes, hayrides, retail pumpkins patches and petting zoos lasting less than
forty-five (45) days per calendar year.
   LIVING QUARTERS, ACCESSORY: A structure located on the same lot as, and is
subordinate to, the principal residential dwelling, and which may be attached
or detached from the principal dwelling, and which may provide living
accommodations with provisions for eating, sanitation, and sleeping for
occupants, or guests of occupants of the principal dwelling, their domestic
employees, tenants or caregivers, but does not include cooking facilities (220V
wiring). Accessory living quarters may include a guesthouse, casita, or
caretaker/domestic unit and may be located in the front, side or rear yard of
the lot or may be above a garage. Direct access from the principal dwelling is
not required. Accessory living quarters are not considered dwelling units and
do not count toward maximum density calculations within the PADA. Accessory
living quarters require a zoning permit when modified or developed separately
from the principal dwelling.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pick ups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and
accessible to such vehicles when required off street parking spaces are filled.
Required off street loading space is not to be included as off street parking
space in computation of required off street parking space. All off street
loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right of
way.
   LOOP: A minor street in which both terminal points are on the same street of
origin.
   LOT: A parcel, plot, tract, or other land area of sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and created by
subdivision for sale, transfer, or lease, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage, as may be
required within this title, on an improved public street, or on an approved
private street, and may consist of:
      1.   A single lot of record;
      2.   A portion of a lot of record; and
      3.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record.
   LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street,
highway, alley, road or rights of way of record.
   LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a
lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
   LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
adjacent to the street, except for alley load homes designed to face each other
with common area pedestrian access between fronts. In that case the front of
the lot shall be the property line opposite of the alley and adjacent to the
common area pedestrian access. For the purpose of determining frontage
requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated
under "Yard" in this section.
   LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF: The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion
of the right of way of any public or private street.
   LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the county recorder; or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT TYPES: As used in these regulations, lot types are as follows:
      1.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersections of two (2) or more
streets.
      2.   Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only
one street other than a corner lot.
      3.   Through Lot: A lot with frontage on more than one street other than
a corner lot.
   LOT WIDTH: Lot width shall be determined as follows: the distance between
side lot lines measured at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
   M3 EAGLE: The original and temporary name for Valnova that was used during
the planning and approval process with the city of Eagle. All references to M3
Eagle in prior planning documents are synonymous with Spring Valley and
Valnova.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: Industrial uses which are usually controlled
operations; relatively clean, quiet and free of objectionable or hazardous
elements such as smoke, noise, odor or dust; operating and storing within
enclosed structures and generating little industrial traffic and no nuisances.
   MASTER DEVELOPER: GWC Capital, LLC, a Utah limited liability company, and
all its assignees and successors in title and interest.
   MASTER DRAINAGE STUDY: That certain preliminary master drainage study, dated
June 14, 2006, as may be amended from time to time.
   MASTER HABITAT STUDY: That certain final habitat study and natural features
analysis, dated June 2006, as may be amended from time to time.
   MASTER PLAN: The overall plan and program for Spring Valley as approved by
the city and described in the PADA.
   MASTER TRAFFIC STUDY: That certain traffic impact study, dated June 26,
2006, as may be amended from time to time.
   MASTER WASTEWATER STUDY: That certain preliminary master wastewater study,
dated June 14, 2006, as may be amended from time to time.
   MASTER WATER STUDY: That certain preliminary master potable water study,
dated June 14, 2006, as may be amended from time to time.
   MICROBREWERY: A small brewery, generally producing fewer than ten thousand
(10,000) barrels of lager and ale a year and frequently selling its products on
the premises. Also called boutique brewery, brewpub. Sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages is limited to lager, ale, wine, and cider. A microbrewery
may include, but is not limited to, the following: tasting rooms, barrel rooms,
bottling rooms, tank rooms, laboratories, processing structure, and offices.
   MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe or
iron or steel rods, used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as
specified in chapter 50-1303, Idaho Code.
   MORTUARY/FUNERAL HOME: A facility where services and/or ceremonies are held
in conjunction with human burial or cremation. Crematories may be an accessory
use.
   MOTION PICTURE/RADIO/TELEVISION PRODUCTION FACILITY: A facility for the
making, broadcasting, and/or recording of movie, radio, or television
productions.
   MUSEUM: Institution displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or
more of the arts or sciences. This classification includes museums and art
galleries.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or use of land existing at the time
of enactment of this title, and which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is situated.
   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS, RETAIL: Land, building or combination thereof for
the storage, cultivation, and transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants
offered for retail sale to the general public on the premises including
products used for gardening or landscaping.
   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS, WHOLESALE: Land, building or a combination thereof
for the storage, cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants
offered for commercial sale to professional landscape businesses and members of
such businesses and not for retail sale to the general public.
   NURSING/CONVALESCENT HOME/TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: An establishment providing
care on a twenty four (24) hour basis for persons requiring regular medical
attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical
services. This classification also includes senior assisted living facilities
with provisions for shared kitchen facilities and rooms with private bathrooms.
   OFFICE PARK: A comprehensively planned and unified office oriented
development containing at least two (2) separate buildings. Office parks
typically have a mixture of office, service, professional, and commercial
activities and are designed to incorporate aesthetic and service amenities for
the employees and patrons of the establishments located within the park.
However, commercial and service uses are considered ancillary uses which shall
not exceed ten percent (10%) of the buildable acres of the office park and are
intended to be secondary and complementary to the principal use.
   OFFICE, MEDICAL AND DENTAL: A facility for a group of one (1) or more
physicians for the examination and treatment of human patients, primarily
engaged in furnishing, on an outpatient basis, chiropractic, dental, medical,
surgical, medical imaging, or other services to individuals. Patients are not
kept overnight. Ancillary laboratory facilities may be included.
   OFFICES, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL: An office of a firm or organization
providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services. This
classification includes medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office
use, but excludes banks and savings and loan associations.
   OPEN SPACE: Land which is set aside for use by residents of Valnova or the
general public for recreation, agriculture, habitat, vegetation, scenic or
similar uses. Open space may be developed or natural and may include: 1) public
and private parks, sports fields, and trails; 2) golf courses; 3) equestrian
centers; 4) vineyards and other agricultural lands; 5) landscape easements or
common areas inside or outside of public rights of way; 6) floodplains and
floodways; 7) the lesser of fifty percent (50%) of school sites or the area of
playfields; 8) scenic corridors; 9) undeveloped hillsides; 10) wetlands,
wildlife habitat, drainage areas, and unique or sensitive plant areas; and 11)
conservation easements or permanent open space on private lands or lots subject
to deed restriction. Open space may be publicly or privately owned and may be
accessible or inaccessible to the public. The minimum open space within Valnova
shall be twenty percent (20%) of Valnova or one thousand two hundred three
(1,203) acres. The minimum amount of open space within any planning area shall
be fifteen percent (15%) of the total gross acres of the planning area.
   OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE: Open space which includes, but is not limited to,
athletic fields, buildings or structures for recreational activities including
picnic areas, community garden, golf courses or sports courts, children's play
area, dog play area, and pathways, excluding passive open space areas.
Landscape buffer areas not required pursuant to chapter 3 of this title may be
considered, in part, as active open space provided a pathway or other active
amenity is located within and incorporated into the buffer area.
   OPEN SPACE, PASSIVE: Open space which includes, but is not limited to,
landscaped buffer areas required pursuant to chapter 3 of this title (including
the sidewalk within the buffer area), natural areas, wetland areas, ornamental
gardens, decorative fountains, and water bodies, excluding active open space
areas.
   ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: Any unplatted contiguous parcel of land held in one
ownership as of November 15, 1983.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of goods, wares, merchandise, equipment,
vehicles, materials or supplies in the same place for more than twenty four
(24) hours in an open area. The term outdoor storage shall include material
that is kept under a pole barn structure or any structure that is less than
fully enclosed.
   OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having any interest, legal or equitable, in the land to be
subdivided.
   OWNERS' ASSOCIATION: A legal entity created by the master developer or
parcel developer for the purpose of managing and operating common areas and
facilities within Spring Valley for the use of its members through assessments
of its members may include the Spring Valley Community Association.
   PARCEL: A designated tract or area of land established by plat or as
otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
   PARCEL DEVELOPER: A person or business and its agents engaged in the
development and construction of improvements on a parcel or site subject to
this title and the PADA.
   PARKING LOT, PARKING GARAGE: A parking lot or garage offering short term or
long term parking to the public and which may also include a fee.
   PARKING SPACE: An area adequate for parking a vehicle with room for opening
doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street
or alley and maneuvering room.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: A parking space that is located outside of any
street or alley right of way.
   PARKING SPACE, ON STREET: A parking space that is located along or within a
street or alley right of way. On street parking spaces are allowed to count
toward the parking requirements of a use.
   PARTIAL RETENTION OR DETENTION FACILITY: A constructed basin or underground
storage vessel built to retain a portion of the storm drainage it receives
until it is absorbed into the soil strata, and to allow not more than an amount
as designated by agreement with an adjacent drainage receiver to pass into an
adjacent drainageway or drainage facility.
   PARTIAL RIGHT OF WAY: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of
the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of
land.
   PAWNSHOP: An establishment engaged in the buying or selling of merchandise,
including minimal numbers of used vehicles, and offering loans secured by
personal property. This definition does not include the sale of new vehicles
unless the business is in conjunction with and on the premises of a new vehicle
dealership.
   PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT: Provision of instructional services or facilities,
including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, martial arts
studios, driving schools, business and trade schools, and diet centers,
reducing salons, and fitness studios.
   PERSONAL SERVICES: Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers
services to the general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, electronics
and appliance repair (no outdoor storage), barbershops, beauty parlors and
similar activities.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES: Facilities necessary for the provision of
personal wireless services (i.e., towers, support buildings, etc.).
   PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES (WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDING): Facilities
necessary for the provision of personal wireless services (i.e., antennas) that
are located within a building or on a building and screened from view.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial wireless telecommunication services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and
similar services that are marketed to the general public.
   PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO: An establishment for taking or developing photographs
on site for a fee or compensation.
   PLANNING AREA: One of five (5) different areas that comprise Spring Valley
as depicted on exhibit B of the PADA and as described in exhibits D, D1, D2,
D3, D4 and D5 of the PADA.
   PLANNING UNIT MASTER PLAN (PUMP): A plan for the development of a distinct
area of land within Spring Valley. Such plan identifies general location and
size of development parcels, establishes uses and density ranges for each
parcel, locates amenities and open space, establishes the major vehicular and
pedestrian circulation system and generally locates community facilities. A
PUMP does not include site plans or layout of lot lines that would normally be
part of a preliminary plat.
   PLAT: The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, town site or other
tract of land or a replatting of such including certifications, descriptions
and approvals including the following:
      1.   Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by drawings of a
proposed subdivision; and
      2.   Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by drawings of an
approved subdivision development, the original and one copy of which is filed
with the county clerk and recorder.
   PORCH: A covered outdoor space defined by building walls and guardrails at
the front, side or rear of a residence with one or more access points into the
residence.
   PREANNEXATION AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT (PADA): That certain preannexation
and development agreement, between the city and M3 Companies LLC, recorded
December 27, 2007, as amended from time to time.
   PREDEVELOPMENT RUNOFF: The runoff quantity that would have been produced
during the design storm from the site in its original native soil condition,
prior to any construction of buildings or of modified surfaces.
   PRINCIPAL BUSINESS: The business activity carried out by a person or entity
at a specific location that is not an "accessory use". The term "accessory use"
as used herein shall be defined as set forth in this section.
   PRINTING AND/OR BLUEPRINTING: An establishment providing printing,
blueprinting, photocopying, graphic design, engraving, binding, or related
services.
   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: The erection, construction, alteration, operation
or maintenance of buildings, power plants, electric substations and
transmission lines, wells and well houses, water treatment plants or pumping
stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants, fiber optic internet housing/hut
and other similar public services structures by a public utility, by a railroad
whether publicly owned or privately owned, or by a municipal or other utility
provider, including the furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport,
communication, public water and sewage services.
   PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings
and structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the
storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service
facilities.
   QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic or nonprofit nature.
   RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCAST STATION: A facility used to transmit
television and radio signals and shows/programs.
   RECREATION/COMMUNITY CENTER OR CLUB: A facility that provides a variety of
recreational facilities and programs for community residents or the general
public. Such facilities may include swimming pools, indoor and outdoor sports
courts, exercise facilities and classes, spa facilities, locker rooms, meeting
rooms, dance studios, game rooms, arts and crafts rooms, a restaurant and snack
bar, bar, banquet facilities, lounge area and other similar uses. Recreation
centers include YMCAs, teen centers, and similar facilities and may also
include entertainment facilities or health clubs.
   RECREATION ITEM, PERSONAL: Includes, but is not limited to, bus, boat,
snowmobile, jet ski, horse trailer, motorcycle, and all-terrain vehicle.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping
trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for
recreational or emergency occupancy. Any of the following vehicles which are
licensed for travel on the highway: travel trailer (a vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreation or vacation, or one permanently identified as a travel
trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer); pick-up coach (a structure
designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreation and vacation); motor home (a portable, temporary dwelling to
be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of
a self-propelled vehicle); and camping trailer (a canvas, material or metal
folding structure, mounted on wheels, and designed for travel, recreation and
vacation use).
   RECYCLING/SOLID WASTE TRANSFER CENTER: A facility that is not a junkyard and
in which recoverable resource materials, such as paper products, glassware, and
metal cans are collected, sorted, flattened, crushed, or bundled within a
completely enclosed structure prior to shipment to others who use such resource
materials to manufacture new products.
   RELIGIOUS FACILITY: A building or structure, or group of buildings or
structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for
conducting organized religious services and accessory uses associated
therewith. The term "religious facility" is not to be construed in any way to
include private residences within which religiously related gatherings are
conducted.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: An establishment primarily engaged in the
research, development, testing, and production of high technology electronic,
industrial or scientific products or commodities for sale, but prohibits uses
that may be objectionable by reason of production of offensive odor, dust,
noise, vibration, or storage of hazardous materials. Examples of research and
development establishments include biotechnology, chemical, pharmaceutical,
medical, electrical, transportation, and engineering firms and computer
component manufacturers.
   RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent
property which is reserved or held in public ownership for future street
extension or widening.
   RESORT: A destination point for visitors that generally provides overnight
accommodations and recreation, fitness and spa facilities for persons on
vacation including timeshare and vacation clubs. A resort is self-contained and
provides personal services customarily furnished at hotels, including the
serving of meals and meeting/conference facilities. Buildings and structures in
a resort complement the scenic qualities of the location in which the resort is
situated. Resorts are considered nonresidential uses and are thus not
considered residential dwelling units within the context of any density
calculations or allowable densities set forth in the PADA.
   RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses
as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom, and dining room. Bars and
microbreweries are allowed within restaurants, whether operated by the
restauranteur or by a separate entity, and shall be allowed under the same use
classification as the restaurant when operated within a restaurant.
   RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THROUGH: A restaurant, typically with indoor seating,
which includes drive-up window service for ordering food to go.
   RETAIL SALES: The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under
another use classification. This classification includes department stores,
clothing stores, drugstores, video stores, furniture stores, and businesses
retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items,
jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies, printing and copy supplies and
service, electronic equipment, music, pets and pet supplies, sporting goods,
kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, artwork, art supplies and services,
antiques, collectibles, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor coverings,
office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding
services and installation), and other similar items, but excluding building
material/lumber yards. This definition also includes stores and establishments
for the rental of small tools and equipment.
   RETENTION FACILITY: A constructed basin or constructed underground storage
vessel built to retain all of the storm drainage it receives until it is
absorbed into the soil strata.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way
which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
   ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of agricultural and related products, the majority of which have been
grown on adjacent land.
   ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICALS: All equipment mounted above the roof plane of a
building, including, but not limited to, heating and air conditioning
equipment, antennas, satellite dishes, and other equipment necessary to
establish a controlled interior environment. All roof mounted mechanicals shall
be screened from view.
   ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or
sale of agricultural and related products, the majority of which have been
grown on adjacent land.
   SALES OFFICES/TRAILERS, TEMPORARY: The temporary use of a mobile home,
travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or dwelling unit within a development
project as a sales or rental office for the project.
   SCHOOL, BUSINESS: A commercial or public school providing instruction solely
in professional skills including, but not limited to, business management,
accounting, secretarial skills, sales, marketing and merchandising.
   SCHOOL, COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY: An educational institution authorized by the
state of Idaho to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees.
   SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY/MIDDLE/HIGH: A public or private educational institution
having a curriculum comparable to that required in the public schools of the
state of Idaho.
   SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL/TECHNICAL: A commercial or public establishment offering
training in a skill or trade to be pursued as a career.
   SEAT: For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces
for certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed
or indicated on each twenty four (24) linear inches of benches, pews or space
for loose chairs. A row of benches, pews or loose chairs for every five feet
(5') of seating area shall be considered for determining total possible number
of rows.
   SETBACK: The required distance from a building to a property line or site
improvements including streets, curbs, parking lots, various site driveways and
access roads, walkways, hardscape and walls and in which no building or
structure may be located above ground except as may be provided herein.
   SFSL DRIVE AISLE: A right of way or common lot inclusive of an easement
specific to the SFSL residential zoning district which provides vehicular
access to the rear or side of a property and is primarily intended to provide
access for garages and designated parking. Design and construction standards
shall be the same as private alleys except as otherwise stated within
subsection 11A-2-4(G) and its exhibits (Exhibits 2.2 through 2.8).
   SHOPPING CENTER, COMMUNITY: A group of commercial establishments, planned,
developed, owned and/or managed as a unit and typically containing one hundred
thousand (100,000) to three hundred fifty thousand (350,000) square feet of
gross leasable space designed to serve the needs of the community. A community
shopping center is typically anchored by supermarkets, super drugstores, and
discount department stores and sometimes contains big box retailers selling
such items as apparel, home improvement/furnishings, toys, electronics or
sporting goods.
   SHOPPING CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD: A group of commercial establishments planned,
developed, owned and/or managed as a unit and typically containing thirty
thousand (30,000) to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of gross
leasable space and designed to provide convenience shopping for the day to day
needs of consumers in the neighborhood. A neighborhood shopping center is
typically anchored by a supermarket or drugstore.
   SIGN: Any display or device consisting of attached or painted letters,
symbols or designs, and is intended to communicate business identification, an
advertisement, announcement, direction or other message or attract, distract,
hold, direct or focus attention. Refer to
chapter 3 of this title.
   SITE DRIVEWAY AND ACCESS ROAD: Facilities that are typically privately owned
and maintained, do not conform with public street design standards, are located
on site, serve an individual development (occasionally with separately owned
lots) and do not serve as public streets either by function or appearance.
   SITE FURNISHINGS: Utilitarian outdoor elements intended for pedestrian use
such as benches, trash receptacles, public telephones, newspaper racks,
bollards, drinking fountains, bike racks, parcel delivery service and postal
boxes, and lighting standards.
   SPECIAL CARE FACILITY: A facility used exclusively for one or more of the
following: 1) the treatment of alcohol or drug dependency; 2) the housing and
care of persons with physical or mental illness that requires them to be
confined in an institutional facility as allowed by Idaho Code.
   SPECIAL EVENT: An event or happening organized by any person which will
generate or invite considerable public participation and/or spectators for a
particular and limited purpose and time, including, but not limited to, musical
and dance performances, arts and craft shows, artifact displays, holiday
events, fun runs, roadway foot races, fundraising/charitable events, bike-a-
thons, parades, and fairs. Special events may occur on public or private
property.
   SPRING VALLEY: A six thousand plus (6,000+) acre planned community located
in the North Eagle Foothills in the city of Eagle, which will contain a mix of
residential, commercial, employment, institutional, civic, service,
recreational, and open space uses and which is subject to the PADA.
   SPRING VALLEY COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION (SVCA): A nonprofit corporation of
property owners or associations established for the benefit of its members to
maintain community association owned common areas and facilities, enforce the
Spring Valley CC&Rs and perform other functions directed by its members and
authorized by applicable regulations and land purchase agreements.
   SPRING VALLEY DESIGN GUIDELINES: See
Chapter 3 of this title. A document containing planning principles, design and
development standards, and design review processes required for all development
within Spring Valley.
   SPRING VALLEY DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE (SVDRC): A committee established by
the master developer to review and approve all development, building and site
improvement proposals consistent with the approved standards within Spring
Valley.
   SPRING VALLEY MASTER DECLARATION OF COVENANTS, CONDITIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS
(CC&Rs): A document that is part of the recorded founding documents for the
Spring Valley property. It establishes the basic governance powers for the
Spring Valley Community Association and its board of directors.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The specifications as specified in this chapter or
as officially adopted by the city.
   STATE: The state of Idaho.
   STORAGE VESSEL: An earthen basin or tank or vault structure employed to
store liquid. Earthen basins used to store storm drainage may be filled with
porous media (usually gravel) to attain structural stability, in which case the
volume of available storage is taken as the volume of the interstitial voids of
the porous media.
   STORM DRAIN FACILITY: Facilities by which stormwater is collected and
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems,
streets, gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, and natural and humanmade or
altered drainage ditches/channels/lakes/reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
   STORM DRAINAGE: The water running off the surfaces of a site as a result of
precipitation on the site (including rain, hail meltwater and snow meltwater).
   STORY: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the
ceiling immediately above it.
   STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also
includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard,
land, place and other such terms.
   STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/
or heavy traffic.
   STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic
from minor streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street connected to another street at one end only and
provided with a turnaround space at its terminus.
   STREET, DEAD END: A street connecting to another street at one end only and
not having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
   STREET, FRONTAGE: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street, to provide access to abutting properties.
   STREET, MINOR: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to
abutting properties.
   STREET, PRIVATE: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties
under separate ownership and which is not dedicated to or officially accepted
by a public entity, but not including a driveway as defined in section
11A-13C-2-1 of this chapter.
   STREET FAIR: Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live
entertainment, or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures
for a maximum period of seven (7) days. This classification includes block
parties.
   STREETSCAPE OR STREET SCENE: All of the plant material, walkways, walls,
community monumentation and street furnishing adjacent to a Spring Valley
roadway that establish the visual character of the street.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on
the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes,
walls, fences and billboards.
   SUBDIVIDER: The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The subdivider need not be the owner of the
property; however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient
proprietary rights in the property to represent the owner.
   SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing any lot, tract or parcel of
land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
development, which may also include the dedication of a public street.
Subdivisions shall be divided into "minor subdivision" and "major subdivision",
as those terms are defined in this chapter. However, this chapter shall not
apply to any of the following:
      1.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does
not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not increase the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
      2.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent
or a court decree for the distribution of property;
      3.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as
defined and allowed in the Idaho Code;
      4.   Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan;
      5.   Acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in
conformance with the comprehensive plan; and
      6.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of present land usage.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision not able to qualify as a minor
subdivision, including, but not limited to, subdivision of two (2) or more
lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the
local government facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any subdivision containing not more than ten (10) lots
fronting on an existing street; not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements;
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property;
and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the applicable PUMP,
official map, or this chapter.
   SUPER PAD/LARGE LOT: One or more lots, each at least two (2) acres in size,
identified as super pad(s)/large lot(s) on a plat for grading and/or further
development. Such super pad(s)/large lot(s) will be graded and will have
adequate roads and utilities stubbed to such lots in preparation for
replatting. Such super pad(s)/large lot(s) are not considered buildable lots
until replatted as provided in article B of this chapter.
   SURETY: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the
developer or his agent to the city clerk, which guarantees that the developer
will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an approved
plat, and provides that if the developer defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the developer or his agent will pay damages up
to the limit of the surety, or the financial instrument will itself complete
the requirements of the approved plat.
   SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land surveyor
to do professional surveying.
   TOWER: Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, similar structure, or
combination thereof, with a "height", as defined in this chapter, in excess of
fifteen feet (15'), including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and
masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.
   TOWNHOME/TOWNHOUSE: An attached single-family dwelling unit within a row of
similar dwelling units sharing one or more common walls and in which ownership
includes the building and the lot on which the building sits.
   USE, ACCESSORY: A use or structure that is incidental and subordinate to an
established principal use of a property and is located on the same lot as the
principal use. Accessory uses/structures include, but are not limited to,
detached carports and garages, covered parking structures, trash enclosures,
pool houses and cabanas, barns, corrals, stables, caretaker's quarters,
guardhouses, storage sheds, outdoor storage structures, microwave and satellite
dish antennas, and similar uses and structures. Accessory uses shall require a
zoning permit when modified or developed separately from the principal use.
   USE, PRINCIPAL: The primary or main use of the land, building or structure,
as distinguished from an accessory or temporary use.
   USE, TEMPORARY: Any activity on a site approved by the administrator for a
limited time of operation, as set forth in
chapter 3 of this title. A temporary use is governed by a zoning permit.
   UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, stormwater and similar facilities providing service to and used by
the public.
   UTILITY STRUCTURES OR APPURTENANCES: Elements of the utility system that
extend above ground and can be seen. Utility appurtenances include, but are not
limited to, electronic transformers, switch and junction boxes, telephone
switch and junction boxes, cable television boxes, gas vents and valves,
irrigation controllers and valve boxes, security and camera, satellite dishes
and antennas of all types.
   VALNOVA: A six thousand plus (6,000+) acre planned community located in the
North Eagle Foothills in the city of Eagle, Idaho, which will contain a mix of
residential, commercial, employment, institutional, civic, service,
recreational, and open space uses and which is subject to the PADA.
   VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this chapter as to lot size,
lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, or
other ordinance provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the
placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not
be considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant
only upon a showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site
and the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
   VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming,
diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those
who are in need of medical or surgical attention and may include overnight
accommodations on the premises for the treatment, observation and/or
recuperation. It may also include boarding that is an accessory use to the
primary activity.
   VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in
relation to a larger area.
   VIEW CUL-DE-SAC: A cul-de-sac that terminates next to a roadway, park or
open space area and has a view opening that may consist of a view fence or view
wall with a gate for pedestrian access.
   VIEW FENCE: A fence constructed of metal pickets, glass or other approved
material that allows full or partial viewing through.
   VIEW WALL: A security or privacy screen that is part solid wall and part
view fence.
   VINEYARD: Land used for the growing of grapes including storage of related
equipment and accessory uses. It may also include a winery, tasting room, wine
cellar, bottling, and any other uses related to the production of wine.
   WALL, COMMUNITY: A wall within and along the perimeter of Spring Valley that
is designed to enhance the community theme.
   WALL, PARCEL: A wall not designated as a community wall within a
neighborhood, including a wall between individual parcels and rear and side
yard privacy walls.
   WAREHOUSING AND STORAGE, MINISTORAGE: Provision of storage space for
household or commercial goods within an enclosed building with direct public
access to individual storage spaces. This may include vehicle storage to a
maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the site. Where greater than twenty percent
(20%) of the site is allocated to vehicle storage, the vehicle storage must be
treated as outdoor storage.
   WATER CONSERVING PLANT MATERIALS: Plant materials that require little or no
irrigation.
   WHOLESALING DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE: Storage and distribution facilities
without direct public access for merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users, to other wholesalers
and to members of such businesses.
   WINERY: A facility dedicated to producing, warehousing, distributing, and
selling of wine and other associated products. A winery may include a crushing
facility, bottling equipment, barrel storage, agricultural equipment and
storage. A tasting room, restaurant, events center, and retail sales associated
with the winery may be included as accessory uses.
   YARD: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
by any structure or portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the
general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments
and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
      FRONT YARD: A yard extending between the side lot lines across the front
of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
      INTERIOR SIDE YARD: A yard extending from the principal building to the
side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines
establishing the front and rear yards.
      REAR YARD: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a
lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
      STREET SIDE YARD: A yard extending from the principal building to the
secondary street that adjoins the lot between the lines establishing the front
and rear yards.
   ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: The location of a building on a lot in such a
manner that one or more building sides have no (zero) building setback (or yard
requirements) and rests directly on a side or rear lot line.
   ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by the administrator authorizing the uses
of land and structures, and the characteristics of the uses. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014; amd. Ord. 889, 1-10-2022; Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 2
PERMITTED USES
SECTION:
11A-2-1: Uses
11A-2-2: Land Use Districts
11A-2-3: Land Use Standards
11A-2-4: Setbacks And General Lot Development Regulations
11A-2-1 USES:
Spring Valley is an approximately six thousand seventeen (6,017) acre planned
community located in the North Eagle Foothills and will contain a mix of
residential, commercial, employment, public, institutional, civic, service,
recreational and open space uses. The zoning of the site is residential one
with a development agreement (R-1-DA) as identified on the city of Eagle's
official zoning map in section 8-2-1 of the Eagle city code. The maximum
development intensity for the site is seven thousand one hundred sixty (7,160)
residential units and two hundred forty five (245) acres of nonresidential
uses. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-2-2 LAND USE DISTRICTS:
Each planning unit master plan (PUMP) shall identify the land use district(s)
proposed on each parcel in accordance with
chapter 7 of this title. The following land use districts are found within
Spring Valley:
   A.   Village Center: The village center (VC) district is the heart of the
community and the main activity center for Spring Valley and is designed to
accommodate commercial, community, residential and cultural activities. This
district may include shopping, business and professional offices, research and
development, hotel and resort uses, vineyards and wineries, cultural,
educational, civic, community facilities, and parks and recreational facilities
to serve the entire Spring Valley population. Medium to high density
residential areas may be included as a secondary use and residential units may
be stacked vertically above business uses.
   B.   Mixed Use: Mixed use districts are comprised of highway mixed use (HMU)
and mixed use (MU) and are intended to provide a variety and mixture of retail,
business, residential and employment opportunities for Spring Valley and area
residents. The HMU district is located next to State Highway 16 at the northern
entrance to Spring Valley and the MU district is located interior to the
community. The HMU district is designed to provide highway oriented businesses
as well as similar and more intensive uses than found in the MU district. These
districts will accommodate office, flex space, light manufacturing, research
and development, shopping, business, lodging, professional and support
commercial services, primary, secondary and higher educational facilities,
parks and recreation facilities, vineyards and wineries, and residential uses.
   C.   Commercial: Commercial districts are intended to provide commercial
facilities designed for use by community or area residents that will provide
most of the daily and weekly support services that residents require on a
regular basis. Commercial centers may be community commercial (CC) or
neighborhood commercial (NC) and may include retail and convenience businesses,
shopping centers, professional offices, and vineyards and wineries. Residential
uses may be included in the NC district.
   D.   Residential: Residential districts are intended to provide residential
neighborhoods with a range of lot sizes and housing types depending on
location, site conditions, and market influences to create a community that
emphasizes housing diversity. Residential districts are comprised of single-
family detached (RR, ER, SF1, SF2, SF3, SFZL, SFSL), single-family attached
(SFA) and multi-family (MF1, MF2) at various densities and mixes. Residential
districts may also include schools, daycare facilities, worship sites, parks,
playfields, and other recreational facilities, golf courses, resorts, vineyards
and wineries, and other complementary uses. Some residential uses are also
permitted in nonresidential land use districts as shown in section
11A-2-3, table 2.1 of this chapter. Refer to section
11A-2-4, table 2.2 of this chapter for residential land use descriptions and
density ranges.
   E.   Open Space: Open space districts consist of community open space (COS)
and regional open space (ROS).
      1.   Community Open Space: May be allowed in any of the other land use
districts and is land set aside for recreation, agriculture, habitat,
vegetation, scenic, or similar uses and is intended to primarily serve the
Spring Valley community. Community open space may include public, semipublic,
and private recreational facilities, amphitheaters, golf courses, pathways and
trails, landscape zones in and adjacent to major roadways including areas
outside of a dedicated right of way, greenbelts, cultural, community,
educational, and quasi-public facilities, equestrian centers and trailheads, as
well as parks, playfields and natural open spaces. Agricultural uses, such as
vineyards, wineries and plant nurseries, are considered community open space.
Facilities and tracts of land owned by the Spring Valley Community Association
are also considered community open space.
      2.   Regional Open Space: Regional open space is intended to serve the
general public and may be adjacent to, or provide connection to, large scale
regional open space within the city's North Eagle Foothills planning area.
Regional open space may include many of the amenities provided in community
open space as well as active regional parks, regional trail corridors (such as
the Big Gulch Regional Park, trail and open space corridor), and large natural
areas planned for dedication as permanent natural open space as part of an
Eagle Regional Park and Willow Creek Road open space corridor. Regional open
space may be owned and maintained by the city, the Spring Valley Community
Association, a land trust or other conservation group or entity. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014)
11A-2-3 LAND USE STANDARDS:
This chapter indicates which uses are permitted in each land use district.
Table 2.1 of this section identifies those uses permitted by right, those uses
that require approval by conditional use permit, and those uses that are
prohibited. The asterisk (*) in the table's final column refers to special
performance standards and/or limitations applicable to a particular use. These
special standards are found in
chapter 4, "Specific Use Standards", of this title.
TABLE 2.1
LAND USE TABLE
 
P                = Permitted use
C                = Use permitted by conditional use permit, in accordance with
                   chapter 8 of this title
                   Use either permitted by right or permitted by conditional
P/C              = use permit as defined in the specific land use standards for
                   that use
A                = Accessory use
Blank/not listed = Prohibited uses
 
     Districts                                                                 See Land
     Village Mixed  Commercial Residential                             Open    Use
     Center  Use                                                       Space   Standards
Uses                                                                           (Chapter
     VC      HMU MU CC NC      RR ER SF1 SF2 SF3 SFZL SFSL SFA MF1 MF2 COS ROS 4 Of This
                                                                               Title)
                 Districts                                                                See Land
                 Village Mixed  CommercialResidential                             Open    Use
                 Center  Use                                                      Space   Standards
Uses                                                                                      (Chapter
                 VC      HMU MU CC NC     RR ER SF1 SF2 SF3 SFZL SFSL SFA MF1 MF2 COS ROS 4 Of This
                                                                                          Title)

Commercial:
 Adult business
 Ambulance              C   C  C  C
  services
 Artist studios P       P   P     P                                      C   C
 Arts and       P       P   P  P  P                                              P   C
  crafts shows
 Auto body              C      C                                                         *
  shops
 Auto fuel      C       P   P  P  C
  islands
  Auto gas
 stations/      C       P   P  P  C                                                      *
  service shops
 Auto washing   C              C  C
  facility
  Automotive
 emission       C       P   P  P  C
  testing
  facility
  Auto/
 recreational           P   C  C                                                         *
  vehicle sales
  Auto repair
 and service            P   C  C                                                         *
  shops (major)
  Auto repair
 and service    P       P   P  P  P                                                      *
  shops (minor)
  Auto/truck
 rental         C       P   C  C                                                         *
  agencies
  Banks/
 financial      P       P   P  P  P
  institutions
 Bars/pubs/     P       P   P  P  C                                                      *
  nightclubs
 Bar, wine/     P       P   P  P  C
  tasting room
 Beauty/barber  P       P   P  P  P
  shop
  Bed and
 breakfast      P       P   P            C  C  C                                         *
  facilities
  Building
 materials/     P       P   P  P  P
  lumber yards
  Car washes
 (full and      P       P   P  P  A                                                      *
  self- service)
 Catering       P              P  P
  service
 Cemetery                                C
 Check cashing/
  payday loans
 Childcare
  facilities:
  Daycare
 centers/       C       C   C  C  C      C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C           *
  preschools
 Family/home    C       C   C  C  C      C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C           *
  daycare
 Group daycare  C       C   C  C  C      C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C           *
  Clinics/urgent
 care           P       P   P  P  P
  facilities
  Clubs or
 lodges, public P       P   P  P  P                                              P       *
  and private
  Coffee
 roasting       C       C   C  C  C
  facility
 Convenience    P/C     P/C P/ P/ P/C                                                    *
  stores                     C  C
 Drugstore      P       P   P  P  C
  Dry cleaners/
 laundries/     P       P   P  P  P
  laundromats
  Emergency
 healthcare     P       P   P  P  C
  facilities
  Entertainment
  facilities
 (excluding     P       P   P  P  C                                              P       *
  shooting
  ranges and gun
  clubs)
 Fiberoptic     P/C     P/C P/ P/ P/C    P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
  internet hut               C  C         C  C
 Flex space     P       P   P  P  P                                                      *
 Food and       P       P   P  P  P
  beverage sales
 Hardware store P       P   P  P  C
  Health clubs,
 spas, weight   P       P   P  P  P
  reduction
  salons
 Heliports              C                C                                       C       *
 Home           A       A   A  A  A      A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   A           *
  occupations
  Hospitals
 (included      P       P   P  C
  related
  facilities)
 Hotels and     P       P   P  P  P                                                      *
  motels
 Junkyards
 Kennels and    C       C   C  C  C      A  A                                            *
  pet shops
 Laboratories           P
 Laundromats    P       P   P  P  P
 Liquor stores  C       C   C  C  C                                                      *
  Live
 entertainment  P       P   P  P  P      C                                       P   P   *
  events
 Manufacturing, P       P   P                                                            *
  light
 Microbrewery   P       P   P  P  P
 Mortuaries/            P   P  P                                                         *
  funeral homes
  Motion
  picture/radio/
 television     P       P   P  P  C                                                      *
  production
  facilities
  Nursing/
  convalescent
 home/          C       P   P  C                                         C   C
  transitional
  housing
  Offices,
 business and   P       P   P  P  P
  professional
  Office,
 medical and    P       P   P  P  P
  dental
 Outdoor        P       P   P  P  P      A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   A   A   A   *
  storage
  Parking lots/
 parking        P       P   P  P  P
  garages
  (commercial)
 Pawnshop/auto
  title loans
 Personal       P       P   P  P  P
  improvement
 Personal       P       P   P  P  P
  services
 Photographic   P       P   P  P
  studio
  Printing and/
 or             P       P   P  P  P
  blueprinting
 Public service P/C     P/C P/ P/ P/C    P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
  facility                   C  C         C  C
  Radio and
 television     P       P   P  P  C                                                      *
  broadcast
  stations
  Recreational
 vehicle                P   C  C                                                         *
  storage
  Recycling/
 solid waste            C   C  C                                                         *
  transfer
  center
  Rental
  service/
 storage yard           P   C  C                                                         *
  (large
  equipment)
 Research and   P       P   P  P
  development
 Resorts        P           P     P      P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C     *
                                          C  C
  Restaurant
 (with drive-   C       C   C  C  C
  through)
  Restaurants
  (with and
 without drive- P       P   P  P  C                                                      *
  throughs) and
  catering
  establishments
 Retail sales   P       P   P  P  P
  Shooting
 ranges/gun             C   C  C                                                         *
  clubs (indoor)
  Shopping
 center,                P      P
  community
  Shopping
 center,        P                 P
  neighborhood
  Small engine
 repair (mower, C       P   P  C  C
  chain saw,
  etc.)
 Special care           C   C  C                                                         *
  facility
  Veterinary
 animal         P       P   P  P  P      C  C                                            *
  hospitals/
  clinics
  Warehousing,
 storage,       C       P   P  P  C                                                      *
  ministorage
  Wholesaling,
 distribution,          P   P  P                                                         *
  and storage
Residential:
  Boarding/
 lodging house/ C       P   C  P  C
  dormitory
 Dwelling:
 Accessory              A   A     A      A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A                   *
 Multi-family   P       P   P     P                                      P   P
 Single-family  P       P   P     P            P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P
  attached
 Single-family  P       P   P     P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P
  detached
 Equestrian                              P  P                                            *
  lots
  Home
 occupation,    P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P           *
  Class A and B
  Home
 occupation,                             C  C                                            *
  Class C
  Living
 quarters,              A   A     A      A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A                   *
  accessory
Civic, community
and public/
quasi-public:
  Community
 association    P       P   P  P  P      P                               P   P   P       *
  buildings and
  facilities
 Community      P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
  gardens
  Community
 information    P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P       *
  centers
 Conference     P       P   P  P  P
  centers
 Electric       P/C     P/C P/ P/ P/C    P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C     *
  substations                C  C         C  C
  Equestrian
 centers                P   P            P/ P/                                   P   P   *
  (public and                             C  C
  private)
 Fire/police    P       P   P  P  P      P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
  stations                                C  C
  Golf courses/
 clubhouses                 P     P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P
  (public and
  private)
  Government
 buildings/     P       P   P  P  P                                              P   P   *
  offices
 Libraries      P/C     P/C P/ P/ P/C    P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
                             C  C         C  C
  Maintenance
  facilities
 related to     A       A   A  A  A      A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   A   A   A   *
  open space
  uses
 Museums        P       P   P  P  P                                              P   P   *
  Parks, open
 space and open P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
  space
  easements
  Personal
  wireless
  facilities
 (enclosed      P       P   P  P  P      C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   P   P   P   P   *
  building,
  height - 35'
  or less)
  Personal
  wireless
  facilities
 (enclosed      C       C   C  C  C      C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C   C   C   *
  building,
  height - over
  35')
  Personal
  wireless
 facilities     P       P   P  P  P                                              C   C   *
  (height - 35'
  or less)
  Personal
  wireless
 facilities     C       C   C  C  C                                              C   C   *
  (height - 36'
  - 50')
  Personal
  wireless
 facilities     C       C   C  C  C                                              C   C   *
  (height - over
  50')
 Post offices/  P       P   P  P  P
  annexes
 Pump stations  P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
  Recreation/
 community      P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
  centers
  Recreation
  fields, courts                          P/ P/
 and other      P       P   P  P  P      C  C  P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
  sports
  facilities
 Religious      P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P
  facilities
  Satellite and
 microwave      P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   C   *
  dishes
  Shooting
 ranges/gun                                                                      P/C P/C *
  clubs
  (outdoor)
  Wastewater                 P/ P/        P/ P/
 treatment      P/C     P/C C  C  P/C    C  C  P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
  facilities
 Water storage  P/C     P/C P/ P/ P/C    P/ P/ P/C P/C P/C P/C  P/C  P/C P/C P/C P/C P/C *
  facilities                 C  C         C  C
Educational:
 Schools:
 Business       P       P   P  P
  Colleges and
  universities
 (including     P       P   P  P
  satellite
  campuses)
  Elementary/
  middle/high
 schools        P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P
  (public and
  private)
 Vocational/    P       P   P  P                                                 P/C P/C *
  Technical
Agricultural:
 Agriculture    P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
 Farm                                    P                                       P   P   *
  Plant
 nurseries/sod  P       P   P  P  P      C  C                                    P   P   *
  farms (retail
  and wholesale)
 Vineyards      P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
 Wineries       P       P   P  P  P      C  C  C                                 P   P   *
Industrial:                                                               
 Oil and gas    P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
  extraction
  Oil and gas
 post-
  extraction
Temporary:
  Aggregate
  processing,
 asphalt and    C       C   C  C  C      C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C   C       *
  concrete batch
  plants
 Carnivals and  P       P   C  C  C                                              C   C   *
  circuses
 Farmers'       P       P   P  P  P      C  C                                    P   P   *
  markets
 Holiday/       P       P   P  P  P      P  P                                    P       *
  seasonal sales
 Roadside       C       C   C  C  C      C  C                                    P       *
  stands
 Special events P       P   P  P  P                                              P   P   *
 Street fair    P           P  P  P                                              P   C
  Temporary
 construction   P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P   P   P   *
  offices/yards
  Temporary
 sales offices/ P       P   P  P  P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P           *
  trailers
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 889, 1-10-2022; Ord. 924,
8-27-2024)
11A-2-4 SETBACKS AND GENERAL LOT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
These standards are designed to ensure that development within Spring Valley
will produce a built environment of stable, desirable character which is
harmonious with existing and future development and is consistent with the
intent and purpose of the Spring Valley master plan. Centralized water and
wastewater facilities are required for all subdivision and lot split
applications in all land use districts exceeding one dwelling unit per two (2)
acres.
   A.   General Setback Standards:
      1.   Minimum residential and nonresidential district setbacks are
outlined in tables 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 of this section. More restrictive setbacks
may be established through the Spring Valley design guidelines prepared by the
master developer.
      2.   Dwelling units located in the VC, HMU, MU, and NC districts shall
use the setback standards for either the applicable nonresidential district or
for the corresponding residential district based on density. (For example, a
single-family detached neighborhood with a density of up to 10 units per acre
in the VC district would use the standards of the SF3 residential district.)
      3.   Dwelling units that are stacked above nonresidential uses shall use
the setbacks of the nonresidential district.
      4.   Dwelling units shall adhere to the setbacks outlined in table 2.2 of
this section unless identified in this subsection or building envelopes are
used in which case the more restrictive setbacks shall apply.
      5.   Residential setbacks for front, side and rear loaded single- family
units shall be measured from the back of sidewalk, or back of curb if no
sidewalk exists, or edge of pavement if no curb exists, to the foundation of a
building or the face of a garage. All other setbacks shall be measured to the
property line or as otherwise noted.
      6.   Driveway length shall be nineteen feet (19') minimum beyond the back
of sidewalk, or back of curb if no sidewalk exists, or edge of pavement if no
curb exists to allow vehicles to park completely outside the vehicular or
pedestrian travel corridor, or three to five feet (3 - 5') to prevent a vehicle
from parking in the driveway. No more than three (3) consecutive dwelling units
in a row shall have front loaded driveways between three to five feet (3 - 5')
in length. There shall be no such restriction for rear loaded dwelling units.
      7.   Bay windows, nooks, architectural pop outs and appendages,
fireplaces, cabinets designed to screen utility meters and similar
architectural features may encroach no more than two feet (2') into any
setback, provided they remain at least three feet (3') from the side property
lines and ten feet (10') from the front property line, and do not increase the
living space within the home at the floor line. The maximum width of such
structures shall not exceed thirteen feet (13') in total for any facade.
      8.   Roof overhangs, cornices, and similar architectural features may
encroach no more than two feet (2') into any setback provided they remain at
least three feet (3') from the property line.
      9.   Balconies must maintain the setback required for the structure to
which they are attached and may not extend into the required setback area
except on lots which adjoin a golf course, park area, common open space, or
similar open space. In such case the balcony may extend into the setback area
toward the open space a distance equal to fifty percent (50%) of the required
setback provided they remain at least five feet (5') from the property line.
Balconies on multi-family units may also overhang a sidewalk up to five feet
(5') so long as they do not encroach into the public right of way.
      10.   Interior fire escapes are encouraged. Exterior fire escapes shall
encroach no more than six feet (6') into any setback provided they remain at
least three feet (3') from the property line. Exterior fire escapes are allowed
in the side or rear yards only.
      11.   Accessory dwellings, including guesthouses, casitas, and caretaker/
domestic units shall comply with the setback and height standards for the
district they are located in as set forth in tables 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 of this
section or as otherwise described in
chapter 4 of this title.
      12.   Accessory structures shall not be permitted in the front or street
side yards except for garages and accessory dwellings which shall comply with
the setback standards of the applicable residential district. Accessory
structures less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area and less than
seven feet (7') in height are permitted in the interior side or rear yards, but
must remain at least five feet (5') from the property line and maintain a
minimum separation of six feet (6') from the principal dwelling. Accessory
structures one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area or larger shall comply
with the minimum setbacks shown in tables 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 of this section and
shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty five feet (25').
      13.   Attached patio covers, awnings, carports, trellises and similar
structures and architectural elements within residential districts may encroach
no more than two feet (2') into the front setback and may encroach into the
side and rear setbacks up to fifteen feet (15') provided they remain at least
five feet (5') from the property line. These setbacks are measured from the
supporting posts; however, overhangs may extend up to three feet (3') from a
property line. Such structures must remain open without the use of siding,
screens or other enclosures. Enclosed structures must conform to the setback
standards for the principal dwelling.
      14.   Awnings, trellises and similar structures and architectural
elements in nonresidential districts may overhang a sidewalk up to six feet
(6') so long as they do not encroach into the public right of way or affect a
tree canopy.
      15.   Open porches for residential dwellings may project up to five feet
(5') into the required front yard setback provided they remain at least three
feet (3') from the back of a sidewalk or eight feet (8') from the back of a
curb if no sidewalk exists.
      16.   Swimming pools shall only be permitted in the side or rear yard
areas. Swimming pools shall maintain a minimum setback of three feet (3') from
the water's edge to property lines and easements. Any setback, if required,
from the dwelling or other buildings on the same lot shall be determined by the
city building department.
   B.   Building Heights:
      1.   Building heights shall be measured from the finished floor elevation
closest to the finished grade to the top of the roof. The height of the
building may follow the slope of the contour of the lot (grade adaptive
architecture). "Top of roof" means ridgeline or the highest point of any
architectural element concealing rooftop equipment, excluding chimneys and
vents. The height restrictions are not intended to limit the number of stories.
      2.   Height restrictions do not apply to chimneys, which are governed by
the building code.
      3.   Themed, nonhabitable structures or parts of structures, such as
church steeples and clock towers, may be allowed up to sixty feet (60') in
height in the CC, NC and residential districts and may be allowed up to seventy
five feet (75') in height in the VC, HMU and MU districts with a conditional
use permit, except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard
to the safe landing and takeoff of aircraft at an established airport.
      4.   Refer to tables 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 of this section for maximum
building heights.
   C.   Residential Density:
      1.   Residential density, as shown on table 2.2 of this section, shall be
determined on a gross area basis. Gross area includes the area within the
adjacent right of way to the centerline of the street prior to any right of way
dedication.
   D.   Refuse Storage/Disposal: Every parcel with a multi-family or commercial
use shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall
be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated by the use and must be
a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any single-family residential property. The
receptacle shall be screened from public view on at least three (3) sides by a
solid wall or structure that is constructed to be a minimum of 1-foot (1')
above the height of the trash and/or recycle receptacle within the collection
area measured from finish surface and on the fourth side by a solid gate not
less than the height of the trash and/or recycle receptacle. Trash structures
must be compatible in materials with the principal building(s). Trash
receptacles for single-family homes must be stored within the enclosed garage
or screened from the right of way behind a fence.
   E.   Hillside Development And Grade Adaptive Housing: Guidelines for
hillside development and grade adaptive housing are contained in the grading
guidelines and hillside development standards for Spring Valley.
   F.   Side And Rear Yards For Nonresidential Uses Abutting Residential
Districts: Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located nor conducted
closer than forty feet (40') to any lot line of a residential district; except
that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to fifty percent (50%) of the
requirement if acceptable screening approved by the city is provided. Such
screening shall be a masonry or solid fence between four (4) and eight feet
(8') in height, maintained in good condition and free of all advertising or
other signs along with landscaping in accordance with the buffer area and
screening requirements in the Spring Valley landscape guidelines. Landscaping
provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall not be allowed.
   TABLE 2.2
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Single-Family Residential Uses
District Maximum Density Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks Maximum Height
Single-Family Residential Uses
District        Maximum Density Minimum Lot   Minimum Setbacks Maximum Height
                                Area
                                              Front:
                                              Front garage:
                                              50'
(RR) Rural      1 unit per 2                  Side garage: 30'
residential1    gross acres     1.0 acre      Living: 40'      35'
                                              Interior side:
                                              20'
                                              Street side: 30'
                                              Rear: 30'
                                              Front:
                                              Front garage:
                                              30'
(ER) Estate     2 units per                   Side garage: 25'
residential1    gross acre      0.3 acre      Living: 25'      35'
                                              Interior side:
                                              10'
                                              Street side: 25'
                                              Rear: 30'
                                              Front:
                                              Front garage:
                                              25'
                                              Side garage: 15'
(SF1) Single-   5 units per                   Living: 15'
family          gross acre      8,000 sq. ft. Interior side:   35'
detached1                                     7.5'
                                              Street side: 20'
                                              Rear: 25'
                                              Alley garage: 5'
                                              or 19' or more
                                              Front:
                                              Front garage:
                                              20'
                                              Side garage: 10'
(SF2) Single-   7 units per                   Living: 10'
family          gross acre      6,000 sq. ft. Interior side:   35'
detached1                                     5'
                                              Street side: 15'
                                              Rear: 20'
                                              Alley garage: 5'
                                              or 19' or more
                                              Front:
                                              Front garage:
                                              20'
                                              Side garage: 10'
(SF3) Single-   10 units per                  Living: 10'
family detached gross acre      4,000 sq. ft. Interior side:   35'
                                              5'
                                              Street side: 15'
                                              Rear: 15'
                                              Alley garage: 5'
                                              or 19' or more
                                              Front: See note
                                              2
(SFZL) Single-                                Interior side:
family zero lot 10 units per    4,000 sq. ft. 10'              35'
line2,3         gross acre                    Street side: 15'
                                              Rear: 15'
                                              Alley garage: 5'
                                              or 19' or more
                                              See subsection
                                              G, "Single-
(SFSL) Single-  12 units per                  Family Special
family special  gross acre      3,000 sq. ft. Lot (SFSL)       38'
lot                                           Development
                                              Standards", of
                                              this section
                                              Front: See note
                                              2
(SFA) Single-                                 Interior side:
family          18 units per    n/a           5'               38'
attached2,3     gross acre                    Street side: 15'
                                              Rear: 15'
                                              Alley garage: 5'
                                              or 19' or more
 
Notes:
   1.    In the RR, ER and SF1 districts, the rear setback may be reduced to 20
feet if the rear property line is adjacent to open space that is a minimum of
50 feet wide. In the SF2 district, the rear setback may be reduced to 15 feet
if the same condition exists.
   2.    In the SFZL and SFA districts, the front building setback, exclusive
of the garage, may be eight feet (8'). The front setback to a side entry garage
may also be eight feet (8'). The setback to a front entry garage shall be
either nineteen feet (19') or more or three to five feet (3' to 5'). Setbacks
between five feet (5') and nineteen feet (19') are not allowed.
   3.    In the SFZL district, the side setback shown is for the nonzero lot
line of the dwelling. In the SFA district, the side setback shown is for the
nonparty wall side of the dwelling.
 
    TABLE 2.3
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 
Multi-Family Residential Uses
District       Maximum Density Minimum Open    Minimum Setbacks Maximum Height
                               Space
                                               20' from the
                                               exterior
(MF1) Medium   28 units per                    property lines   45' (60' in the
density multi- acre            20% of the site of the           VC, HMU and MU
family                                         development and  districts)
                                               10' between
                                               buildings 1
                                               20' from the
                                               exterior
(MF2) High     40 units per                    property lines   45' (60' in the
density multi- acre            20% of the site of the           VC, HMU and MU
family                                         development and  districts)
                                               10' between
                                               buildings 1
 
Note:
   1.   In all multi-family districts, garage door setbacks shall be either
nineteen feet (19') or more or three to five feet (3' to 5'). Setbacks between
five feet (5') and nineteen feet (19') are not allowed.
 
    TABLE 2.4
   NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Nonresidential Uses
District Minimum  Maximum FAR Minimum Setbacks Maximum Height
         Lot Area
Nonresidential Uses
District                  Minimum  Maximum FAR Minimum Setbacks  Maximum Height
                          Lot Area
                                               Front: 0'
(VC) Village center       n/a      4.0         Interior side: 0' 60'
                                               Street side: 0'
                                               Rear: 0'
                                               Front: 0'
(HMU and MU) Highway      n/a      4.0         Interior side: 0' 60'
mixed use and mixed use                        Street side: 0'
                                               Rear: 0'
                                               Front: 20'
(CC) Community commercial 10 acres 0.5         Interior side: 0' 40'
                                               Street side: 0'
                                               Rear: 0'
                                               Front: 15'
(NC) Neighborhood         3 acres  0.5         Interior side: 0' 35'
commercial                                     Street side: 10'
                                               Rear: 0'
 
Note: The minimum on site landscape requirement for any nonresidential parcel
is 10 percent of the lot area. The intent of this requirement may be satisfied
by interior plazas of building, rooftop gardens and parking lot landscape
consistent with
chapter 3  of this title. This requirement may be waived if the lot coverage is
above 80 percent.
   TABLE 2.5
   OPEN SPACE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 
Open Space Uses
District                   Development Standards
COS (Community Open Space) For specific land use standards for uses proposed
                           within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional
                           Open Space District (ROS), refer to the specific
ROS (Regional Open Space)  land use as defined within
                           11A-4-4.
 
   G.   Single-Family Special Lot (SFSL) Development Standards: The SFSL
district offers alternative site planning and housing mix opportunities from
the typical single-family detached development. SFSL projects shall conform to
the following:
      1.   Applicability: A parcel may be developed using a combination of SFSL
types.
      2.   Development Standards: Development standards for each SFSL type are
shown in exhibits 2.2 through 2.8 of this section. Alternative SFSL types may
be added to these standards in the future through a modification of these
standards (see
Chapter 8 of this title) to reflect new housing designs and neighborhood
configurations.
      3.   Parking:
         a.   Two (2) enclosed garage spaces are required for each dwelling
unit. Tandem garage spaces shall satisfy this requirement.
         b.   All SFSL projects shall also provide guest parking spaces as
follows:
            (1)   One guest space shall be provided for every four (4) units.
            (2)   On street parking is acceptable for guest parking when
sufficient street width exists per ACHD road standards and there are no
conflicts with utilities or driveways. When off street guest parking areas are
provided in lieu of on street parking, such parking areas shall be distributed
as evenly as possible throughout the SFSL project.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-693.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-695.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-697.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-699.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-701.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-703.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-705.png]
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 889, 1-10-2022; Ord. 924,
8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION:
11A-3-1: General Applicability
11A-3-2: Purpose And Goals
11A-3-3: Effect Of Other Provisions
11A-3-4: Definitions
11A-3-5: Eagle Architecture And Site Design Book (EASD)
11A-3-6: Design Requirements, Objectives And Considerations
11A-3-7: Landscape And Buffer Area Requirements
11A-3-8: Signage
11A-3-9: Lighting
11A-3-10: Administrative And Board Level Applications
11A-3-11: Application Requirements
11A-3-12: Notification
11A-3-13: Design Review Application Processing
11A-3-14: Appeals
11A-3-15: Terms Of Approval
11A-3-16: Modifications
11A-3-17: Restrictions On Other Required Documents
11A-3-18: Sureties
11A-3-19: Inspection
11A-3-1 GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
This title applies to all proposed development located within Spring Valley and
requires the submittal of a design review application pursuant to this title
and fee as prescribed from time to time by the city council.
An individual single-family detached dwelling on a single parcel is
specifically excluded from the requirements of design review. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014; amd. Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
11A-3-2 PURPOSE AND GOALS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this title is to:
      1.   Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and to
provide a method by which the city may implement this interdependence to the
benefit of the community.
      2.   Encourage the development of private property in harmony with the
desired character of the city and in conformance with the guidelines herein
provided with due regard to the public and private interests involved.
      3.   Provide planning and design guidelines to give specific direction
for development, while allowing for flexibility that promotes creative, market
driven development proposals.
   B.   Goals: The general theme of the design review overlay district is to
specify desirable building and landscape architectural styles and materials to
create a sustainable and pleasing environment for residents and visitors alike.
The architectural designs, materials, and graphics set forth in this title are
compiled to create a theme unique to the area called "Spring Valley
architecture". (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-3 EFFECT OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
If any provision of this title is found to be in conflict with any other
provision of this title, building, fire safety or health ordinance or other
provision of the Eagle city code, the provision which establishes the higher
and/or more restrictive design standard shall prevail. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-4 DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or phrases used in this title shall be interpreted as defined
within a particular chapter, as defined within this title, or as defined in
chapter 1 of this title, with the more specific and/or more restrictive
definition controlling. Any other words or phrases not specifically defined
shall be interpreted to give this title its most reasonable application. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-5 EAGLE ARCHITECTURE AND SITE DESIGN BOOK (EASD):
The purpose of the EASD book is to show, through the use of pictures and text,
specific period architectural styles, themes, and elements envisioned through
the requirements of this title. The EASD book, established through a resolution
of the city council, contains many of the exhibits referenced in this title and
is incorporated herein by reference. The architecture styles found in the EASD
book are permitted styles. Architectural styles not shown within the EASD book
will not be considered. A copy of the EASD book is available at Eagle City
Hall. All applications made pursuant to this title shall also be reviewed in
accordance with the Eagle architecture and site design book. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
11A-3-6 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS, OBJECTIVES AND CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   General Objectives And Considerations: The following apply to Spring
Valley. The following, including the provisions set forth in the Eagle
architecture and site design book, contains a listing of objectives applied to
each application, and a listing of matters which shall be considered by the
design review board. The objectives are separated into two (2) sections: site
design and building design. Specific aspects of design should be examined to
determine whether the proposed development will provide a desirable environment
for its occupants as well as for its neighbors, and whether, aesthetically, the
composition, materials, textures and colors meet the intent of this title. The
design review board shall consider the following criteria in reviewing the
application:
      1.   Site Design Objectives: The site plan design shall minimize impact
of traffic on adjacent streets, provide for the pedestrian, and provide
appropriate, safe parking lot design.
         a.   The functional relationship of the structures and the site in
relation to its surroundings;
         b.   The impact and effect of the site development plan on traffic
conditions on contiguous streets and adjoining properties or neighborhoods;
         c.   The site layout with respect to separation or integration of
vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic patterns;
         d.   The arrangement and adequacy of off street parking facilities
relative to access points, building location and total site development to
prevent traffic conflict or congestion;
         e.   The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading ramps,
docks, and bays and vehicle service facilities;
         f.   The access, parking lot, and interior roadway illumination plans
and hours of operation;
         g.   The required driver, pedestrian and bicycle sight distance
requirements of the project and their relationship to adjacent streets,
driveways and properties;
         h.   The coordination of the site development with planned right of
way alignments, acquisitions and street improvements;
         i.   The graphic delineation of traffic circulation patterns to avoid
confusion, congestion and conflicts;
         j.   The continued maintenance of traffic, parking and lighting
systems;
         k.   The protection of views and vistas in relation to urban design
and aesthetic considerations; and
         l.   The provision of safe pedestrian and bicycle connections between
neighborhoods and commercial areas.
      2.   Site Landscaping: The site landscaping shall minimize impact on
adjacent properties through the proper use of screening with sound and sight
buffers, and unsightly areas shall be concealed or screened and the design
review board shall consider:
         a.   The location, height, and materials of walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent development;
         b.   The location and type of new plantings, with due regard to
preservation of specimen and landmark trees, and to maintenance of all
plantings;
         c.   The providing of screen plantings or other screening methods
reasonably required to conceal outdoor storage areas, trash receptacles,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and other unsightly
developments;
         d.   The installation of sound and sight buffers, the preservation of
public views, light and air, and the consideration of those landscape aspects
of design which may have substantial effects on neighborhood development, land
uses, and amenities;
         e.   The design and use of open spaces and parks; and
         f.   The permanent maintenance of all landscaped areas and fencing.
      3.   Site Grading And Drainage: The on site grading and drainage shall be
designed so as to maximize land use benefits and to minimize off site impact
and provide for slope and soil stabilization to prevent erosion and the design
review board shall consider:
         a.   The existing and proposed grading relative to soil removal, fill
work, retainage, soil stabilization, erosion control on the site and the
adjacent terrain and streets, and adoption of the development to the existing
site contours;
         b.   The planting of ground covers or shrubbery to prevent dust, to
stabilize soils and embankments and to control erosion;
         c.   Existing and proposed storm drainageways, canals, floodway and
floodplains relative to flow or alignment alterations, containment and
endangerment of health; and
         d.   The maintenance of floodway, floodplains, drainageways, channels,
culverts, head gates, canals, and soils.
      4.   Signage: Signing for any project shall provide for business
identification and minimize clutter and confusion on and off the site, and
shall be in compliance with this chapter. The design review board shall
consider:
         a.   The "overall sign concept" for multi-tenant business centers to
assure that it addresses the continuity between tenant sign design and building
design;
         b.   The reduction of hazards to motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians
as may be caused by or partially attributable to the distraction and
obstruction of improperly located and designed signs;
         c.   The provision for effective and necessary business identification
systems adapted to the building design;
         d.   The continued maintenance of signs throughout their life; and
         e.   The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting,
landscaping, and hours of operations of all permanent signs and outdoor
advertising structures or features to ensure that any such proposals do not
detract from the function of, or design of, buildings, structures, surrounding
properties, neighborhoods, or streets.
      5.   Utilities: Utility service systems shall not detract from building
or site design. Cable, electrical, and telephone service systems shall be
installed underground, and the design review board shall consider:
         a.   Size and location of all service systems for appropriate
appearance and maintenance accessibility;
         b.   The location and design of transformers, pad mount and roof
mounted mechanicals and electrical equipment shall be reviewed and approved by
the design review board. All roof mounted mechanicals shall be completely
screened from view through the use of a parapet wall when utilizing a flat roof
design or shall be enclosed within the building when utilizing a roof design
other than a flat roof. "Screened from view" shall mean "not visible" at the
same level or elevation of the parapet wall (e.g., the perspective generally as
shown on an elevation plan);
         c.   The location and sizes of all utility lines, manholes, poles,
underground cables, gas lines, wells, and similar installations; and
         d.   The continued maintenance of these service systems.
      6.   Building Design:
         a.   Building Mass: The mass of the building shall be reviewed for its
relationship with existing development in the immediate surrounding area and
with the allowed use proposed by the applicant;
         b.   Proportion Of Building: The height to width relationship of new
structures shall be compatible and consistent with the architectural character
of the area and proposed use;
         c.   Relationship Of Openings In The Buildings: Openings in the
building shall provide interest through the use of such features as balconies,
bays, porches, covered entries, overhead structures, awnings, changes in
building facade and roofline alignment, to provide shadow relief. Avoid
monotonous flat planes;
         d.   Relationship Of Exterior Materials: The design review board shall
determine the appropriateness of materials as they relate to building mass,
shadow relief, and existing area development. Use of color to provide blending
of materials with the surrounding area and building use, and the functional
appropriateness of the proposed building design as it relates to the proposed
use shall be considered; and
         e.   Allowed Architectural Styles: The architecture styles provided in
the EASD book are approved examples for applicants to follow when designing for
Spring Valley architecture.
   B.   Architectural Requirements, Building Materials, Fence And Deck/Patio
Materials, Colors, And Architectural Appurtenance Height Limitation: Unless
specified as prohibited herein, materials listed in this chapter are allowed.
If a material proposed for construction is not listed in this chapter it shall
be upon the discretion of the administrator, the design review board, and the
city council, whichever the case may be, to determine the appropriateness of
such material.
      1.   Exterior Walls And Soffits:
         a.   Wood: Cedar (clear) and redwood (clear) - architectural/premium
grade. Log siding, wood shingles are permitted for accent only, twenty five
percent (25%) maximum wall coverage (per each facade); synthetic board and bat
sidings are permitted as accents only. Plywood is prohibited;
         b.   Fiber Cement: Fiber cement;
         c.   Masonite: Horizontal lap only, maximum six inch (6") reveal;
         d.   Vinyl: 0.46 millimeter minimum thickness, integral color;
         e.   Textured Tilt-Up Concrete: Textured tilt-up concrete with accent
reveals;
         f.   Textured Pour In Place Concrete: Textured pour in place concrete
with accent reveals;
         g.   Masonry: Brick, natural rock/stone, synthetic stone, decorative
block. Smooth face block for accent only, ten percent (10%) maximum wall
coverage (per each facade);
         h.   Stucco: Twenty five percent (25%) planer change required,
additional accents shall be incorporated through the use of other material(s);
         i.   EIFS: Permitted for accent only, ten percent (10%) maximum wall
coverage (per each facade). Additional accents required through the use of
other materials;
         j.   Additional Encouraged Material: Exposed beams, fabric awnings,
cornices/dentils, shutters, dormers, cupolas, columns;
         k.   Metal: Metal siding shall be anodized, shall have a concealed
fastener system, shall have a factory finish or equivalent, and shall include
special design treatments to enhance its appearance. These treatments may
include brick or masonry wainscot treatments along exterior walls and accent
colored metals.
Metal siding is prohibited on the portion of any building facing a road. This
includes sections within the front facade that may be perpendicular to the road
but within the face of the building oriented toward the road.
A waiver of this subsection B1k on metal siding may be allowed where the
applicant shows that the metal is architecturally compatible with surrounding
buildings; is architecturally compatible with other nonmetal buildings in the
city; and is attractively landscaped, designed, and situated, to eliminate the
stark utilitarian look intended to be prevented by this subsection.
      2.   Roofs:
         a.   Wood shakes/shingles: Premium on number 1 grade;
         b.   Architectural grade textured composition shingles;
         c.   Tile: Cementitious, clay;
         d.   Slate;
         e.   Metal: Standing seam, batten seam (concealed fasteners required);
metal, standing seam/batten seam is prohibited on mansard roof sections facing
a road;
         f.   Flat roof specification: Single ply, built up (both
nonreflective).
      3.   Fences:
         a.   Vinyl: Integral color required;
         b.   Block (with columns);
         c.   Brick (with columns);
         d.   Wrought iron;
         e.   Fences:
         a.   Vinyl: Integral color required;
         b.   Block (with columns);
         c.   Brick (with columns);
         d.   Wrought iron;
         e.   Dog ear cedar, fir, chain link, barbwire, razor wire and similar
high maintenance and/or unsightly fencing is prohibited. However, powder coated
chain link fencing may be permitted for use on sports courts, school sites or
at public utility sites, such as water tanks, when not located within general
view corridors.
Fencing shall comply with Section 7.4.2 of the approved Habitat Mitigation
Plan:
Fencing meant to exclude wildlife from yards or building envelopes shall be a
minimum of six-feet (6') high and be constructed of a highly visible material
such as wood, metal, or block. Fence bottoms shall be in contact with the
ground. Fences shall either be solid or open-style fencing, however open style
fencing shall be designed with vertical spacing narrow enough to prevent big
game from getting their heads caught between members.
Fencing along regional, community, natural open space areas, and along wildlife
corridors within low density residential areas (Rural Residential (RR) and
Estate Residential (ER) districts) shall be strategically located or be
wildlife friendly to prevent unnecessary barriers to wildlife movement. Fences
that accommodate wildlife passage shall be no higher than 40-inches (40") high
and will be avoided on slopes greater than 25-percent (25%). Fences with
horizontal rails or wires shall provide spacing of at least 12-inches (12")
between the top two (2) cross members and 18-inches (18") between the lower
cross member and the ground.
The top level of all fences shall be free of protruding objects or rails.
      4.   Decks And Patios:
         a.   Concrete (stamped finish and smooth finish);
         b.   Brick pavers;
         c.   Wood polymer composite lumber;
         d.   Wood (pressure treated, redwood).
      5.   Colors:
         a.   Earthen tones are encouraged.
         b.   Flat or low gloss finishes are encouraged.
         c.   Roof mounted mechanicals, all vents protruding through the roof,
and similar features shall be painted so as to match the color of the roof.
         d.   Exposed metal flashing or trim will be anodized or painted to
blend with the exterior colors of the building.
      6.   Architectural Appurtenance Height Restrictions:
         a.   All spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and any other such
structures shall be limited to the maximum height as established in subsection
11A-2-4B3 and section
11A-2-4, tables 2.2 through 2.4 of this title. Additional height may be
permitted if a conditional use permit is approved by the city council.
   C.   Streetscape: Streetscape improvements are to include street trees,
streetlights, pedestrian lighting, bollards, public art, kiosks and
furnishings. In areas anticipated to have higher concentrations of pedestrian
use wider sidewalks and a further varied number of amenities are to be made
available to enhance the pedestrian experience and to further encourage the
health of the business community. Examples of streetscape design and amenities
are shown within the EASD book and in the urban streets standards, section
11A-3-7, exhibit 3-E of this chapter.
At a minimum, the following specific streetscape criteria shall apply:
      1.   Street trees shall comply with the requirements contained in
chapter 7 of this title. Any tree located within a concrete area shall include
tree grates and tree wells as depicted on the tree well and tree grate exhibit
within the EASD book. Root barriers shall be required to limit future sidewalk
damage from tree roots.
      2.   Bollard style pedestrian lighting shall be required along all
pathways not illuminated by street and/or site lighting.
      3.   Bollards or other approved treatment such as street trees, planters,
benches or special paving, as approved by the design review board, shall be
required at all bulb outs.
      4.   Public art is encouraged and/or areas should be made available for
the placement of public art in the future.
      5.   Furnishings shall be required for all applications incorporating
streetscape improvements, pedestrian areas and/or plaza areas. Furnishings may
include flagpoles, benches, seating/tables, planters, bike racks, outdoor
clocks, drinking fountains, wall lamps, waste receptacles and other similar
amenities as may be approved by the design review board. Furnishing examples
are depicted within "urban accessories" section of the EASD book. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014; amd. Ord. 889, 1-10-2022; Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
11A-3-7 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER AREA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Overview And Intent: The existing (nondeveloped) landscape character of
Spring Valley, and much of the North Eagle Foothills, is predominantly
nonnative grasslands with some shrubs and agriculture and is quite different
from the rest of Eagle and the Boise River corridor which contain dense
plantings and large buffer areas along arterials and collector roadways,
irrigated pastures, and riparian woodlands. The intent of these standards is to
provide a landscape character that is appropriate to the foothills and balances
aesthetics and livability with water demands and availability. These standards
promote water conservation through the use of treated effluent for irrigation,
efficient irrigation systems, and the use of native and other plants that
require little or no irrigation to survive. In addition, these guidelines shall
be used in conjunction with the grading guidelines and hillside development
standards, habitat mitigation plan and wildfire management plan.
The landscape concept for Spring Valley can be best described as a "foothills
landscape". This concept is based on the landscape of the Northern Rocky
Mountain Foothills and high plains prairie. Foothills landscape will be
characterized by diverse layers of both deciduous and evergreen shrubs and
trees that will create interest through its broad palette of indigenous
material and other plants, including turf, utilized throughout the region. This
concept also takes advantage of soil and exposure conditions to develop
potential vineyard groves throughout the community with the rolling foothills
as the backdrop.
   B.   Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan is required for all
developments requiring a design review, including, but not limited to, all
subdivisions. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale (no smaller than 1
inch equals 30 feet) and shall indicate the following:
      1.   Boundaries, property lines, and dimensions.
      2.   Existing trees and vegetation identified by species and size.
      3.   The location and design of areas to be landscaped.
      4.   The location and labels for all proposed plants.
      5.   Plant lists or schedules with the botanical and common name,
quantity, and spacing and size of all proposed landscape material at the time
of planting.
      6.   Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as
earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture,
lights, and courts or paved areas.
      7.   Planting and installation details as necessary to ensure conformance
with all required standards.
   C.   Landscape As Percent Of Site:
      1.   Landscaping shall cover a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the
property on multi-family residential developments. Hardscape plaza areas, such
as decorative concrete/paver patios that are integrated into the design of the
landscaped area, may be included in the fifteen percent (15%) landscape
coverage requirement.
      2.   Landscaping shall cover a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
property on all other developments. Hardscape plaza areas, such as decorative
concrete/paver patios that are integrated into the design of the landscaped
area, may be included in the ten percent (10%) landscape coverage requirement.
      3.   All landscape improvements required in this chapter shall count
toward fulfillment of the above minimum percentages.
      4.   If only a portion of a property is being developed, and if the city
does not require improvements on the entire property, improvements to landscape
shall continue a minimum of twenty five feet (25') (on site) beyond the
proposed development.
   D.   Tree Retention, Removal and Replacement:
      1.   Retention Of Existing Trees:
         a.   Existing trees shall be retained unless removal is approved in
writing by the city.
      2.   Removal And Replacement Of Existing Trees:
         a.   Where trees are approved by the city to be removed, replacement
with a species identified in section 11A-3-7(Y) of this article is required.
For each caliper inch of deciduous tree removed, an equivalent amount of
caliper inches shall be replanted. For each vertical foot of coniferous tree
removed, an equivalent amount of vertical feet shall be replanted.
Example: An eight inch (8") caliper deciduous tree is removed, an acceptable
replacement would be four (4) two inch (2") caliper deciduous trees. A twelve
foot (12') tall coniferous tree is removed, an acceptable replacement would be
two (2) six feet (6') tall coniferous trees.
         b.   When a homeowners association or its agent removes tree(s) from a
subdivision common area to appropriately thin an overgrown canopy, replacement
shall not be required provided the site remains in compliance with
subdivision's approved landscape plan as determined by the city.
         c.   Unless it is determined by the city that replacement is necessary
to preserve and/or restore riparian and wildlife habitat, removal of the
following trees shall not otherwise require replacement: black locust, poplar,
cottonwood, willow, tree of heaven, elm, and silver maple. Trees which are weak
wooded, weak branched, suckering, damaged, diseased, insect infested, or
containing similar maladies may be exempt from replacement if removal is first
approved by the city.
         d.   In cases where the condition of the tree(s) constitutes an
"emergency" as defined in section
11A-1-5 of this title, the tree(s) may be removed without approval provided
that the city is notified after the tree's removal and provided with
documentation indicating the tree's condition at time of removal.
         e.   Planting within public rights of way shall be with approval from
the city and the public entity owning the property.
      3.   Damage During Construction: Existing trees or shrubs that are
retained shall be protected from damage to bark, branches, or roots during
construction. Construction or excavation occurring within the drip line of any
public or private retained tree or shrub may severely damage the tree or shrub.
Any severely damaged tree shall be replaced in accordance with subsection D2 of
this section.
      4.   Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Grade changes and impervious
surfaces shall be allowed at a distance from the trunk of a retained tree equal
to the diameter of the tree trunk plus six feet (6'), or to the drip line,
whichever is furthest from the trunk.
      5.   Minimum Landscaping: Existing vegetation which is to be retained may
be used to satisfy the minimum required landscaping.
      6.   Existing Healthy Plants And Vegetation: Existing healthy native
plants and vegetation to be retained within the habitat areas of special
concern shall be identified on the habitat mitigation plan of the applicable
PUMP as areas that are to be retained or replanted as native
   E.   Prohibited Materials And Landscaping:
      1.   No required landscape areas shall include artificial trees, plants,
or any carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute. Artificial turf may be
used for nonrequired landscape areas such as sports fields and putting greens.
      2.   Clear vision triangles shall be observed in regard to all
vegetation. All shade trees planted within vision triangles shall be pruned to
a minimum seven feet (7') above the adjacent sidewalk and fourteen feet (14')
above the adjacent roadway surface whenever branches overhang such
improvements. Shrubs and ground covers planted within the vision triangle shall
not exceed three feet (3') height at maturity. The boundaries of the vision
triangle shall be shown on the landscape plans and are defined by measuring
from the intersection of the edges of two (2) adjacent roadways forty feet
(40') along each roadway and connecting the two (2) points with a straight
line. In all cases, ITD and ACHD standards shall apply also.
      3.   When the city determines that a sight obstruction exists, it shall
notify the owner of the property upon which the obstruction is located and
order that the obstruction be removed within fifteen (15) days.
      4.   All violations of these standards and Eagle city code shall be
subject to the requirements of title 1, chapter 4 of the Eagle city code.
   F.   Installation And Minimum Standards:
      1.   Trees shall be planted in accordance with the city of Eagle tree
planting specifications included as an exhibit within the EASD book. Accepted
nursery standards and practices shall be followed in the planting and
maintenance of landscaped areas.
      2.   Soil and slope stabilization must result after landscape
installation. Soil and slope stabilization measures shall comply with those
contained in the Spring Valley grading guidelines and hillside development
standards. Manufactured slopes shall be revegetated within the first planting
season following completion of construction.
      3.   Revegetation of slopes and other areas intended to reestablish
native vegetation shall use a site specific, city approved upland revegetation
seed mix consisting of plants contained in the native open space and upland
revegetation plant list contained in subsection Y of this section. Native
species are emphasized, but desirable nonnative species may also be used.
Plugs, potted plants and transplants and a variety of grasses, forbs and shrubs
may be added to reestablish a diverse stand of native or desirable plant
species. Additional plants not on the list may be proposed, but must be
approved by the city on the environmental landscape plan of the applicable
PUMP.
      4.   Class I, II and III trees planted with the ACHD right of way shall
meet the following ACHD minimum standards:
 
Class Offset       Planter Width
I        5 feet1   10 feet
II       5 feet1   8 feet3
III      5 feet1   10 feet
 
Notes:
1.    A 5 foot offset is required from the edge of sidewalk when the sidewalk
is attached to the curb or 5 feet from the curb when no sidewalk exists.
2.    Class I trees shall be planted where they will not overhang the sidewalk
or curb without pruning.
3.    A 6 foot wide planter may be allowed with an ACHD waiver and a root
barrier.
      5.   Only class I trees may be planted under or within ten feet (10') of
any overhead line.
      6.   Conifers are prohibited as a street tree, but are allowed outside
the right of way and vision triangle.
      7.   Trees of any type shall not be planted within ten feet (10') of any
streetlight, storm drain facility, drain inlet, structure of piping system,
seepage bed, fire hydrant or utility box.
      8.   Root barriers shall be installed for all new trees planted adjacent
to existing or proposed public or private sidewalks and paving. Root barriers
shall extend a minimum of eighteen inches (18") below the subgrade on the
sidewalk side and a minimum of twenty four inches (24") below subgrade on the
curb side. Root barriers shall extend two inches (2") above the ground and key
into the road feature. When trees are planted in formal patterns at consistent
spacing along curbs and straight sidewalks, barriers shall be constructed at
the same time as the street and the sidewalk. When trees are planted at minimum
spacing, the barrier shall run continuously along both the curb and sidewalk
features which it is designed to protect. When trees are planted in informal
patterns at random spacing along meandering sidewalks, barriers may be
installed at the time of planting. All root barriers within or adjacent to the
public rights of way shall conform with ACHD and ITD standards.
      9.   All landscaped areas adjacent to vehicular areas shall be protected
with an approved curbing material.
      10.   The minimum acceptable size for deciduous trees shall be two inch
(2") caliper, balled and burlapped.
      11.   The minimum acceptable size for evergreen trees shall be six feet
to seven feet (6' - 7') balled and burlapped.
      12.   A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the required shrubs in a
project shall be one gallon.
      13.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required shrubs in a
project shall be five (5) gallon or larger.
      14.   Hydroseeding of plant material may be used in conjunction with
container plants (shrubs, vines and ground covers) or by itself for
revegetating disturbed areas but may not be used on the interior of commercial
sites.
      15.   Wetland/riparian areas shall be established in accordance with the
recommendations in the habitat mitigation plan. A wetlands/riparian plant list
is provided in subsection Y of this section.
      16.   Plant material selection shall be taken from the plant list in
subsection Y of this section.
      17.   a. Certification Of Completion: Upon the completion of the
landscape installation, or other improvement subject to design review approval,
a written certification of completion shall be prepared by the licensed
landscape architect responsible for the landscape plan. The certification of
completion shall state that the installation of all landscape improvements is
in substantial compliance with the city approved landscape plan. This
certification shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in lieu of, the inspections
performed and certificates issued by the city.
         b.   Report Of Deficiencies: In the event that deficiencies are
present after the landscape installation, or other improvements subject to
design review approval, the licensed landscape architect shall prepare and file
with the city a report noting the deficiencies in the improvements. The city
will not accept a certification of completion, or issue a certificate of
occupancy, until the licensed landscape architect has verified that the
deficiencies have been corrected.
         c.   Landscape Architect Designee: The licensed landscape architect
may, at his or her discretion, appoint an authorized designee to certify the
project provided that the designee is a licensed landscape architect.
         d.   Revegetated Upland Areas: Revegetated upland areas within the
habitat areas of special concern (HASC) shall be exempt from this section.
Upland areas, as identified in the habitat mitigation plan, shall not be deemed
established and stabilized until seventy percent (70%) of the area no longer
requires supplemental maintenance such as supplemental watering or additional
planting/seeding. Until such time or three (3) years, whichever is shorter, the
city shall hold a surety for thirty percent (30%) of the original improvement
cost. In the event that insufficient funds are available in the surety to meet
the establishment criteria, the Spring Valley master developer shall supplement
funding in order to reach the establishment criteria or no further building
permits associated with the subject plat will be approved.
   G.   Tree Species Mix:
      1.   When more than ten (10) trees are to be planted to meet the
requirements of these guidelines, a mix of species shall be provided. The
number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of
trees required to be planted. Species shall be planted in proportion to the
required mix. See the table below:
 
Required Number Of Trees Minimum Number Of Species
   11 - 20            2
   21 - 30            3
   31 - 40            4
   41+                5
 
      2.   In cases where a formal and consistent landscape design concept is
desired, such as in the village center area or a formal streetscape, a minimum
of one species shall be planted when eighty (80) or less trees are required and
a minimum of two (2) species shall be planted when over eighty (80) trees are
required.
      3.   Landscape shall be designed to maintain its interest throughout the
entire year. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required trees and shrubs
in a project shall be deciduous and a minimum of twenty percent (20%) shall be
evergreen.
   H.   Maintenance:
      1.   All required landscapes shall be permanently maintained in a healthy
growing condition by the property owner or property owner's representative.
This includes the maintenance of street trees and/or other landscape materials
within or abutting the public right of way adjacent to the subject property.
The property owner or property owner's representative shall remove, and if
required to meet the standards of these requirements, shall replace any
unhealthy or dead plant material immediately or as the planting season permits.
In all cases, maintenance and planting within public rights of way shall be
with approval from the public and/or private entities owning the property.
      2.   An initial and long term monitoring and maintenance plan shall be
developed prior to preliminary platting by the master developer and implemented
by the property owner for native revegetated areas and undisturbed areas within
the habitat areas of special concern (HASC), as identified in the habitat
mitigation plan, to gauge the success of revegetation efforts. A noxious weed
control plan was developed as part of the habitat mitigation plan and will be
implemented by the property owner to reduce and control invasive and noxious
weeds within the HASC.
   I.   Completion Time:
      1.   The administrator may authorize a delay in the completion of
planting if a surety for one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of
installation is provided to the city. The developer may be provided progressive
payments out of the surety to the extent of the cost of the completed portion
of the required improvement is completed, inspected and deemed approved by the
city of Eagle.
   J.   Irrigation Required: An underground automatic irrigation system is
required for all development, as defined in section
11A-3-1 of this chapter, except as described below:
      1.   All required landscaped areas must be provided with an automatic
underground irrigation system except upland revegetation areas that are
intended to be naturalized (consisting of plant species that are indigenous to
or compatible with the area and do not require permanent irrigation). An
aboveground system or hand watering may be used on a temporary basis until such
areas are established and stabilized. Such areas are considered established and
stabilized when a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the revegetated area can
exist without such supplemental watering.
      2.   The system shall be equipped with a reduced pressure backflow
prevention device.
      3.   All spray irrigation systems shall be designed and constructed to
provide one hundred percent (100%) spray coverage.
      4.   Irrigation systems shall be circuited and zoned for exposure,
topography and the varying water requirements of the plant material.
      5.   Appropriate sprinkler heads shall be selected and placed as required
to reduce direct and indirect overthrow and overflow onto nonpervious areas
(walks, drives, etc.).
      6.   Overhead or spray irrigation may be used to water turf, pastures,
slopes and berms, flowerbeds and hydroseeded areas.
      7.   Drip or subterranean irrigation shall be used to water trees (except
those in turf areas), shrubs and ground covers.
      8.   Use of nonpotable water (treated effluent or reuse water) for use in
the irrigation of lawn and plant material is required for public and common
areas when available. Such systems may be phased or transitioned from potable
water as treated effluent becomes available over time. Areas for transition
shall be identified on the irrigation plans. Such public and common areas
include:
         a.   Landscape along arterial and collector roadways.
         b.   Parks and sports fields.
         c.   Golf courses.
         d.   Community gardens.
         e.   Lakes and ponds.
         f.   Slopes.
      9.   Reuse water may also be used for aquifer recharge and recovery
subject to IDWR approval.
      10.   The master developer shall install the reuse system that is
separate from the potable water system and meets all applicable state and local
regulations. Stubs shall be provided to individual parcels to allow parcel
developers to tie into the system as needed to irrigate common areas within the
parcel. Such system may initially be installed as a dry line system to provide
future connection to the reuse system when reuse water becomes available.
      11.   All nonpotable water access points shall be clearly and permanently
labeled with markers indicating that the water is not safe for human
consumption.
      12.   Maintain all irrigation systems to ensure proper operation and
water conservation.
   K.   Buffer Areas/Common Lots:
      1.   Definition: A transition zone or buffer area consists of horizontal
space (land) and vertical elements (plants, berms, fences, or walls). The
purpose of such buffer space is to physically separate and visually screen
adjacent land uses which are not fully compatible due to differing facilities,
activities, or different intensities of use, such as townhouses and a
convenience store, or a high volume roadway and residential dwellings.
      2.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   When a nonresidential use abuts a residential use, a ten foot
wide by six foot high (10' x 6') landscaped buffer is required.
         b.   When a nonresidential parking lot abuts a residential activity, a
five foot wide by six foot high (5' x 6') landscaped buffer is required.
         c.   To conceal outdoor storage areas, trash receptacles, exposed
equipment associated with any commercial or industrial activity, and off street
loading when adjacent to or in view from a residential activity or public
street right of way, a five foot wide by six foot high (5' x 6') landscaped
buffer is required.
      3.   Materials:
         a.   All buffer areas shall be comprised of, but not limited to, a mix
of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover in which evergreen
plant materials comprise a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the total plant
material used.
         b.   Height requirements shall be accomplished with plant material,
with a fence or decorative wall.
         c.   The required buffer area shall result in an effective barrier
within three (3) years and be maintained such that sixty percent (60%) or more
of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of vision through
it.
         d.   Chainlink fencing, with slats or otherwise, and cedar fencing is
prohibited for screening.
      4.   Major Roadways: Residential developments within Spring Valley,
including, but not limited to, subdivisions and multi-family developments,
shall be buffered from streets classified as collectors, arterials, and state
highways, as shown on exhibit 3-A of this section, or as determined by ACHD or
ITD, to protect residential communities from noisy, potentially dangerous, high
speed roads. The "buffer area" shall be defined as a common lot located between
the residential lots within the subdivision and the right of way line of the
adjacent roadway. This buffer is required as part of the common area open space
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association. Any landscaping proposed to
be within the public right of way shall not be included as a part of the buffer
area required below. The height for berming/fencing, except as noted below,
shall be measured from the elevation of the final grade of the adjacent roadway
(measured at the centerline) to the top of the proposed berming/fencing. The
required buffer area width, plantings, walls and fencing are described in
subsection L of this section.
   EXHIBIT 3-A
   MASTER STREETS AND CIRCULATION PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-207.png]
 
   L.   Streetscapes: The following standards shall apply to Spring Valley
internal and perimeter roadways as shown on exhibit 3-A of this section. In all
cases, any planting within public rights of way shall be with approval from the
public entity owning the property. (The rights of way widths and pavement areas
in the sections below are shown for illustrative purposes only. Actual rights
of way widths and lane configurations will be determined by ACHD and ITD as
appropriate.)
      1.   Foothills Arterial Streets:
         a.   The landscape buffer for foothills principal arterials shall be
thirty feet (30') minimum except adjacent to single-family residential uses
where it shall be fifty feet (50') minimum (not including right of way). See
exhibit 3-B of this section.
         b.   The landscape buffer for foothills minor arterials (not including
Willow Creek Road which is described below) shall be twenty four feet (24')
minimum except adjacent to single-family residential uses where it shall be
thirty five feet (35') minimum (not including right of way). See exhibit 3-C of
this section.
         c.   A detached sidewalk shall be provided on both sides of the street
at least eight feet (8') from the back of curb. The sidewalk shall be a minimum
of five feet (5') wide and may or may not meander depending on the streetscape
approved by the city with the PUMP. Sidewalks may be attached to the curb in
front of bus pullouts but shall be six feet (6') minimum width in such
locations. An eight foot (8') wide multiuse pathway on one side of the road may
be approved by the city within low density areas (1 acre lots and larger) or
along roadways adjacent to regional open space.
         d.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area along arterial streets:
            (1)   Three (3) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet of street
frontage on each side of the street except next to single-family residential
uses where there shall be four (4) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet.
            (2)   One shrub/ground cover per seventy five (75) square feet of
buffer area (excluding sidewalks, drives and other hardscape areas). Turf may
be used in place of shrubs/ground covers, but the amount used shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the landscape area on a plat by plat or phase by phase
basis.
            (3)   The landscape planting along Linder Road and the Highway 16
principal arterial through BLM shall be determined in consultation with BLM and
the city.
         e.   A minimum five foot (5') high, maximum eight foot (8') high,
berm, decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly
designed concrete wall, or fence, or combination thereof shall be provided
within or at the limits of the buffer area adjacent to single-family
residential lots or at the property line of such lots. The maximum slope for
any berm, if provided, shall be three feet (3') horizontal distance to one foot
(1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative
rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be provided in combination with
the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be provided for the placement
of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and similar high maintenance and/or
unsightly fencing shall not be permitted. Walls or fencing are not required
adjacent to multi-family residential uses, except when necessary to provide a
buffer to enclose private outdoor living space, nonresidential uses or open
space.
   EXHIBIT 3-B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-229.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-C
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-227.png]
 
      2.   Collector Streets:
         a.   The landscape buffer for collector streets shall be twenty feet
(20') minimum except where it is adjacent to single-family residential uses
where it shall be thirty five feet (35') minimum (not including right of way).
See exhibit 3-D of this section.
         b.   A detached sidewalk shall be provided on both sides of the street
at least eight feet (8') from the back of curb. The sidewalk shall be a minimum
of five feet (5') wide and may or may not meander depending on the streetscape
concept shown on the PUMP. Sidewalks may be attached to the curb in front of
bus pullouts, dropoff areas, on street parking areas, and similar circumstances
as approved by ACHD and the city, but shall be six feet (6') minimum width in
such locations. An eight foot (8') wide multiuse pathway on one side of the
street may be approved by the city within low density areas (1 acre lots and
larger) or along streets adjacent to regional open space depending on the
streetscape approved by the city on the PUMP.
         c.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area:
            (1)   Two (2) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet of street
frontage except next to single-family residential uses where there shall be
three (3) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet.
            (2)   One shrub/ground cover per seventy five (75) square feet of
buffer area (excluding sidewalks, drives and other hardscape areas). Turf may
be used in place of shrubs/ground covers, but the amount used shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the landscape area on a plat by plat or phase by phase
basis.
         d.   A minimum five foot (5') high, maximum eight foot (8') high,
berm, decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly
designed concrete wall, or fence, or combination thereof shall be provided
within or at the limits of the buffer area adjacent to single-family
residential lots or at the property lines of such lots. The maximum slope for
any berm, if provided, shall be three feet (3') horizontal distance to one foot
(1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative
rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be provided in combination with
the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be provided for the placement
of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and similar high maintenance and/or
unsightly fencing shall not be permitted. Walls or fencing are not required
adjacent to multi-family residential uses except when necessary to provide a
buffer to enclose private outdoor living space, nonresidential uses or open
space.
   EXHIBIT 3-D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-225.png]
 
      3.   Urban Streets:
         a.   Urban streets may be arterials, collectors or local streets, or
stretches thereof, which are located within a plan area designated as a
Community Center or Neighborhood Center within the approved Planning Unit
Master Plan (PUMP).
         b.   There shall be no minimum landscape buffer required, however, the
minimum setback from the back of curb to the front plane of the building shall
be sixteen feet (16'). See exhibit 3-E of this section.
         c.   Urban streets shall have an attached or detached sidewalk on both
sides of the street unless located adjacent to Regional Open Space (ROS). Where
this condition exists, the sidewalk shall be on the residential side only.
Sidewalks shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide. Street trees in the
sidewalk area shall be planted in tree wells with tree grates or cutouts a
minimum of four feet (4') square while providing a minimum five foot (5') clear
sidewalk width. Any patios or outdoor dining and seating areas between the back
of curb and building will also provide a minimum five foot (5') clear sidewalk
width. Paved and/or landscaped bulb outs or thirty to sixty degree (30 - 60°)
angle entries shall be provided at intersections where on street parking is
provided.
         d.   Landscape setbacks not owned by a public entity shall be owned
and maintained by an individual property owner or owners' association,
whichever the case may be.
         e.   The following plant material shall be provided at a minimum,
between the back of curb and building:
            (1)   One tree per thirty five (35) linear feet of street frontage
(including driveways) on each side of the street.
   EXHIBIT 3-E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-223.png]
 
      4.   Local Residential Streets:
         a.   There are no landscape buffers for local residential streets. The
minimum setback for local streets (both public and private) in single- and
multi-family residential uses shall correspond to the building setbacks
identified in section
11A-2-4, tables 2.2, "Single-Family Residential District Development
Standards", and 2.3, "Multi-Family Residential District Development Standards",
of this title.
         b.   An attached or detached sidewalk shall be provided on both sides
of the roadway as shown on exhibit 3-F of this section. If the sidewalk is
detached it must be at least six feet (6') from the back of curb with a root
barrier or eight feet (8') without a root barrier to support a class II tree
and ten feet (10') to support a class III tree. The sidewalk shall be a minimum
of five feet (5') wide and may or may not meander depending on the streetscape
concept. The sidewalk requirement may be waived as part of the PUMP approval in
the following conditions:
            (1)   A single loaded street adjacent to a slope (sidewalk shall be
required on the loaded side only).
            (2)   A double loaded street in a hillside area where topographic
constraints allow sidewalk on one side of the street only to minimize grading.
            (3)   Single-family special lot (SFSL) neighborhoods as detailed in
the Spring Valley development standards (sidewalk shall be required on at least
1 side of the street).
            (4)   Low density (1 acre and larger lots) neighborhoods (sidewalk
requirement may be waived where a striped 4 foot wide shoulder is provided).
         c.   One shade class (class II or class III) selected from the
approved tree list in subsection Y of this section shall be located on both
sides of all streets with the landscape strip between the sidewalk and the
curb. If the sidewalk is attached, then the tree shall be planted a minimum
five feet (5') in back of the sidewalk. Trees shall be planted at the front of
each lot generally located on each side of the lot line corner with the
distance between trees to be a minimum of thirty five feet (35') and a maximum
of eighty feet (80') of street frontage.
         d.   All mailboxes shall be located outside of the minimum sidewalk
width and outside of required sight triangles.
   EXHIBIT 3-F
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-221.png]
 
      5.   Willow Creek Road:
         a.   The landscape buffer for Willow Creek Road shall be one hundred
feet (100') minimum (not including the right of way). See exhibit 3-G of this
section.
         b.   The following shall be provided, at a minimum, within the limits
of the buffer area:
            (1)   Three (3) trees and eighteen (18) shrubs per one hundred
(100) linear feet of right of way.
            (2)   A minimum ten foot (10') wide, decomposed granite, multiuse
trail to be owned and maintained by the owners' association. If the trail is to
be dedicated to the city, the trail's location and materials shall be subject
to recommendation by the parks and pathways development commission and approval
by the city council.
         c.   A minimum five foot (5') high, maximum eight foot (8') high,
berm, decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly
designed concrete wall, or fence, or combination thereof shall be provided
within or at the limits of the buffer area adjacent to single-family
residential lots or at the property line of such lots. The maximum slope for
any berm, if provided, shall be three feet (3') horizontal distance to one foot
(1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative
rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be provided in combination with
the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be provided for the placement
of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and similar high maintenance and/or
unsightly fencing shall not be permitted. Walls or fencing are not required
adjacent to multi-family residential uses except where necessary to provide a
buffer to enclose private outdoor space, nonresidential uses or open space.
   EXHIBIT 3-G
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-219.png]
 
      6.   State Highway 16:
         a.   The landscape buffer for State Highway 16 shall be one hundred
feet (100') minimum next to residential uses and sixty feet (60') minimum next
to nonresidential uses (not including right of way). See exhibit 3-H of this
section.
         b.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area:
            (1)   Five (5) trees and twenty (20) shrubs/ground covers per one
hundred (100) linear feet of right of way. Turf may be used in place of shrubs/
ground covers, but the amount used shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landscape area on a plat by plat or phase by phase basis.
            (2)   Additional plant material may be provided within the ITD
right of way subject to a license agreement with ITD.
         c.   A minimum ten foot (10') high, maximum twelve foot (12') high,
berm, decorative block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly
designed concrete wall, or combination thereof shall be provided within the
buffer area adjacent to residential lots. The height of the berm and/or wall
shall be measured from the elevation of the grade beneath such berm and/or
wall. The maximum slope for any berm shall be three foot (3') horizontal
distance to one foot (1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall,
cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be
provided in combination with the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be
provided for the placement of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and
similar high maintenance and/or unsightly fencing shall not be permitted. A
berm or decorative wall is not required adjacent to nonresidential uses.
   EXHIBIT 3-H
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-217.png]
 
      7.   Medians:
         a.   The minimum width of a median, if provided, that will support
trees is eight feet (8') for class II trees and ten feet (10') for class I and
III trees. The minimum width of a median that will support turf is ten feet
(10'). The minimum width of a median that will support shrubs and ground covers
is four feet (4'). If a median or median nose is narrower than four feet (4'),
the area shall be filled with stamped concrete, decorative pavers or rock.
Medians will generally be provided on arterial, collector and urban streets.
         b.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the median:
            (1)   One tree per fifty (50) linear feet of median (a minimum of 2
trees are required in medians over 35 feet in length).
            (2)   One shrub/ground cover per seventy five (75) square feet of
landscaped area. Turf may be used in place of shrubs/ground covers, but the
amount of turf shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped area on a
plat by plat or phase by phase basis.
            (3)   In the event a median is less than thirty five feet (35') in
length, a single tree shall be permitted. Shrub/ground cover and turf
requirements (above) would apply.
      8.   Streetscape Design Concepts: Landscape along Spring Valley roadways
shall be arranged in formal or informal patterns, or a combination of both.
Formal landscape patterns (exhibit 3-I of this section) consist of plants
arranged in consistent spacing and/or massing patterns while informal landscape
patterns (exhibit 3-J of this section) consist of plants arranged in less
consistent or random spacing and/or massing patterns. Straight sidewalks are
usually associated with formal streetscapes while meandering sidewalks are
usually associated with informal streetscapes. The street classification and
streetscape concept for each roadway shall be consistent with the approved
environmental landscape plan for the PUMP that contains that roadway.
   EXHIBIT 3-I
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-215.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-J
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-213.png]
 
      9.   Wildlife Crossings: Wildlife movement corridors have been identified
in sections 7.4.1 and 7.4.2 of the habitat mitigation plan. Wildlife crossing
points along roadways shall be approved by the city identified on the
environmental landscape plan of the applicable PUMP.
All crossings shall follow the recommendation in the habitat mitigation plan to
minimize conflicts between animals and vehicles. Such measures, including
provision of culverts, grade separations, fencing, traffic control measures and
low plantings for driver visibility, shall be shown on the plat and landscape
plans for the appropriate areas.
   M.   Parks, Open Space And Common Areas:
      1.   Parks within Spring Valley shall be planted, at a minimum, with the
following:
         a.   Turf, either seed or sod.
         b.   One tree per one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of
nonpervious space.
         c.   Four (4) shrubs/ground covers per tree.
      2.   Parks shall contain at least five (5) of the following amenities:
         a.   Ball field.
         b.   Sports court.
         c.   Swimming pool and/or spa.
         d.   Recreation/community building.
         e.   Restroom building.
         f.   Play equipment.
         g.   Shade structure.
         h.   Picnic table.
         i.   Bench.
         j.   Barbecue grills.
         k.   Trash container.
         l.   Sidewalk/trail.
         m.   Bike rack.
         n.   Pet refuse container.
      3.   Open space tracts and common areas that are not considered parks,
roadway landscape buffers, or parking area perimeters shall be planted, at a
minimum, with the following:
         a.   One tree per one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
         b.   Four (4) shrubs/ground covers per tree. Hydroseeding may be used
in conjunction with plants or by itself for revegetating disturbed areas.
         c.   If turf is used, every fourteen (14) square feet of turf shall
count for one shrub/ground cover, however, turf shall not exceed thirty percent
(30%) of the open space or common area or the required shrub/ground cover
quantities.
   N.   Wetland/Riparian Areas: Wetland and riparian area construction and
maintenance shall follow the principles and guidelines contained in sections
7.4.3 through 7.4.5 and appendix B of the Spring Valley habitat mitigation
plan. A plant list for wetland/riparian areas is contained in subsection Y of
this section.
   O.   Slope Revegetation For Naturalized Areas: Disturbed and manufactured
slopes with the habitat areas of special concern (HASC), as identified in the
habitat mitigation plan, that are intended to be restored to a natural like
condition shall be identified on the planning unit master habitat mitigation
plan and revegetated with a combination of grasses, forbs and shrubs native to
the region or otherwise favorable to regional climactic and soil conditions.
Revegetation may also occur on other existing open space areas to be retained
within the HASC that have been affected by fire or have otherwise been
degraded.
      1.   Revegetation shall follow the recommendations and criteria in the
habitat mitigation plan, sections 7.4.4 through 7.4.5.
      2.   A plant list for use in natural slope revegetation in upland areas
is contained in subsection Y of this section. Seed mixes and rates shall be
based on natural resource conservation service (NRCS) or other approved
guidelines. Seed mixes may be adjusted as necessary according to the response
and success of the revegetation project. Native and approved nonnative shrubs
may also be planted from container material, plugs or transplants to supplement
the seed mix to increase the success rate of the revegetation application and
for soil stability and aesthetics.
      3.   Native species shall be emphasized, but desirable nonnative species
may also be included for structural and functional components. Nonnative
species shall be sterile or nonaggressive, i.e., they will not compete or
displace more desirable native species.
      4.   Temporary irrigation may be used to facilitate plant establishment
and growth rates but shall be discontinued after establishment as defined in
subsection F17d of this section.
      5.   Seedings without irrigation shall be allowed to germinate for
approximately one year based on seasonal and time constraints. The following
year (early spring), plugs, supercells, potted plants and transplants of a
variety of grasses, forbs and shrubs may be added to reestablish a diverse
stand of native or desired species.
      6.   Seed application shall be by rangeland drill (set to the appropriate
depth) or broadcasting (hydroseeding). Broadcast seeding shall require
scarification of the soil surface.
      7.   All areas shall be classified in a noxious zone at the time of PUMP
approval. Noxious weed control shall comply with the noxious weed containment
plan per section 7.4.5 of the habitat mitigation plan.
      8.   Success of revegetation objectives shall be based on the habitat
quality descriptors defined in table 2 of the habitat mitigation plan.
      9.   All natural slope revegetation shall be fully established within
five (5) growing seasons. Such areas shall be considered established when a
minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the plants can exist on rainfall alone, see
subsection F17d of this section.
   P.   Single-Family Residential Neighborhoods:
      1.   Landscape Along Local Streets: Landscape along local streets shall
be in accordance with the requirements in subsection L4c of this section.
      2.   Common Open Space:
         a.   Single-family residential neighborhoods (except those in the RR
and ER districts) shall contain a minimum of six hundred (600) square foot
common open space per lot of which a minimum of fifty percent (50%) shall be an
amenity area for active and/or passive recreation. An "amenity area" is defined
as ground with a slope of ten percent (10%) or less.
         b.   The following shall be provided, at a minimum, within the amenity
area:
            (1)   One tree for every one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet of landscapable area.
            (2)   Turf in fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped area.
            (3)   Seventy five percent (75%) vegetative cover (shrubs/ground
covers) in nonturf landscaped areas after three (3) years of planting.
            (4)   A walkway and seating area with bench.
            (5)   A trash receptacle and pet refuse bag dispenser.
            (6)   Walkway/pathway linkage to a regional or community trail when
adjacent to such trail.
         c.   Optional items within amenity areas shall include, but are not
limited to:
            (1)   Children's play area with play structure.
            (2)   Shade structure.
            (3)   Picnic table(s) and barbecue grill(s).
      3.   Landscape Within Common Areas: Landscape within common areas outside
of amenity areas shall be in accordance with the requirements in subsection M3
of this section.
   Q.   Multi-Family Residential Neighborhoods (3 Or More Attached Units):
      1.   On Site Project Landscape: Landscape shall cover a minimum of
fifteen percent (15%) of the property. Hardscape plaza areas, such as
decorative concrete paver patios that are integrated into the design of the
landscape area may be included in the fifteen percent (15%) landscape coverage
requirement.
      2.   Parking Lot Landscape: See subsection S, "Parking Lot Landscape", in
this section.
      3.   Amenity/Common Area Landscape:
         a.   Amenity Areas: Amenity areas shall be landscaped per the
following minimum requirements:
            (1)   One 2-inch caliper tree for every one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet of total landscape area. Additional trees may be one inch
(1") caliper in size.
            (2)   Seventy five percent (75%) minimum vegetative cover for
nonpaved areas after three (3) years of planting.
         b.   Common Areas: General landscape areas within projects exclusive
of parking lot areas, street frontage areas and recreation areas shall be
planted per the following minimum requirements:
            (1)   One 2-inch caliper tree for every one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet of total landscape area. Additional trees may be one inch
(1") caliper in size.
            (2)   Seventy five percent (75%) minimum vegetative cover for
nonpaved areas after three (3) years of planting.
      4.   Boulders And Rock Mulch:
         a.   Boulders and rock outcroppings, if used, shall be buried at least
fifty percent (50%) so as to appear as natural rock outcroppings.
         b.   All decorative rock mulch materials used on site shall be earth
toned. White or multicolored materials are not permitted.
   R.   Nonresidential Projects:
      1.   On Site Project Landscape:
         a.   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total parcel area shall be
landscaped. Pedestrian walkways, outdoor pedestrian plazas and hardscape
features are considered landscape for this requirement.
         b.   Landscape shall be designed and maintained to not obstruct the
visibility of signage and sightlines for vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
         c.   Landscape areas shall be planted per the following:
            (1)   A minimum of one tree per one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet of total landscape area shall be provided throughout the site
landscape area except in the parking areas that are subject to requirements
identified in subsection S of this section.
            (2)   The minimum tree size at site entries and pedestrian plazas
shall be three inch (3") caliper for emphasis. Remaining trees shall be a
minimum two inch (2") caliper.
            (3)   Shrubs shall be a minimum of five (5) gallon in size. Ground
cover shall be a minimum one gallon in size.
            (4)   Trees planted in paved areas shall be planted in
appropriately sized tree wells with tree grates or planters for the tree type
selected. The minimum dimension of tree wells or planters shall be four feet
(4').
      2.   Parking Lot Landscape: See subsection S, "Parking Lot Landscape", of
this section.
      3.   Boulders And Rock Mulch:
         a.   Boulders and rock outcroppings, if used, shall be buried at least
fifty percent (50%) so as to appear as natural rock outcroppings.
         b.   All decorative rock mulch materials used on site shall be earth
toned. White or multicolored materials are not permitted.
   S.   Parking Lot Landscape:
      1.   Visual Impact: Landscape shall be provided to minimize the visual
impact of off street parking: Parking should be located to the side and rear of
buildings and shall be screened so that it does not dominate the streetscape.
Walls, fences, hedges, berms, and landscape may be used to screen parking areas
(chainlink and cedar fencing shall not be permitted). In the design of large
parking areas, arrange bays of parking spaces to be separated by landscape.
When parking lots occur on sloping terrain, step the parking lots to follow the
terrain rather than allowing the lot surface to extend above natural grade.
      2.   Parking Lot Landscape Strip: A landscape strip shall be provided
when a parking lot is located adjacent to a public right of way. The landscaped
strip shall serve to shield views of parked cars to passing motorists and
pedestrians, and to establish coordination among architecturally diverse
buildings, which creates a pleasing, harmonious appearance along the roadway.
Four (4) options are provided for fulfilling this requirement as shown on
exhibit 3-K of this section:
         a.   Provide a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip between the
property line and the parking lot, and plant with a minimum of one shade tree
and ten (10) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of frontage, excluding
driveway openings.
         b.   Provide an earth berm of thirty inches (30") minimum height (do
not exceed 3:1 slope) within a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip between the
property line and the parking lot, and plant with a minimum of one shade tree
and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of frontage, excluding
driveway openings.
         c.   Provide a six foot (6') landscaped strip with a minimum thirty
inch (30") grade drop from the property line to the parking lot, and plant with
a minimum of one shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear
feet of frontage, excluding driveway openings. Root barriers shall be required
for all trees in planter less than ten feet (10') in width next to a sidewalk,
roadway or paved parking area.
         d.   Provide a three foot (3') high wall, fence of brick, stone, or
decorative block or concrete along with a six foot (6') wide landscaped strip
between the property line and the parking lot, and plant a minimum of one shade
tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of frontage,
excluding driveway openings. Root barriers shall be required for all trees in
planter less than ten feet (10') in width next to a sidewalk, roadway or paved
parking area.
   EXHIBIT 3-K
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-211.png]
 
      3.   Parking Lot Perimeter Landscape: Perimeter landscape requirements
define parking areas and prevent two (2) adjacent lots from becoming one large
expanse of paving. This requirement does not hinder the ability to provide
vehicular access between lots.
         a.   Provide a minimum five foot (5') wide perimeter landscaped strip
between the property lines and the parking lot, and plant with a minimum of one
shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of perimeter.
         b.   Provide a minimum ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip between
the parking lot and adjacent buildings and plant with a minimum of one shade
tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five feet (35') of perimeter.
         c.   See exhibit 3-L of this section for additional information.
      4.   Parking Lot Interior Landscaping:
         a.   Calculated Amount: Interior parking lot landscape shall be
required on any parking lot with ten (10) spaces and above. The required amount
of landscape is based on a sliding scale, as follows:
 
Total Number Of Spaces Percent Of Total Area Of A Lot That Must Be An Interior
                       Landscaped Area
   10 - 20          5 percent
   21 - 50          8 percent
   51+              10 percent
 
         b.   Additional Requirements:
            (1)   A landscaped island or a planter extending the length of the
parking row shall be provided for a maximum of every twelve (12) consecutive
spaces. When diamond planters are used, one shall be provided for every six (6)
consecutive spaces.
            (2)   A terminal island shall be placed at the end of a row of
parking.
            (3)   No parking island shall be less than six feet (6') in any
dimension.
            (4)   The length of a parking island shall be the same as the
parking space that it is adjacent to.
            (5)   No parking space shall be more than sixty feet (60') from an
interior landscaped area.
            (6)   Parking islands are to be as evenly spaced as feasible
throughout the lot to consistently reduce the visual impact of long rows of
parked cars.
            (7)   Deciduous shade trees and ground covers or low shrubs are
recommended as primary plantings in interior landscaped areas. Deciduous shade
trees are to be clear branched to a height of six feet (6').
            (8)   A terminal or interior island for a single row of parking
spaces shall be landscaped with at least one tree and shrubs, ground cover, or
grass. A terminal or interior island for a double row of parking spaces shall
contain not less than two (2) trees and shrubs, ground cover, or grass.
            (9)   Parking lot tree requirements shall be met even when covered
parking structures are used. Accent trees may be substituted for shade trees
next to covered parking structures where such structures exist.
            (10)   See exhibit 3-L of this section for further information.
   EXHIBIT 3-L
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-209.png]
 
   T.   Landscaped Commercial Strips:
      1.   Landscaped strips shall be provided between all nonresidential
building development and roads classified as a local street to lend continuity
among different architectural styles, screen unsightly views, establish a
pleasing view for motorists, and create a safe and pleasant corridor for
pedestrians.
         a.   The landscaped strip shall be ten feet (10') wide minimum and
planted with one shade tree and ten (10) shrubs for every thirty five feet
(35') of street frontage. Two (2) ornamental or two (2) evergreen trees may be
substituted for one shade tree.
   U.   Wildfire Protection: The North Foothills are prone to wildfires.
Landscape design shall be reviewed and approved by the applicable fire
districts for consistency with the Spring Valley wildfire management plan
approved by the Eagle and Star fire district.
   V.   Incentives:
      1.   The administrator may reduce the site parking requirements by up to
five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed landscape
plan incorporates the retention of existing significant trees, particularly in
the interior of the site.
      2.   The administrator may reduce the site parking requirements by up to
five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed landscaping
exceeds the requirements of these guidelines by fifteen percent (15%) or more.
      3.   The administrator may reduce technical standards of parking lot
design where paving requirements conflict with the retention of significant
trees.
   W.   Alternative Methods Of Compliance:
      1.   Project Conditions: It is not the intent of these landscape
requirements to inhibit creative solutions to land use problems. Under certain
site conditions, a strict interpretation of requirements may be either
physically impossible or impractical. Alternative compliance is a procedure
that allows certain modifications to existing regulations within this chapter.
Requests for use of alternative landscaping schemes are justified only when one
or more of the following conditions apply:
         a.   The sites involve space limitations or unusually shaped parcels;
         b.   Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such
that full compliance is impossible or impractical;
         c.   Due to a change of use of an existing site, the required buffer
yard is larger than can be provided; and
         d.   Safety considerations are involved.
      2.   Request For Alternative Method Of Compliance: The applicant must
provide the city with a written request if an alternative method of compliance
is proposed. The request shall state which requirement as set forth within this
chapter is to be modified, what project conditions stated within subsection W1
of this section justify using the proposed alternative, and how the proposed
alternative equals or exceeds said requirement.
      3.   Tree Fund: Persons applying for an alternative method of compliance
for relief from regulations that require all existing trees to remain on site
may elect to make a financial contribution to the Eagle city tree fund in lieu
of retaining all trees on site. The condition(s) which warrants the need for
the tree fund alternate method of compliance shall be specified in the
application submitted under subsection W2 of this section. If the application
is approved, the amount to be contributed by the applicant will be based upon
the total caliper inches of deciduous tree(s) removed from the site and the
total vertical feet of coniferous trees removed from the site. Cost per caliper
inch for deciduous trees and cost per vertical foot for coniferous trees shall
be determined by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall have the
right to review and consider the value determination, and following said
review, to reapply for other alternative methods of compliance, without
prejudice, in accordance with subsection W2 of this section.
   X.   Plan Preparation: Preparing a landscape plan requires special skills.
Landscape design involves more than a simple arrangement of plants with
irrigation; plants are not haphazardly placed in a way that fills up leftover
space. Landscape plans should reflect a theme so that site elements are
artfully and technically organized in a way that conveys meaning, coherence,
and spatial organization. Landscape should enhance the physical environment as
well as the project's aesthetic character. Therefore, landscape plans to be
submitted for approval shall be prepared by or under the responsible control of
a licensed landscape architect with said plans to be duly stamped to clearly
identify the preparer.
   Y.   Approved Plant List: This list is a suggested planting list for Spring
Valley. Other plant species and varieties will be considered and may be used
subject to SVDRC and city approval. ACHD and/or ITD approval will also be
required, as appropriate, if the plant is a street tree or is located within
the public right of way. An "X" in the far right column next to a tree
descriptor indicates the tree is allowed as a street tree. The list contains,
at the end of this subsection, plants intended for use in the establishment of
wetland/riparian and upland natural slope areas in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the habitat mitigation plan.
      SPRING VALLEY PLANT LIST
      Small Trees (Class I)
Botanical Name Common Name Street Trees
Botanical Name                      Common Name            Street Trees
Acer campestre                      Hedge maple            X
Acer ginalla                        Amur maple             X
Acer glabrum                        Rocky mountain maple   X
Acer grandidentatum                 Bigtooth maple         X
Amelanchier alnifolia               Saskatoon serviceberry X
Amelanchier canadensis              Canadian serviceberry  X
Cercidiphyllum japonicum            Katsuratree            X
Cercis canadensis                   Eastern redbud         X
Chilopsis linearis                  Desert willow          X
Cornus Florida                      Flowering dogwood      X
Cornus Florida "cloud 9"            Flowering dogwood      X
Cornus kousa                        Kousa dogwood          X
Cotinus coggygria                   Common smoketree       X
Crataegus douglasii                 Douglas hawthorn       X
Crataegus laevigata                 English hawthorn       X
Crataegus monogyna                  Singleseed hawthorn    X
Crataegus phaenopyrum               Washington hawthorn    X
Crataegus virdis                    Green hawthorn         X
Crataegus x lavallei                Lavalle hawthorn       X
Koelreuteria paniculata             Goldenraintree         X
Koelreuteria paniculata "September" Goldenraintree         X
Magnolia stellata                   Star magnolia          X
Magnolia x soulangiana              Saucer magnolia        X
Malus "Indian magic"                Indian magic crabapple X
Malus "prairie fire"                Prairie fire crabapple X
Malus "profusion"                   Profusion crabapple    X
Malus "radiant"                     Radiant crabapple      X
Malus "spring snow"                 Spring snow crabapple  X
Prunus blireiana                    Blireiana plum         X
Prunus cerasifera                   Purpleleaf plum        X
Prunus cerasifera "Newport"         Newport cherry plum    X
Prunus cistena "big cis"            Big cis plum           X
Prunus serrulata                    Oriental cherry        X
Prunus subhirtella                  Higan cherry           X
Prunus virginiana                   Common chokecherry     X
Prunus x yedoensis                  Yoshino cherry         X
Pyrus calleryana                    Callery pear           X
Pyrus calleryana "aristocrat"       Callery pear           X
Pyrus calleryana "capital"          Callery pear           X
Pyrus calleryana "chanticleer"      Callery pear           X
Pyrus calleryana "Cleveland"        Callery pear           X
Pyrus calleryana "redspire"         Callery pear           X
Rhus typhina                        Staghorn sumac         X
Rhus typhina "laciniata"            Staghorn sumac         X
Syringa reticulata                  Japanese tree lilac    X
Syringa reticulata "ivory silk"     Japanese tree lilac    X
 
      Medium Trees (Class II)
Botanical Name Common Name Street Trees
Botanical Name                             Common Name             Street Trees
Acer nigrum                                Black maple             X
Acer platanoides                           Norway maple            X
Acer pseudoplatanus                        Sycamore maple          X
Acer saccharum                             Sugar maple             X
Acer truncatum                             Pacific sunset maple    X
Aesculus hippocastanum                     Horsechestnut           X
Aesculus octandra                          Yellow buckeye          X
Aesculus pavia                             Red buckeye             X
Alnus glutinosa                            Alder                   X
Alnus rubra                                Red alder               X
Alnus tenuifolia                           Mountain alder          X
Betula nigra                               River birch             X
Betula nigra "heritage"                    River birch             X
Betula occidentalis                        Water birch             X
Carpinus betulus                           European hornbeam       X
Carpinus betulus "fastigiata"              European hornbeam       X
Celtis occidentalis                        Common hackberry        X
Celtis occidentalis "prairie pride"        Prairie pride hackberry X
Celtis reticulata                          Netleaf hackberry       X
Cladrastis kentukea                        American yellowwood     X
Corylus colurna                            Turkish filbert         X
Diospyros virginiana                       Common persimmon        X
Fagus sylvatica                            European beech          X
Fraxinus americana                         White ash               X
Fraxinus americana "autumn purple"         Autumn purple ash       X
Fraxinus oxycarpa "raywood"                Raywood ash             X
Fraxinus pennsylvanica                     Green ash               X
Fraxinus pennsylvanica "cimmaron"          Cimmaron ash            X
Fraxinus pennsylvanica "Marshall seedless" Marshall seedless ash   X
Fraxinus pennsylvanica "Patmore"           Patmore ash             X
Fraxinus pennsylvanica "summit"            Summit ash              X
Ginkgo biloba                              Ginkgo (male only)      X
Ginkgo biloba "autumn gold"                Ginkgo (male only)      X
Ginkgo biloba "Magyar"                     Ginkgo (male only)      X
Ginkgo biloba "Princeton sentry"           Ginkgo (male only)      X
Gleditsia triacanthos                      Honeylocust             X
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis              Thornless honeylocust   X
Gleditsia triacanthos "Moraine" inermis    Thornless honeylocust   X
Gleditsia triacanthos "shademaster"        Thornless honeylocust   X
inermis
Gleditsia triacanthos "skyline" inermis    Thornless honeylocust   X
Juglans regia                              English walnut          X
Liquidambar styracaflua                    American sweetgum       X
Liquidambar styracaflua "Moraine"          American sweetgum       X
Magnolia acuminata                         Magnolia cucumbertree   X
 
      Large Trees (Class III)
Botanical Name Common Name Street Trees
Botanical Name                    Common Name         Street Trees
Acer platanoides "crimson king"   Crimson king maple  X
Acer platanoides "emerald queen"  Emerald queen maple X
Aesculus glabra                   Ohio buckeye        X
Carya ovata                       Shagbark hickory    X
Catalpa speciosa                  Northern catalpa    X
Fagus grandifolia                 American beech      X
Fagus sylvatica                   Eastern beech       X
Gymnocladus dioicus               Kentucky coffeetree X
Gymnocladus dioicus "espresso"    Kentucky coffeetree X
Liriodendron tulipifera           Tuliptree           X
Platanus x acerifolia             London planetree    X
Platanus x acerifolia "Bloodgood" London planetree    X
Quercus alba                      White oak           X
Quercus bicolor                   Swamp white oak     X
Quercus macrocarpa                Bur oak             X
Quercus robur                     English oak         X
Quercus rubra                     Red oak             X
Quercus shumardii                 Shumard oak         X
Ulmus americana "new harmony"     New harmony elm     X
Ulmus americana "Valley Forge"    Valley Forge elm    X
Ulmus carpinifolia "prospector"   Prospector elm      X
 
      Conifers
Botanical Name Common Name Street Trees
Botanical Name                       Common Name                Street Trees
Abies concolor                       White fir                   
Abies concolor "violacea"            White fir                   
Calocedrus decurrens                 California incense cedar    
Cedrus atlantica "fastigiata"        Blue atlas cedar            
Cedrus atlantica "glauca"            Blue atlas cedar            
Cedrus atlantica "glauca pendula"    Blue atlas cedar            
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana             Lawson cypress              
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana "allumii"   Lawson cypress              
Chamaecyparis lawsoniana "stewartii" Lawson cypress              
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis           Alaska cedar                
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis "pendula" Weeping Alaska cedar        
Juniperus chinensis                  Chinese juniper             
Juniperus communis                   Common juniper              
Juniperus occidentalis               Western juniper             
Juniperus scopulorum                 Rocky mountain juniper      
Juniperus virginiana                 Eastern red cedar           
Larix decidua                        European larch              
Larix decidua "pendula"              European larch              
Larix occidentalis                   Western larch               
Metasequoia glyptostroboides         Dawn redwood                
Picea abies                          Norway spruce               
Picea engelmannii                    Engelmann spruce            
Picea glauca                         White spruce (Black Hills)  
Picea glauca "densata"               White spruce (Black Hills)  
Picea omorika                        Serbian spruce              
Picea pungens                        Colorado spruce             
Picea pungens "glauca"               Colorado spruce             
Picea pungens "hoopsii"              Colorado spruce             
Picea pungens "koster"               Colorado spruce             
Picea pungens "moerheimii"           Colorado spruce             
Pinus aristata                       Bristlecone pine            
Pinus contorta                       Lodgepole pine              
Pinus edulis                         Pinyon pine                 
Pinus flexilis                       Limber pine                 
Pinus monticola                      Western white pine          
Pinus mugo                           Mugo pine                   
Pinus nigra                          Austrian pine               
Pinus parviflora                     Japanese white pine         
Pinus ponderosa                      Ponderosa pine              
Pinus strobus                        Eastern white pine          
Pinus sylvestris                     Scotch pine                 
Pinus thunbergiana                   Japanese black pine         
Pinus wallichiana                    Himalayan pine              
Pseudotsuga menziesii                Douglas fir                 
Sequoiadendron giganteum             Giant sequoia               
Taxodium distichum                   Bald cypress                
Taxodium distichum "monarch of       Bald cypress                
Illinois"
Taxodium distichum "Shawnee brave"   Bald cypress                
Thuja occidentalis                   Eastern arborvitae          
Thuja plicata                        Western red cedar           
 
      Additional Potential Landscape Trees
      (Upon City And ACHD Approval)
Botanical Name Common Name Street Trees
Botanical Name          Common Name            Street Trees
Acer griseum            Paperbark maple        X
Acer truncatum          Shantung maple         X
Alnus cordata           Italian alder          X
Asimina triloba         Common pawpaw          X
Cedrus atlantica        Blue atlas cedar        
Chamaecyparis obtusa    Hinoki false cypress    
Chamaecyparis pisifera  Japanese false cypress  
Eucommia ulmoides       Hardy rubbertree       X
Evodia daniellii        Korean evodia          X
Fagus grandfolia        American beech         X
Maackia amurense        Amur maackia           X
Paulownia tomentosa     Empress tree           X
Picea orientalis        Oriental spruce         
Pinus bungeana          Lacebark pine           
Pinus cembra            Swiss stone pine        
Pinus densiflora        Japanese red pine       
Pterocarya fraxinifolia Caucasian wingnut      X
Quercus imbricaria      Shingle oak            X
Thujopsis dolobrata     False arborvitae        
Tsuga canadensis        Canadian hemlock        
 
      Trees Prohibited In The Right Of Way
Botanical Name Common Name Street Trees
Botanical Name                   Common Name                   Street Trees
Acer negundo                     Box elder (sensational maple)  
Acer rubrum                      Red maple                      
Acer saccharinum                 Silver maple                   
Acer x freemanii                 Red maple, freeman varieties   
Ailanthus altissima              Tree of heaven                 
Betula papyrifera                Paper birch                    
Betula pendula                   European birch                 
Conifers spp                     Conifers                       
Fraxinus excelsior               European ash                   
Gleditsia triacanthos "sunburst" Honeylocust "sunburst"         
Juglans nigra                    Black walnut                   
Populus species                  Poplar                         
Populus tremuloides              Quaking aspen                  
Robinia pseudoacacia             Black locust                   
Salix species                    Willow                         
Sorbus aucuparia                 European mountain ash          
Sorbus scopulina                 Western mountain ash           
Ulmus species                    Elm                            
 
      Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                         Common Name
Acer ginnala                           Amur maple
Acer grandidentatum                    Bigtooth maple
Alnus incana                           Thinleaf alder
Amelanchier spp                        Serviceberry
Arctostaphylos nevadensis              Pinemat manzanita
Aronia melonocarpa                     Glossy black chokeberry
Artemisia cana                         Silver sagebrush
Artemisia frigida                      Fringed sage
Artemisia ludoviciana                  White sagebrush
Artemisia tridentata                   Big sagebrush
Atriplex canescens                     Four wing saltbush
Berberis spp                           Barberry
Buddleia spp                           Butterfly bush
Buxus microphylla "winter gem"         Winter gem boxwood
Buxus sempervirens "variegata"         Varigated boxwood
Caragana arborescens                   Pea shrub
Caryopteris spp                        Blue-mist spirea
Ceanothus velutinus                    Velvet buckbrush
Ceratoides lanata                      Winterfat
Cercocarpus spp                        Mountain mahogany
Chamaebatiaria millefolium             Fernbush
Chamaecyparis pisifera "filifera aurea Gold thread cypress
nana"
Chrysothamnus spp                      Rabbittbrush
Cornus alba "bailhalo"                 Ivory halo dogwood
Cornus sericea                         Isanti dogwood
Cornus sericea "cardinal"              Redtwig dogwood
Cornus sericea "flaviramea"            Yellowtwig dogwood
Cornus sericea "kelseyi"               Kelsey dogwood
Cornus stolonifera                     Red osier dogwood
Cotoneaster spp                        Cotoneaster
Elaeagnus angustifolia                 Russian olive
Ephedra viridis                        Green Mormon tea
Ericameria nauseosa                    Rubber rabbitbrush
Eriogonum heracleoides                 Parsnipflower buckwheat
Eriogonum sphaerocephalum              Rock buckwheat
Euonymus alata                         Burning bush
Euonymus alata "compactus"             Burning bush
Euonymus fortunei "emerald gaiety"     Emerald gaiety euonymus
Euonymus fortunei "emerald 'n gold"    Emerald and gold euonymus
Euonymus fortunei "gold prince"        Gold prince euonymus
Euonymus fortunei "moonshadow"         Moonshadow euonymus
Euonymus fortunei "silver queen"       Silver queen euonymus
Euonymus japonica                      Boxleaf euonymus
Euonymus japonica "aureo marginata"    Golden euonymus
Euonymus japonicus "green spire"       Greenspire euonymus
Euonymus kiautschovicus "Manhattan"    Manhattan euonymus
Fallugia paradoxa                      Apache plume
Forsythia x intermedia                 Forsythia
Forsythia x intermedia "spring glory"  Spring glory forsythia
Hibiscus syriacus "minerva"            Minerva rose of Sharon
Hibiscus syriacus "red heart"          Red heart rose of Sharon
Holodiscus discolor                    Ocean spray
Juniperus chinensis "mint julep"       Mint julep juniper
Juniperus chinensis "old gold"         Old gold juniper
Juniperus horizontalis "bar harbor"    Bar harbor juniper
Juniperus horizontalis "blue chip"     Blue chip juniper
Juniperus horizontalis "plumosa        Youngstown juniper
compacta Youngstown"
Juniperus horizontalis "Prince of      Prince of Wales juniper
Wales"
Juniperus x pfitzeriana "sea green"    Sea green juniper
Ligustrum spp                          Privet
Lonicera xylosteoides                  Clavey's dwarf honeysuckle
Lonicera xylosteum "emerald mound"     Emerald mound honeysuckle
Mahonia aquifolium                     Oregon grape
Paxistima spp                          Dwarf mountain lover
Philadelphus lewisii                   Mock orange; syringa
Philadelphus lewisii "blizzard"        Blizzard mock orange
Philadelphus virginalis                Dwarf Minnesota snowflake mock orange
Philadelphus virginalis "snowflake"    Snowflake mock orange
Philadelphus x virginalis "Minnesota"  Minnesota mock orange
Photinia spp                           Photinia
Physocarpus spp                        Mountain ninebark
Picea abies "nidiformis"               Birdsnest spruce
Pieris spp                             Pieris
Pinus mugo                             Mugo pine
Pinus mugo "mops"                      Dwarf mugo pine, mops dwarf mugo pine
Pinus mugo var. pumilio                Pumillo mugo pine, dwarf mugo pine
Potentilla fruticosa "Abbottswood"     Abbotswood potentilla
Potentilla fruticosa "gold drop"       Gold drop potentilla
Potentilla fruticosa "goldfinger"      Goldfinger potentilla
Potentilla fruticosa "jackmani"        Jackmani potentilla
Potentilla fruticosa "pink beauty"     Pink potentilla
Prunus besseyi                         Western sand cherry
Prunus cistena                         Cistena plum
Prunus laurocerasus "Otto Luken"       Otto Luyken laurel
Prunus tomentosa                       Nanking cherry
Prunus virginiana                      Chokecherry
Purshia tridentate                     Antelope bitterbrush
Pyracantha spp                         Pyracantha
Rhamnus frangula                       Buckthorn
Rhododendron spp                       Azalea; rhododendron
Rhus spp                               Sumac
Ribes spp                              Currant
Rosa spp                               Rose
Rubus spp                              Raspberry, blackberry
Salix purpurea "nana"                  Dwarf artic blue willow
Salvia dorrii                          Purple sage
Sambucus spp                           Elderberry
Shepherdia spp                         Buffaloberry
Sorbaria sorbifolia                    Ashleaf spirea
Sorbus scopulina                       Mountain ash
Sphaeralcea ambigua                    Desert globemallow
Sphaeralcea grossulariifolia           Goosefoot globemallow
Sphaeralcea munroana                   Munro's globemallow
Spiraea bumalda "dolchia"              Dolchia spirea
Spiraea japonica "goldmound"           Goldmound spirea
Spiraea nipponica "Halward's silver"   Halward's silver spirea
Spiraea x bumalda "Anthony Waterer"    Anthony Waterer spirea
Spiraea x bumalda "crispa"             Crispa spirea
Spiraea x bumalda "goldflame"          Goldflame spirea
Spirea x bumalda "magic carpet"        Magic carpet spirea
Spirea x "Van Houttie"                 Van Houttie spirea, bridal wreath spirea
Symphoricarpos albus                   Snowberry
Symphoricarpos occidentalis            Western snowberry
Symphoricarpos orbiculatus             Red snowberry
Symphoricarpos oreophilus              Mountain snowberry
Syringa meyeri                         Dwarf Korean lilac
Syringa patula "Miss Kim"              Miss Kim lilac
Syringa vulgaris                       Common lilac
Syringa vulgaris "sensation"           Sensation lilac
Syringa x prestoniae "Donald Wyman"    Donald Wyman lilac
Syringa x prestoniae "Miss Canada"     Miss Canada lilac
Taxus spp                              Yew
Thuja occidentalis "Berkman's golden"  Golden Berkman arborvitae
Thuja occidentalis "Danica"            Danica arborvitae
Thuja occidentalis "golden globe"      Golden globe arborvitae
Thuja occidentalis "smaragd"           Emerald green arborvitae
Viburnum spp                           Viburnum
Weigela florida "Alexandra"            Wine and roses weigela
Weigela florida "dark horse"           Dark horse weigela
Weigela florida "java red"             Java red weigela
Weigela florida "minuet"               Minuet weigela
Weigela florida "pink poppet"          Pink poppet weigela
Weigela florida "red prince"           Red prince weigela
Yucca spp                              Yucca
 
      Vines
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name            Common Name
Campsis radicans          Trumpet vine
Clematis columbiana       Blue virginsbower
Clematis hirsutissima     Hairy clematis
Clematis ligusticifolia   White (western) clematis
Lornicera spp and hybrids Honeysuckle
Rosa spp                  Roses
Vitis spp                 Grapes
Wisteria spp              Wisteria
 
      Ground Covers
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                                       Common Name
Achillea spp                                         Yarrow
Ajuga reptans                                        Carpet bugle
Antennaria parviflora                                Pussytoes
Antennaria rosea                                     Rosy pussytoes
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi                              Kinnikinnick
Armeria maritime                                     Common thrift
Artemisia ludoviciana                                Prairie sage
Artemisia stellerana                                 Dusty miller
Asarum caudatum                                      Wild ginger
Bergenia spp                                         Bergenia
Callirhoe involucrata                                Purple poppy mallow
Campanula spp                                        Bellflower
Cerastium tomentosum                                 Snow in summer
Cotoneaster spp                                      Cotoneaster
Delosperma nubigenum                                 Hardy ice plant
Fragaria chiloensis                                  Wild strawberry
Galium odoratum                                      Sweet woodruff
Heuchera spp                                         Coral bells
Juniperus horizontalis "bar harbor"                  Bar harbor juniper
Juniperus horizontalis "blue chip"                   Blue chip juniper
Juniperus horizontalis "plumosa compacta Youngstown" Youngstown juniper
Juniperus horizontalis "Prince of Wales"             Prince of Wales juniper
Mahonia repens                                       Creeping mahonia
Phlox subulata                                       Moss pink
Sedum spp                                            Stonecrop
Sempervivum tectorum                                 Hen and chicks
Vinca major                                          Periwinkle
Vinca minor                                          Myrtle, dwarf periwinkle
 
      Perennials
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                      Common Name
Agastache cana                      Hummingbird mint
Allium spp                          Ornamental allium
Anaphalis margaritacea              Pearly everlasting
Aquilegia spp                       Columbine
Arabis spp                          Rockcress
Artemisia frigida                   Fringed wormwood
Asclepia speciosa                   Showy milkweed
Aster spp                           Aster
Balsamorhiza hookeri                Hooker's balsamroot
Balsamorhiza sagittata              Arrowleaf balsamroot
Camassia quamash                    Blue camas
Castilleja rhexifolia               Splitleaf Indian paintbrush
Castilleja sulphurea                Sulphur Indian paintbrush
Chaenactis douglasii                False yarrow
Chrysanthemum spp                   Chrysanthemum
Clarkia amoena                      Farewell to spring
Coreopsis spp                       Coreopsis
Crepis acuminata                    Tapertip hawkesbeard
Dalea purpureum                     Purple prairie clover
Delphinium spp                      Delphinium
Dianthus spp                        Pinks
Dodecatheon pulchellum              Shooting star
Echinacea purpurea                  Purple coneflower
Epilobium (Chamerion) angustifolium Fireweed
Epilobium canum                     Hummingbird trumpet (firechalis)
Erigeron compositus                 Cutleaf daisy
Eriogonum jamesii                   James' buckwheat
Eriogonum niveum                    Snow buckwheat
Eriogonum thymoides                 Thymeleaf desert buckwheat
Eriogonum umbellatum                Sulphur buckwheat
Eriophylum lanatum                  Oregon sunshine
Eschscholzia californica            California poppy
Gaillardia aristata                 Blanket flower
Gaillardia grandiflora              Blanket flower
Geranium spp                        Hardy geraniums
Geum spp                            Prairie smoke
Helianthus nuttallii                Marsh sunflower
Hemerocallis spp                    Daylily
Hymenoxys grandiflora               Old man of the mountains
Iliamna rivularis                   Mountain hollyhock
Ipomopsis angustifolium             Scarlet gillia
Iris spp                            Iris (excluding red iris)
Kniphofia uvaria                    Red hot poker
Leucocrinum montanum                Sand lily
Liastris spp                        Graygeather
Lilium spp                          Lilies
Limonium latifolium                 Sea-lavender
Lomatium nudicaule                  Barestem desert parsley
Lupinus spp                         Lupine
Mentzelia laevicaulis               Blazingstar
Mertensia ciliata                   Tall fringed bluebells
Mimulus cardinalis                  Scarlet monkeyflower
Mimulus guttatus                    Yellow monkeyflower
Mirabilis jalapa                    Four o'clock
Mirabilis multiflora                Wild four o'clock
Monarda spp                         Beebalm
Monardella odoratissima             Horsemint
Oenothera spp                       Evening primrose
Papaver spp                         Poppy
Penstemon spp                       Penstemon
Polemonium caeruleum                Jacob's ladder
Ratibida columnifera                Mexican hat
Rosa spp                            Roses
Rudbeckia hirta                     Black-eyed Susan
Salvia spp                          Salvia
Scutellaria spp                     Skullcap
Solidago canadensis                 Goldenrod
Stanleya pinnata                    Prince's plume
Thalictrum fendleri                 Meadow rue
Typha latifolia                     Cattail
Viola spp                           Violet
Wyethia amplexicaulis               Mule's ear
Zinnia grandiflora                  Prairie zinnia
 
      Grasses
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                      Common Name
Achnatherum hymenoides              Indian ricegrass
Achnatherum thurberianum            Thurber's needlegrass
Agropyron spp                       Wheatgrass
Agrostis stolonifera                Creeping bentgrass
Buchloe dactyloides                 Buffalograss
Carex aquatilis                     Water sedge
Carex nebrascensis                  Nebraska sedge
Carex utriculata                    Beaked sedge
Dactylic glomerata                  Orchardgrass
Deschampsia caespitosa              Tufted hairgrass
Eleocharis palustris                Spikerush
Elymus multisetus (elymoides)       Sandhollow squirreltail
Festuca spp                         Fescue
Juncus balticus                     Baltic rush
Juncus effuses                      Soft rush
Juncus ensifolius                   Daggerleaf rush
Juncus tenuis                       Path rush
Juncus torreyi                      Torrey's rush
Leymus cinereus                     Great basin wildrye
Lolium spp                          Ryegrass
Poa pratensis                       Kentucky bluegrass
Poa secunda                         Sandberg bluegrass
Pseudoroegneria spicata             Bluebunch wheatgrass
Schoenoplectus acutus               Hard stem bulrush
Schoenoplectus pungens (americanus) Three square bulrush
Sporobolus cryptandrus              Sand dropseed
Stipa comata                        Needle and thread grass
 
      WETLAND/RIPARIAN PLANT LIST
      Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name      Common Name
Betula occidentalis Red birch
Populus tremuloides American aspen
Populus trichocarpa Black cottonwood
Prunus emarginata   Bitter cherry
Prunus virginiana   Chokecherry
Rhamnus purshiana   Cascara
Salix lasiolepis    Arroyo willow
Salix spp           Willow
 
      Low/Medium Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name            Common Name
Achillea millefolium      Yarrow
Arnica cordifolia         Heartleaf arnica
Cornus sericea            Red-osier dogwood
Geranium viscosissimum    Sticky geranium
Osmorhiza chilensis       Sweet Cicely
Ribes aureum              Golden currant
Rosa woodsii              Wood's rose
Rubus parviflora          Thimbleberry
Smilacina stellata        Starry false Solomon's seal
Symphoricarpos albus      Snowberry
Symphoricarpos oreophilus Mountain snowberry
Thalictrum occidentale    Western meadowrue
 
      Grasses
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                    Common Name
Agropyron trachycaulum            Slender/bearded wheatgrass
Bromus carinatus or B. marginatus California brome
Carex hoodii                      Hood's sedge
Carex spp                         Sedges
Elymus glaucus                    Blue wildrye
Juncus spp                        Rushes
Typha spp                         Cattails
 
      Flowers
 
Botanical Name Common Name
Aquilegia spp  Columbine
Mimulus spp    Monkeyflower
 
      NATIVE OPEN SPACE AND
      UPLAND REVEGETATION PLANT LIST
      Low/Medium Shrubs
 
Botanical Name          Common Name
Artemisia tridentata    Wyoming big sage
Chrysothamnus nauseosus Rabbitbrush
Purshia tridentata      Bitterbrush
 
      Forbs
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name        Common Name
Achillea millefolium  Yarrow
Balsamorhiza sagitata Balsamroot
Fagopyrum esculentum  Wyeth buckwheat
Helianthus annuus     Annual sunflower
Linum lewisii         Lewis fax
Lomatium dissectum    Fern biscuitroot
Lupinus sericeus      Silky lupine
Medicago sativa       Alfalfa
Penstemon palmeri     Penstemon
Sanguisorba minor     Small burnet
Sphaeralcea munronaa  Munro's globemallow
Wyethia amplexicaulis Mule's ear
 
      Grasses/Flowers
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name          Common Name
Elymus multisetus       Bottlebrush squirreltail
Festuca idahoensis      Idaho fescue
Leymus cinereus         Great Basin wildrye
Oryzopsis hymenoides    Indian ricegrass
Poa secunda             Sandberg's bluegrass
Pseudoroegneria spicata Bluebunch wheatgrass
Sphaeralcea munroana    Munro's globemallow
Sporobolus cryptandrus  Sand dropseed
Stipa thurberiana       Thurber's needlegrass
 
      Perennials
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name          Common Name
Eriogonum thymoides     Thymeleaf desert buckwheat
Eriogonum umbellatum    Sulphur buckwheat
Geum spp                Prairie smoke
Ipomopsis angustifolium Scarlet gillia
Lomatium nudicaule      Barestem desert parsley
Lupinus spp             Lupine
Mentzelia laevicaulis   Blazingstar
Oenothera spp           Evening primrose
Penstemon spp           Penstemon
Wyethia amplexicaulis   Mule's ear
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
11A-3-8 SIGNAGE:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   All Signs: Signs shall not be erected or maintained in Spring Valley
except those signs specifically enumerated in this chapter.
      2.   Undefined Or Unclassified Signs: To determine applicable regulations
for any sign not specifically defined herein, the administrator shall use the
definition or classification within this chapter which most closely defines or
classifies any such sign.
      3.   Architectural Compatibility: The number, area, and height of signs
as outlined in this chapter are intended to be maximum standards which do not
necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. Therefore, in addition to the
enumerated maximum standards, the city shall give consideration to a sign's
relationship to the overall appearance of the subject property as well as the
surrounding area.
      4.   Materials And Appearance: It is the intent of this chapter to
encourage interesting, creative, readable, effective, uncluttered, and well
maintained signage within Spring Valley. Sign materials and appearance shall be
complementary to the community theme, building architecture and colors.
      5.   Nonconforming Signs: As these regulations are amended, any existing
sign within Spring Valley that was erected with the approval of the city and
conformed to the previously established regulations shall be allowed to remain
for the useful life of the sign unless otherwise prohibited.
      6.   Change Of Face, Copy And/Or Logo On Signs: Signs conforming to this
chapter shall require an administrative sign permit, but not a full design
review application for a change of face, copy and/or logo on any such sign,
provided that the sign structure is not changed in any way and provided that
the colors previously approved by the city are not changed.
   B.   Definitions: If conflict arises between any definition in this section
and any other definition within this chapter, the definition with the more
specific and/or more restrictive definition shall control. Any other words or
phrases not specifically defined shall be interpreted to give this section its
most reasonable application.
   A-FRAME SIGN: A temporary, portable sign having two (2) separate surfaces
meeting at the top to form an "A" and supported on these surfaces without the
use of a pole.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected or
maintained for outdoor advertising purposes upon which any poster, bill,
printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed
including statuary for advertising purposes.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign which is designed and constructed to give its
message through a sequence or progressive changes or parts or lights or degree
of lighting, such as an electronic reader board.
   AREA OF THE BUILDING FACE: The general outer surface of an exterior wall of
a building. The area of the building face shall be a total area of such
surface, including the area of doors and windows which open into such face, if
any.
   AUTOMATED SIGN: A sign with a fixed or changing display capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures or images composed of, a series of light
emitting elements or moving panels or parts; including, but not limited to:
tripaneled, digital, electronic message boards, light emitting diodes (LED)
signs or signs that in any other way move or create the illusion of movement.
This definition does not include signs with copy that is manually changed.
   BANNER SIGN: Any temporary sign made of lightweight fabric, plastic, or
similar material. Governmental flags or emblems shall not be considered banner
signs.
   BILLBOARD: Any off premises outdoor advertising sign structure.
   CABINET SIGN (SCULPTED): A sign consisting of a translucent or
nontranslucent panel containing sign copy which is affixed to a cabinet that is
sculpted to form a nonsquare or nonrectangular decorative shape which provides
interest to the sign, such as the shape of a logo, the shape of letters, or
combination thereof.
   CABINET SIGN (STANDARD): A sign consisting of one or more translucent or
nontranslucent panels containing sign copy, which are interchangeable and which
are affixed to a box or cabinet that is generally square or rectangular in
shape.
   CITY ENTRY SIGN: A permanent sign identifying the city of Eagle or the
central business district. No business advertising is permitted on city entry
signage.
   COMMUNITY ENTRY SIGN: A permanent sign located at the entrance(s) to the
community identifying Spring Valley to the public. Such sign may be grade
adaptive, integrated into a berm or wall, or freestanding.
   COMMUNITY EVENTS: Community sponsored events such as Eagle Fun Days, Eagle
Saturday Market, First Friday, school sporting events, and similar city,
chamber of commerce, Eagle Idaho Merchants Association, Spring Valley, and
school district type events, including events sponsored by any church/religious
institution which has a city approved site within Eagle.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY/AMENITY SIGN: A permanent sign identifying a community
facility, such as a recreation building, or an amenity, such as a park, and
that reinforces the community identity. Such sign may be freestanding or wall
sign, attached to a wall (placard type sign), or hanging.
   COMMUNITY MARKETING SIGN: A temporary informational sign identifying
builders and/or projects within the community or community information for
marketing purposes.
   COMMUNITY SIGNS: A family of signs that identifies Spring Valley and its
various community facilities, elements and features to the public, provides
directional information, announces community events and other marketing
information and reinforces the community theme. Such signs may be permanent or
temporary and consist of the following: community entry signs; community
facility/amenity signs; subdivision/neighborhood entry signs; regional and
community trail signs; community and builder directional signs; community
marketing signs; feather flag signs; streetlight banners; community event
signs; future development signs; and custom/semicustom lot signs.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary informational sign which identifies the
architect, engineer, contractor, owner, banking institution, or other
individual or firms involved with the construction of a building, enterprise or
improvement or announcing the character of the building, enterprise or
improvement.
   COOPERATIVE BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign including multiple
businesses, and which may or may not include directional information.
   CUSTOM/SEMICUSTOM LOT SIGN: A temporary sign placed on a custom or
semicustom lot identifying the lot number and which may also contain the Spring
Valley or neighborhood logo and indication of availability or nonavailability
(e.g., "Available", "For Sale" or "Sold").
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN, BUILDER (OFF PREMISES): A temporary sign which identifies
the direction toward a project under construction or residential neighborhood
for sale or for lease. The sign may contain the project, neighborhood or
builder name and logos as well as arrows indicating traffic directions.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN, COMMUNITY (OFF PREMISES): A permanent sign which
identifies the direction toward community features such as schools, parks,
libraries, or other public facilities. The sign may use words or logos as well
as arrows indicating traffic directions.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN (OFF PREMISES): See definitions of Portable Off Premises
Directional Sign and Subdivision Off Premises Directional Sign.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN (ON PREMISES): An on premises permanent directional sign
which foremost contains words such as "Entrance", "Enter", "Exit", "In", "Out",
or other similar words, or a sign containing arrows or characters indicating
traffic directions and used either in conjunction with such words or
separately.
   DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign for listing the tenants, occupants, floor plan,
addresses or suite numbers of a building, center or residential building
complex.
   DOUBLE FACED SIGN: A sign with copy on two (2) parallel faces, legible from
opposite directions.
   DRIVE-THROUGH/DRIVE-UP SERVICE MENU BOARD SIGN: A sign identifying products
for sale and prices for those products. The menu board sign may include
business identification.
   FACE OF SIGN: The surface of the sign area upon, against or through which
the message is displayed or illustrated.
   FEATHER FLAG SIGN: A durable and lightweight fabric that flows easily in the
wind, and is attached to an aluminum or PVC pole. The pole can either be
inserted into the ground or can be connected to a solid, spring or spinning
base.
   FLAG: Any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols used as
a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other private entity.
   FREE HANGING SIGNBOARD: A sign attached underneath a canopy, awning or
colonnade.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: A single or multiple faced sign, supported from the
ground by one or more columns, uprights or braces.
   FRONTAGE: The length of a lot or parcel along a street or other principal
thoroughfare which it borders, but not including such length along an alley,
regional open space or watercourse.
   FUTURE DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A temporary community sign that identifies future
land use or development on a parcel.
   GRADE: The elevation or level of the street closest to the sign to which
reference is made, as measured at the street's centerline, or top of curb if
one exists, adjacent to where the sign is to be placed, or the relative ground
level in the immediate vicinity of the sign if determined by the administrator
to be an accurate determination for grade with regard to the intent of this
title.
   GRADE ADAPTIVE SIGN: A sign that is integrated into a slope or hillside.
   GRAND OPENING: The promotional activity used by a new business, enterprise
or residential project or for a grand opening for a business, enterprise or
residential project under new management, to inform the public of its location
and service available to the community. "Grand opening" does not mean the
annual or occasional promotion of services or retail sales by a business.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest
point of a sign or any vertical projection thereof. Architectural elements used
above any sign area may be excluded from the maximum height measurement if the
city determines that said architectural elements add to the character of the
sign and do not create an overbearing appearance in relation to the sign,
building and area.
   HOLIDAY: A day designated as having special significance for which a
government or religious group have deemed that observation is warranted. A
holiday is generally an official observance of religious, national, or cultural
significance, often accompanied by celebrations or festivities.
   HOLIDAY SIGN: Signs advertising a holiday.
   ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL: A sign that is affected by an artificial light
source that is not contained within the sign itself.
   ILLUMINATION, HALO: Illumination of a sign from a light source that is not
visible and is concealed or contained within the sign or located between the
sign and the structure/wall. Illumination from the source of the light becomes
visible in darkness when the light is reflected off of the wall/structure upon
which the sign is attached.
   ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL: Illumination of a sign from any light source that is
concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through
a translucent surface, except for illumination, punch through letter signs.
This includes characters, letters, figures, designs or outline which is
illuminated by gas filled luminous tubes, such as neon, argon or fluorescent.
   ILLUMINATION, PUNCH THROUGH LETTER: A sign with letters, logos or other sign
graphics that are opaque (no light is permitted to shine through them), that
are attached to a sign cabinet or structure that allows light to shine through
it. The distance between the letters, logos, or other sign graphics and the
background (surface of the cabinet or structure) is a maximum of one-half inch
(1/2"). The light source is concealed within the cabinet or structure and is
not visible except that illumination from the light source shines through
transparent (nonopaque) background material for no more than one-fourth inch
(1/4") around the letters, logo, and other graphics, creating a halo effect.
   LOGO SIGN: A sign containing the Spring Valley, builder or project logo.
   MASTER SIGN PLAN, COMMUNITY: Detailed exhibits containing signage standards
for community signage within Spring Valley including sign type, dimensions,
materials, colors and letter font, size and application.
   MASTER SIGN PLAN, PROJECT: A plan designed to show the relationship of signs
for any cluster of buildings intended for business occupancy, or any single
building containing more than one business or any arrangement of business
buildings or shops which constitute a visual entity as a whole. These include
developments such as shopping centers, mini-malls, business parks, and multi-
tenant commercial, office or industrial buildings housing four (4) or more
businesses. Additionally, a master sign plan may be submitted for a single
business if the owner chooses to submit an application for a master sign plan
for said business.
   MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign with a solid base, including rock signs,
or with supports that are designed to be structurally similar to the sign
construction, and which incorporate architectural features which complement the
sign construction. Pole type supports are not permitted for monument signs,
unless enclosed within the monument sign structure.
   MURAL: A painting, other than a business advertising sign, on the outside
wall of a building.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which does not comply with the provisions of
these regulations.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign located within Spring Valley but on a separate
parcel of land or a separate site from the place where the product, service,
activity or business is located.
   ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign located on the same parcel of land or a site as the
place where the product, service, activity or business is located.
   PARAPET: The portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
   PENNANT SIGN: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
whether in series or not, designed to move in the wind and therefore considered
a moving sign.
   POLE SIGN: A freestanding sign that is supported by one or more poles that
are not enclosed as in a monument sign structure.
   PORTABLE OFF PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Off premises portable signs
providing directional information for businesses.
   PORTABLE ON PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS: Portable on premises signs for
advertising which can be used on a permanent basis and which are intended to
allow for business identification and any other advertising being promoted by
the business or enterprise.
   PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not designed to be permanently attached to a
building or anchored to the ground such as A-frame signs, yard signs (rigid),
banner signs, feather flag signs and sandwich board signs.
   PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than twelve inches (12") beyond the surface
of such building or wall.
   READER BOARD: A sign or part of a sign on which the letters are readily
replaceable such that the copy can be changed from time to time.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which the sign is placed, not including a subdivision sign.
   ROOF SIGN: A sign that is erected on or above the roof of a building and
which derives its principal support from the roof or from columns or supports
extending through the roof. The definition includes a sign affixed to any
structure erected upon a roof, including a structure housing building equipment
and includes a sign erected on top of a canopy, deck, patio, or similar
structure.
   SVDRC: The Spring Valley design review committee.
   SHOPPING CENTER: A group of four (4) or more commercial establishments,
planned, developed and owned and/or managed as a unit related in location, size
and types of shops to the trade area the unit serves. Shopping centers provide
services for a community or neighborhood.
   SIGN: Any letters, figures, design, symbol, trademark, logo or device
intended to attract attention to any activity or service, place, subject,
person, firm, corporation, public performance, machine or merchandise
whatsoever, including the display of merchandise. Sources of light used
primarily to illuminate a sign, or a building, or grounds surrounding the
building, shall not be considered signs themselves; provided however, that
sources of light used primarily to attract attention to the light itself or as
a decorative feature of the display shall be considered as part of the sign.
Excluded from this definition are official traffic signs or signals, sheriff's
notices, court notices or official public notices and the flag of government or
noncommercial institutions.
   SIGN AREA: The entire area within a single, contiguous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of writing, representation, logo, emblem or any figure or
similar character, together with any form or other material or color forming an
integral part of the display, or used to differentiate such sign area from the
background against which it is placed. The sign area shall not include the
necessary supports or uprights on which the sign is placed, and superficial,
nonilluminated column covers, ornamental trim and other such incidental objects
attached thereto, or portions of the sign structure which are not designed to
convey a message.
   STATE HIGHWAY: Highways in and through the city of Eagle that are owned and
maintained by the state of Idaho. These include State Highways 16, 20/26, 44
and 55.
   STREETLIGHT BANNER: A temporary sign made of lightweight fabric, plastic or
similar material this is mounted to a streetlight pole with brackets and
announces upcoming community events or reinforces the community theme.
   SUBDIVISION/NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN: A permanent on premises sign used to identify
a subdivision or neighborhood.
   SUBDIVISION OFF PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Off premises portable signs
providing directional information for a subdivision.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: A nonpermanent sign intended for use for a limited period of
time, as regulated within this chapter.
   TRAIL SIGN: A sign identifying a trail or trailhead and which may contain
directional information or information about the trail.
   VEHICLE SIGN: Any sign, logo or advertisement placed, painted, attached, or
displayed on a vehicle.
   WALL SIGN (FLAT): A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a
building or structure with the face of the sign parallel to the plane of said
wall, and not extending over twelve inches (12") from the wall of the building
or structure.
   WALL SIGN (PERPENDICULAR): A sign attached to or erected against the wall of
a building or structure with the face(s) of the sign perpendicular to the plane
of said wall and not extending over twelve inches (12") from the wall of the
building or structure.
   WINDOW SIGN: All signs located inside and affixed to, painted on or within
three feet (3') of windows of a building, whether temporary or permanent,
lighted or unlighted, which may be viewed from the exterior of the building.
The term does not include merchandise located within three feet (3') of the
window.
   YARD SIGN (NONRIGID): Yard signs may be referred to as "lawn signs".
Nonrigid yard/lawn signs are not stable and typically are susceptible to being
blown over by wind and oftentimes do not remain vertical. Common types of
nonrigid yard/lawn signs are corrugated plastic, fold over cardboard, and
poster type which are attached to a light metal stand with less than one-fourth
inch (1/4") thickness, or lattice type wood stakes, which are inserted into the
ground. The metal stands are usually an "H" or "I" type. The "H" type stand is
shaped like an "H" and two (2) of the prongs insert into the sign, or the sign
is attached to the two (2), and the other two (2) prongs are inserted into the
ground. The single or double crossbar between the two (2) prongs adds minimal
strength and makes the entire stand one single unit. The "I" type stand is
essentially an "H" stand without a crossbar linking the prongs.
   YARD SIGN (RIGID): Yard signs may be referred to as "lawn signs". Rigid
yard/lawn signs are stable and are not susceptible to being blown over by wind.
Rigid yard/lawn signs are made of a solid metal frame with a metal thickness of
one-fourth inch (1/4") or more, or they are made of metal one-half inch by one-
half inch (1/2" x 1/2") angle iron, both of which include solid metal legs for
insertion into the ground. The metal frame includes an attached metal or hard
plastic sign face.
   C.   General Provisions:
      1.   Sign Area:
         a.   Wall Mounted Signs: In determining the total area of a sign that
is mounted to a wall or building and is created with individual letters only,
an imaginary vertical line shall be drawn before the first and after the last
letter of each word in the sign. Imaginary horizontal lines shall be drawn
above and below each line in the sign. The sum or the areas within these
intersecting lines shall equal the total area of the individual letter sign. An
example of this formula is shown in exhibit 3-M of this section:
   EXHIBIT 3-M
   SIGN AREA - WALL MOUNTED SIGN WITH INDIVIDUAL LETTERS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-267.png]
 
When graphics are used in combination with letters to create the sign message
the graphics shall be included as part of the formula in determining total
area. An example of this formula is shown in exhibit 3-N of this section:
   EXHIBIT 3-N
   SIGN AREA - WALL MOUNTED SIGN WITH LETTERS AND GRAPHICS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-265.png]
 
         b.   Freestanding/Monument Signs: In determining the total area of a
freestanding or monument sign, the measured width and height shall be of the
entire mass of the frame or monument that contains the signage. This area
excludes architectural embellishments that are distinct features from the area
that is for signage. The maximum height of the sign is determined by measuring
from the tip of the frame or monument to the adjacent grade. The maximum width
of the sign is determined by measuring the furthest horizontal extents of the
frame or monument. An example of this formula is shown in exhibit 3-O of this
section:
   EXHIBIT 3-O
   SIGN AREA - FREESTANDING/MONUMENT SIGNS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-263.png]
 
      2.   Lettering: All letters, numbers and logos for wall and monument
signs shall be raised or recessed. Stick on or painted on letters are not
permitted.
      3.   Addressing: Any on site sign which identifies a complex of
structures shall display the complex address or the address range within the
complex. Any other on site sign may incorporate a street address. The area of
any sign which displays a street address shall not be computed as part of the
sign face. The numeral size of all street addresses displayed on building
fascias shall be in conformance with all applicable government regulations.
      4.   Sign Integration: All signs shall be designed and located as an
integral part of the total site or building design and shall be harmonious with
the building architecture and colors.
      5.   Location Of Signs: All permanent signs shall be located on site and
shall be outside of any rights of way and sight triangles. Identification,
temporary, portable, directional and other signs may be located within the
public right of way, but shall require the approval and license agreement of
the public entity controlling the right of way. Signs shall be a minimum of two
feet (2') from any sidewalk.
      6.   Maintenance Of Signs: The following maintenance standards shall
apply to all signs:
         a.   Every sign and all parts, portions, units and materials
comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports, or
anchorage thereof, shall be continuously maintained by the property owner or
owners' association in a safe, structurally sound, neatly painted, and well
repaired condition.
         b.   Illuminated signs must be capable of being fully illuminated and
legible and the face(s) must be intact without holes or other exterior facial
damage.
         c.   Illuminated signs that are damaged or have defective lighting
elements shall remain unlighted until repaired.
         d.   In the case of abandoned signs, any message or copy pertaining to
the abandoned business must be removed within ninety (90) days of user vacancy
and shall remain unlit until a new panel or sign is approved.
         e.   Any graffiti shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours.
   D.   Specific Provisions And Requirements:
      1.   Community Signs:
         a.   Community Entry Signs: One community entry sign shall be
permitted on each side of any entry road into Spring Valley. The entry sign
wall shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height for a grade adaptive sign
wall or ten feet (10') in height for a freestanding or nongrade adaptive sign
wall, and the sign area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per sign. See
exhibits 3-Q, 3-R and 3-S of this section.
         b.   Community Facility/Amenity Signs:
            (1)   Types Of Signs: No more than two (2) types of signs may be
allowed at each facility/amenity.
            (2)   Freestanding Signs: One freestanding sign shall be allowed
per street front. The sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height and eight
feet (8') in width and the sign area shall not exceed forty eight (48) square
feet. See exhibit 3-T of this section.
            (3)   Placard Type/Wall Attached Signs: One sign shall be allowed
on a pilaster on each side of a vehicular or pedestrian access point into the
facility or amenity. The pilaster shall be a maximum of seven feet (7') high
and four and one-half feet (4.5') wide and the sign area shall not exceed four
(4) square feet per sign. See exhibits 3-U and 3-V of this section.
            (4)   Hanging Signs: One sign hanging from a pilaster shall be
allowed on each side of an entry drive into a facility or amenity. The pilaster
shall be a maximum of ten feet (10') high and five feet (5') wide and the sign
area shall not exceed nine (9) square feet per sign. See exhibit 3-W of this
chapter.
         c.   Subdivision/Neighborhood Signs:
            (1)   One subdivision/neighborhood sign may be permitted on each
side of any entry road into a subdivision, or within the landscape median at
the entry road if approved by ACHD, and at the intersection of any collector
and/or arterial streets abutting the subdivision.
            (2)   Subdivision/neighborhood signs shall not exceed eight feet
(8') in height and the sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per side.
See exhibit 3-X of this chapter.
         d.   Regional And Community Trail Signs:
            (1)   Trailhead Informational Signs: One trailhead informational
sign showing information about the trail (map, points of interest, rules, etc.)
shall be allowed at each designated regional and community trailhead and shall
not exceed nine feet (9') in height and twenty one (21) square feet in sign
area. See exhibit 3-Y of this chapter.
            (2)   Trailhead Portal Sign And Monuments: One sign and entry
portal monument shall be allowed at each designated regional trailhead. The
portal shall consist of two (2) columns a maximum of fourteen and one-half feet
(14.5') high and three feet (3') wide and shall contain the Spring Valley logo
sign hanging from a beam between the columns. The logo sign shall not exceed
four and one-half (4.5) square feet in area. See exhibit 3-Z of this chapter.
            (3)   Trail Informational And Directional Signs: Trail directional
and informational signs shall be located as needed at trail entrances and road
crossings and along trails to indicate directional changes, distances and
similar information. Informational signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in
height and the sign area shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. Directional
signage shall not exceed five feet (5') in height and three (3) square feet in
sign area. Such signs may be combined. See exhibit 3-Y of this section.
         e.   Community Directional Signs: A community directional sign shall
be permitted on each side of an arterial or collector street or within a median
or roundabout of such streets (subject to ACHD approval). Such sign shall be
located at or before an intersection to direct the public to a community
facility. Such sign may be single or double sided and shall not exceed six feet
(6') in height and forty eight (48) square feet per side. Such sign shall
contain a maximum of five (5) panels with each panel a maximum of nine inches
(9") in height. See exhibit 3-AA of this section. A community directional sign
may be required to collocate/be combined with a builder directional sign to
reduce signage clutter along the street. If separate, the minimum separation
between such signs shall be six hundred sixty feet (660').
         f.   Builder Directional Signs: A builder directional sign shall be
permitted on each side of an arterial or collector street or within a median or
roundabout of such streets (subject to ACHD approval). Such sign shall be
located at or before an intersection to direct the public to a project or
residential neighborhood. Such sign may be single or double sided and shall not
exceed six feet (6') in height and forty eight (48) square feet per side. Such
sign shall contain a maximum of five (5) panels with each panel a maximum of
nine inches (9") in height. See exhibit 3-AA of this section. A builder
directional sign may be required to collocate/be combined with a community
directional sign to reduce signage clutter along the street. If separate, the
minimum separation between such signs shall be six hundred sixty feet (660').
         g.   Community Marketing Signs: A maximum of two (2) community
marketing signs may be located along a state highway outside the ITD right of
way. The signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and one hundred forty
(140) square feet in area. The sign permit duration shall be limited to two (2)
years after which the sign may be removed or the permit may be renewed in
successive two (2) year periods upon approval by the city. Such sign shall be
removed not later than three (3) months after obtaining the final residential
building permit for Spring Valley. See exhibit 3-BB of this section.
         h.   Temporary Community Signs: Written city approval shall not be
required for the following temporary community signs as described and regulated
within this subsection:
            (1)   Spring Valley Feather Flag Signs: Feather flag signs
displaying the Spring Valley name and logo are located at the community
information center, community amenities, and commercial projects and
residential subdivisions under construction or for new sale or lease. Spring
Valley feather flag signs shall be a maximum of fifty six (56) square feet in
area and shall be attached to poles a maximum of fourteen feet (14') in height.
Up to eight (8) double faced feather flag signs shall be allowed at each
location. Such signs shall be removed prior to the build out of the community,
in the case of the community information center and community amenity, or prior
to the issuance of the final occupancy permit within commercial project or
residential subdivision. See exhibit 3-CC of this section.
            (2)   Streetlight Banners: Streetlight banners displaying the
Spring Valley name and logo and/or community events are attached to streetlight
poles along arterial, collector and urban streets within Spring Valley. Two (2)
double faced banners may be attached to each pole and each banner shall be a
maximum of twelve (12) square feet in area. Holiday and special event banners
shall be removed within three (3) days after the closing of the event or the
end of the holiday or special event. See exhibit 3-CC of this section.
            (3)   Community Event Signs: Community events signs shall be
permitted for a maximum of sixty (60) days in any calendar year. A sticker with
the date the sign was first installed shall be affixed to the back of the sign.
Said sign shall be a maximum of five feet (5') in height and one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in area. No requirement within this chapter shall apply to
temporary community event signs except however, no temporary community event
sign shall block ADA accessible sidewalk requirements or violate the sight
visibility triangle of any intersection as determined by ACHD. Signs shall be
removed within three (3) days after the closing of the event.
            (4)   Future Development Signs: Future development signs shall be a
maximum of seven feet (7') in height and forty eight (48) square feet in area.
One single faced sign shall be allowed per street frontage, but no more than
two (2) signs total per parcel. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30)
days after start of construction. See exhibit 3-DD of this section.
            (5)   Custom/Semicustom Lot Sign: One sign shall be allowed per
lot. The sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height on lots defined by
setbacks and ten feet (10') in height on lots (over 1 acre) defined by building
envelopes and the sign area shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet. On
building envelope lots, the sign shall be placed in the center of the building
envelope.
      2.   Wall Signs (Flat And Perpendicular):
         a.   A single-tenant building shall be allowed a maximum of three (3)
wall signs, provided that each sign is placed on a different side of the
building.
         b.   Each business within a multi-tenant building shall be allowed a
maximum of three (3) wall signs provided that each sign is placed on a
different side of the building.
         c.   For a single-tenant building the total sign area of any wall sign
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face to which it
is attached, except that any wall sign that is visible from a state highway
shall be permitted a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the area of the
building face to which it is attached.
         d.   For a multi-tenant building the total sign area of all wall signs
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face to which
they are attached, except that the total sign area for wall signs that are
visible from a state highway shall be a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the
area of the building face to which they are attached.
         e.   The sign area, per side, of any perpendicular wall sign shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face to which it is
attached.
      3.   Monument Signs:
         a.   For single-tenant buildings which are not within a shopping
center, monument signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height and the sign
area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per side.
         b.   For multi-tenant buildings which are not within a shopping
center, monument signs shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height and the
sign area shall not exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet per side.
         c.   For any single-tenant building or multi-tenant building which is
not located in a shopping center, one monument sign per abutting street shall
be permitted.
         d.   A "shopping center" as defined in subsection B of this section
shall be allowed one monument sign per street that it abuts for any site less
than twenty (20) acres in size and two (2) signs for any site twenty (20) acres
in size or larger. The height of any such sign shall not exceed fifteen feet
(15') adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state highway and
twenty five feet (25') adjacent to any state highway. The sign area shall not
exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet per side adjacent to a roadway that
is not designated as a state highway and two hundred (200) square feet per side
adjacent to any state highway. If the shopping center has a single address, the
address shall be located on the monument sign and shall be a size that is
readable from the street.
In addition to any shopping center monument signs, any single-tenant building
within a shopping center, and adjacent to a roadway, shall be permitted one
monument sign. The height of any such sign shall not exceed six feet (6')
adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state highway and eight feet
(8') adjacent to any state highway. The sign area shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet per side adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state
highway and sixty (60) square feet per side adjacent to any state highway.
         e.   The minimum distance between monument signs on a single parcel
shall be one hundred feet (100').
         f.   No monument sign shall be any closer than fifty feet (50') from a
monument sign, or other freestanding sign, on an adjacent property.
         g.   Monument signs are permitted to be double faced.
      4.   Free Hanging Signboards:
         a.   Free hanging signboards shall not exceed eight (8) square feet
nor shall any such sign extend beyond the porch or canopy to which it is
attached.
         b.   A minimum distance of seven feet six inches (7'6") shall be
required between a walkway and the bottom of a free hanging signboard.
      5.   Fuel Island Signs:
         a.   Fuel island canopies shall be permitted to have a maximum of
three (3) signs.
         b.   The signs shall be attached to, or painted on, the canopy face.
         c.   The height and width of the sign shall be reviewed with regard to
its proportional relationship to the height and width of the canopy face to
which it is attached or painted. The sign area shall be a maximum of twenty
(20) square feet but in no case shall the sign cover more than one-third (1/3)
of the area of the face of the canopy to which it is attached or painted.
         d.   If two (2) signs are proposed, each sign shall be located on a
different side of the canopy and should be oriented to face oncoming traffic.
         e.   A one square foot sign may be permitted for the fuel logo or fuel
brand only on each side of each fuel dispenser or spandrel attached thereto.
      6.   Drive-Through/Drive-Up Service Menu Board Signs:
         a.   Shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and the sign area
shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet.
         b.   Internal illumination may be permitted if the design review board
determines the following:
            (1)   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with
the general objectives, or with any specific objective of this title;
            (2)   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
            (3)   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      7.   Vendor And Temporary Merchant Signs:
         a.   Shall comply with all the requirements of portable on premises
advertising signs except that any temporary vendor sign shall be allowed only
for the length of time that the temporary vendor is in operation.
         b.   Shall be in compliance with title 3, chapter 4, "Vendors,
Solicitors And Temporary Merchants", of the Eagle city code.
      8.   Automated Signs:
         a.   Automated signs may be permitted as a part of a monument sign
only if the design review board determines the following:
            (1)   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with
the general objectives, or with any specific objective of this chapter;
            (2)   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
            (3)   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
         b.   All automated signs that utilize light to create change may
change frame content through dissolve, fade or scroll features only. No sign
shall be operated in a manner which the sign, sign structure, design or
pictorial segment of the sign shows full animation, growing, flashing, rotating
content, or otherwise creating an illusion of movement, except for single color
text only message displays scrolling or traveling across the sign area.
         c.   The signs shall only change frame content not more than every
eight (8) seconds. The change of content must change immediately within a
period of less than one second.
         d.   Based on brightness measured in nit (an illuminative brightness
measurement equivalent to 1 candle per square meter measured perpendicular to
the rays of the source); automated signs that utilize light to change frames
shall contain an auto dimmer allowing for no more than five thousand two
hundred (5,200) nit illumination between sunrise and sunset and up to three
hundred (300) nit illumination between sunset and sunrise.
         e.   The automated sign portion of any sign should be constructed into
the sign in a manner in which it is subordinate to the overall design of the
sign. The automated sign portion of any sign shall not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the face of any sign.
         f.   Where more than one sign is allowed only one sign may contain an
automated sign.
         g.   The addition of an automated sign to any nonconforming sign is
prohibited.
         h.   Any conforming existing sign or portion of a conforming existing
sign that is refaced with an automated sign shall require a design review
approval.
      9.   Prohibited Signs: The following signs and attention attracting
devices shall be prohibited within Spring Valley, except as may otherwise be
specifically stated within this subsection. Prohibited or nonconforming signs
shall be removed within five (5) calendar days of notification of the violation
by the master developer, SVCA, SVDRC or the city. Prohibited or nonconforming
signs that are not removed within five (5) calendar days of notification are
subject to removal by the master developer, SVCA, SVDRC or the city at the
owner's or user's expense:
         a.   Pole signs.
         b.   Billboard signs.
         c.   Roof signs.
         d.   Cabinet signs (standard) except with nontranslucent panels as may
be incorporated into a monument sign which includes advertising for multiple
tenants, and as long as the cabinet portion of the multi-tenant monument sign
is surrounded on all four (4) sides by architectural elements of the sign
structure.
         e.   Wall signs that extend above the parapet wall.
         f.   Permanent reader board signs in excess of twenty (20) square feet
and all temporary reader board signs.
         g.   Off premises signs, except as otherwise stated within this
chapter.
         h.   Banner signs placed within landscaped areas, or otherwise placed
on posts inserted into the ground, except for grand openings, community events,
community yard sales and yard sales for nonprofit organizations.
         i.   Yard signs (nonrigid) except for political campaigns, garage
sales and yard sales as regulated within this title.
         j.   Any sign which is prohibited within the sight visibility triangle
as specified within the ACHD "Policy Manual" or otherwise create a safety
hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
         k.   Any sign which blocks the Americans with disabilities act (ADA)
minimum width required for handicap accessibility on a public sidewalk.
         l.   Searchlights, beacons, strobe lights, scintillating lights, and
similar lights except for grand openings and community events.
         m.   Moving, revolving, intermittent, oscillating, animated, or
flashing signs, except for grand openings and community events.
         n.   Chasing lights, except as may be approved by the city as an
integral part of a building or structure, and except for grand openings,
community events and seasonal events.
         o.   Inflatable balloons and blimps and other wind activated or
spinning devices.
         p.   Bubble machines except for grand openings and community events.
         q.   Signs purported to be, or which are, an imitation of, or resemble
an official traffic sign or signal, or which bear the words "Stop", "Danger",
"Warning", or similar words in a manner potentially causing confusion with such
official signs or signals.
         r.   Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a
traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or radio
equipment vehicle, or signs which obstruct the visibility of any traffic or
street sign or signal device.
         s.   Miscellaneous signs and posters which are visible from a public
way and are tacked, pasted, taped or otherwise affixed in a similar manner to
or upon the walls of buildings, trees, poles, posts, fences, hydrants, bridges,
or other structures.
         t.   Display of items for sale within any landscape area or required
parking area except as a part of a community event.
         u.   Signs, including window signs, identifying or advertising
activities, products, businesses or services which have been discontinued.
         v.   Any sign in violation of this chapter.
         w.   Any sign in violation of local, state, or federal law over which
the city exercises jurisdiction.
         x.   Any sign whose permit or approval has expired.
      10.   Portable Signs: Written approval of the administrator shall be
required for any portable on premises advertising sign, except for feather flag
signs used as portable on premises advertising signs, and off premises
directional sign. A color picture, or color drawing, including the dimension of
any proposed sign shall be submitted to the city along with a written narrative
describing the sign materials, as well as the planned location of any such
sign. The administrator shall review the sign proposal for compliance with this
chapter. There shall be no cost to the applicant for administrator review and
action on any such sign. Any denial or approval by the administrator may be
appealed in accordance with
chapter 8 of this title.
         a.   Portable On Premises Advertising Signs:
            (1)   One portable on premises advertising sign shall be permitted
per business. Except that, if the business abuts more than one street it shall
be permitted one portable on premises advertising sign per street that it abuts
as long as the signs are a minimum of fifty feet (50') apart.
            (2)   Portable on premises advertising signs, except for feather
flag signs, shall be a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet along roadways with
three (3) or less travel lanes with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per
hour or less and twenty four (24) square feet along roadways with more than
three (3) travel lanes or along roadways with a speed limit of over twenty five
(25) miles per hour.
            (3)   Portable on premises advertising signs, except for feather
flag signs, shall be a maximum of five feet (5') in height along roadways with
three (3) or less travel lanes with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per
hour or less and six feet (6') in height along roadways with more than three
(3) travel lanes or along roadways with a speed limit of over twenty five (25)
miles per hour.
            (4)   Portable on premises advertising signs shall only be
permitted on the parcel where the business is located, or on the adjacent
sidewalk, and shall not be permitted on any other parcel except that any multi-
tenant site shall have the sign on the site and not on any other site.
            (5)   Portable on premises advertising signs on a public sidewalk
abutting the business's parcel may be permitted if a minimum of five feet (5')
of unobstructed walkway, or ADA required minimum, remains for pedestrians. The
sign shall be located so as to not interfere with the flow of pedestrians.
            (6)   If a feather flag sign is used as a portable on premises
advertising sign the maximum height shall be fourteen feet (14') and maximum
width shall be four feet (4').
            (7)   The sign, copy, and materials shall be maintained and kept in
good condition and repair to guard against decay, unsafe, and poorly maintained
signs.
         b.   Portable Off Premises Directional Signs:
            (1)   Portable off premises directional signs shall only be
permitted for businesses which are not located on any street designated as an
arterial street on the Spring Valley master streets and circulation plan (this
includes any business in a shopping center or business park).
            (2)   Portable off premises directional signs are allowed only when
a change in direction is required to lead customers to the business site.
            (3)   A maximum of two (2) portable off premises directional signs
are allowed per business.
            (4)   Portable off premises directional signs shall be separated by
a minimum of six feet (6').
            (5)   Portable off premises directional signs which include
multiple businesses are encouraged in order to guard against clutter and
therefore are permitted double the height and size maximums specified in
subsections D10b(6) and D10b(7) of this section.
            (6)   Portable off premises directional signs shall be a maximum of
eight (8) square feet along roadways with three (3) or less travel lanes with a
speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less and twelve (12) square
feet along roadways with more than three (3) travel lanes or along roadways
with a speed limit of over twenty five (25) miles per hour.
            (7)   Portable off premises directional signs shall be a maximum of
two and one-half feet (2.5') in height along roadways with three (3) or less
travel lanes with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less and
three feet (3') in height along roadways with more than three (3) travel lanes
or along roadways with a speed limit of over twenty five (25) miles per hour.
            (8)   Portable off premises directional signs on a public sidewalk
may be permitted if a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed walkway, or ADA
required minimum, remains for pedestrians. The sign shall be located so as to
not interfere with the flow of pedestrians.
            (9)   The sign, copy, and materials shall be maintained and kept in
good condition and repair to guard against decay, unsafe, and poorly maintained
signs.
            (10)   No portable off premises directional sign owner shall have
any exclusive right to any location within a public right of way, nor shall any
sign be permitted to be placed within any congested area where the signage
might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this paragraph,
the judgment of a "public safety officer" (as defined in section 3-4-2 of the
Eagle city code), or ACHD official, or ITD official, exercised in good faith,
shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public is
impeded or inconvenienced.
            (11)   Portable off premises signs are only allowed to be displayed
during the hours that the business is in operation.
      11.   Permitted Temporary Signs: Written city approval shall not be
required for the temporary signs as described and regulated within this
subsection. Additionally, signs listed under "prohibited signs" of this title
are also prohibited as temporary signs.
         a.   Government: Governmental or other legally required posters,
notices or signs.
         b.   Banner Signs (Business): Banner signs used for limited time frame
promotions of special events, business open houses, or sales of products or
services. Said banner signs shall be securely attached to a fence, building,
structure or similar permanent fixture and shall not be permitted to be
displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days with a minimum of
thirty (30) consecutive days between placements. No banner sign shall be placed
within a landscaped area, or otherwise be placed on posts inserted into the
ground. The maximum size for any such banner sign shall be forty eight (48)
square feet. One banner sign shall be allowed per business.
         c.   Real Estate Signs: "For Sale", "For Rent", or "For Lease" signs
for properties, businesses and residences provided such sign does not exceed
six (6) square feet in residential land use designations, and sixteen (16)
square feet in all other land use designations, except that no said signs may
be permitted along state highways. Said signs shall be located entirely within
the property that is for sale, and shall be removed immediately after the close
of the escrow, or the rental or lease has been accomplished. Said signs shall
only be permitted on the property where the property, business or residence is
located and only one said sign shall be allowed.
         d.   Real Estate Open House Signs: On and off premises signs used for
real estate open houses. Said signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet, shall
only be used during the open house, and shall be removed immediately after the
open house. One said sign per open house shall be allowed at each intersection.
         e.   Political Signs: Off premises signs used for political campaigns
for any item or individual on a voting ballot. Said signs may only be used
during the campaign and shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours after
the voting booths close.
         f.   Garage And Yard Sale Signs: On and off premises signs used for
garage sales and yard sales during the sale only, except that community yard
sales and yard sales for nonprofit organizations may have signs posted ten (10)
days prior to the sale. Said signs shall be removed immediately after the sale.
         g.   Construction Signs: Shall be placed on the construction site only
between the time that a development application has been filed with the city
and final issuance of certificate of occupancy. Contractors' signs may include
banks, realtors, subcontractors, etc., and shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet, except that thirty two (32) square feet may be permitted along state
highways, unless legally required by governmental contract to be larger, and
eight feet (8') shall be the maximum height. Said signs shall be located a
minimum of five feet (5') inside the property line even if the sign is attached
to construction fencing. One said sign shall be allowed per street frontage,
but no more than two (2) signs in total.
         h.   Subdivision Directional Signs (Off Premises): Subdivision
directional signs outside of Spring Valley shall advertise the subdivision name
with directional information and may advertise trade information and/or price
range. Said signs shall be a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet, except that
thirty two (32) square feet may be permitted along state highways, and said
signs may be a maximum of eight feet (8') high. A maximum of three (3) off
premises subdivision directional signs may be utilized for any subdivision
within the city limits. All signs are to be placed on private property. Said
signs are allowed only when a change in direction is required to lead customers
to subdivision site. Subdivision directional signs may only be erected after
city approval of the final plat for the subdivision and must be removed after
the last lot within the approved final plat is sold by the developer. For
subdivision directional signs within Spring Valley, see subsection D1f,
"Builder Directional Signs", of this section.
         i.   Grand Opening Signs: All signs, except for prohibited signs as
regulated in this chapter, are allowed for a grand opening for a new
subdivision, business or enterprise or for a grand opening for a subdivision,
business or enterprise under new management for a maximum period of sixty (60)
calendar days. One sign shall be allowed for each subdivision, business or
enterprise.
         j.   Temporary Sign In Lieu Of Permanent Wall Sign: A business
identification banner, or similar sign, is allowed on a temporary basis, not to
exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, during approval and construction of any
wall sign for a new business. Said sign shall not be larger than the wall sign
that would be permitted per this section, shall only be located on the face of
the building where the wall sign would be permitted per this title, and shall
be removed when the permanent sign is installed, not to exceed one hundred
twenty (120) days.
         k.   Temporary Sign In Lieu Of Permanent Monument Sign: A subdivision
or business identification A-frame, sandwich board or similar sign, is allowed
on a temporary basis, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, during
approval and construction of any monument sign for a new subdivision or
business. Said sign shall not be larger than the monument sign that would be
permitted per this section and shall be removed when the permanent sign is
installed, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days.
         l.   Holiday Signs: Temporary signs commemorating and/or recognizing a
"holiday" as defined herein shall be allowed during the time the holiday is
typically recognized. Holiday signs shall not advertise a business, product or
service. No requirement within this section shall apply to temporary holiday
signs except however, no temporary holiday sign shall block ADA accessible
sidewalk requirements or violate the sight visibility triangle of any
intersection as determined by ACHD. Holiday signs shall be removed within three
(3) days following the end of the holiday.
         m.   Person Signs: Signs worn or held by a person while walking the
public ways of the city.
      12.   Sign Illumination:
         a.   The design review board must find that any illuminated sign
permitted under the specific regulations within this section is designed such
that brightness levels are controlled to assure a soft, subtle effective light
in accordance with other city regulations intended to create and maintain the
Spring Valley architecture theme, while encouraging energy efficient lighting.
No illuminated sign or lighting device shall be placed or directed so as to
permit or cause glare or reflection which may constitute a traffic or safety
hazard or interfere with the use and enjoyment of a public street, walkway or
adjacent property.
         b.   Illumination types, styles, and practices not listed herein shall
be prohibited unless otherwise deemed by the design review board to be
consistent with the Spring Valley architecture theme.
         c.   Floodlighting is permitted only through the use of incandescent,
LED (4,000 Kelvin +/- 275 Kelvin), metal halide (320 watts maximum) and high
pressure sodium light sources.
         d.   Exposed neon is permitted when used to create the sign letter(s)
or as an architectural element as part of the sign design. A clear covering may
be permitted for protection of the neon element.
         e.   LED is permitted as a light source for reverse channel letters.
         f.   Halo illumination is permitted.
         g.   All types of internal illumination are prohibited, except for
automated signs and drive-through/drive-up service menu board signs as
regulated in this chapter.
         h.   External sign illumination shall be shielded and directed so that
the light illuminates the face of the sign only.
      13.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided at the base of all
monument signs. Landscape plans shall be prepared by or under the responsible
control of a licensed landscape architect with said plans to be duly stamped to
clearly identify the preparer. The amount required shall be three (3) times the
size of the largest sign area. An example is shown in exhibit 3-P of this
section:
   EXHIBIT 3-P
   LANDSCAPE AT MONUMENT SIGN BASES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-261.png]
 
      14.   Master Sign Plans:
         a.   Community Master Sign Plan: A community master sign plan, as
defined by this chapter, shall be submitted to the design review board for
review and approval. The purpose of a master sign plan is to coordinate signs,
and create a plan that establishes and maintains a consistent and overall
community sign design. The community master sign plan shall include detailed
exhibits containing signage standards for community signage within Spring
Valley including sign locations, sign type, dimensions, materials, colors and
letter font, size and application, consistent with exhibits 3-Q through 3-DD of
this section. The general phase by phase location of said signs shall be in
compliance with the approved PUMP signage plan for each applicable PUMP. Once
the community master sign plan is approved, community signs adhering to the
criteria in the master plan shall be approved by the administrator. Until such
time as the community master sign plan is approved, the provisions of the city
code for signage approval shall apply to community signs.
         b.   Project Master Sign Plan: A developer who retains control over
one or more structures or buildings intended for business occupancy in a
shopping center, business or office park, single or multi-tenant commercial or
industrial facility or similar project shall submit a project master sign plan,
as defined by this chapter, shall be to the city for review and approval. The
purpose of a master sign plan is to coordinate signs, and create a plan that
establishes a building or site's overall sign design. The master sign plan
shall show sign colors, styles and locations of buildings, maximum size,
illumination, and materials to be used.
         c.   Suspension Or Relaxation: The master sign plan may be approved by
the city with elements that require suspension or relaxation of the height,
area, number of signs, or locations of signs specified within this section if
the design review board finds that extraordinary conditions exist which allow
suspension or relaxation, but that any suspension or relaxation will still meet
the intent of this section and:
            (1)   The development site contains unique or unusual physical
conditions such as topography, proportion, size or relation to a public street
that would limit or restrict normal sign visibility; or
            (2)   The proposed or existing development exhibits unique
characteristics of land use, architectural style, site location, physical
scale, historical interest or other distinguishing features that justify
variation from conventional development; or
            (3)   The proposed signage incorporates special design features
such as logos, emblems, murals, statuaries or similar architectural elements
that are designed in a manner determined by the city to be architecturally
compatible to the sign and area.
      15.   Exempt Signs: The provisions and requirements of this section shall
not apply to the following signs and attention attracting devices, except that
no sign or attention attracting device shall block ADA accessible sidewalk
requirements or the sight vision area of an intersection as determined by ACHD:
         a.   Public Convenience Signs: Signs not exceeding six (6) square feet
in area, erected for the convenience of the public, such as signs identifying
restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features or facilities.
         b.   Directional Signs (On Premises): Shall not exceed six (6) square
feet in area.
         c.   Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and
dates of erection of a building or structure.
         d.   Traffic Or Other Municipal Signs (Signs Required By Law): Traffic
signals, railroad crossings signs, legal notices, and such temporary emergency
or nonadvertising signs as may be authorized by the city council.
         e.   Emergency Service Signs: Signs for emergency services such as
police services, emergency rooms, fire departments, hospitals, etc.
         f.   Utility Company Signs: Signs of public utility companies
indicating danger or which show the location of utility facilities.
         g.   Address Numbers: Numbers and letters for address identification.
         h.   Warning Signs: Nonilluminated or externally illuminated "No
Trespassing", "No Parking", "No Dumping" and other warning signs located on the
lot to which the sign is appurtenant and not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area.
         i.   Seasonal Decorations: Reasonable seasonal decorations within the
appropriate holiday season. However, such displays shall be removed at the end
of the public holiday season.
         j.   Flag (Government): The flag of the national, state and local
government, except no more than two (2) flags are permitted per pole, each flag
shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet in surface area, shall be let
loose to fly in the breeze and the pole shall be a maximum of thirty five feet
(35') in height.
         k.   Flag (Commercial): The flag of a commercial institution, except
that no more than one flag is permitted per business, the flag shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet in surface area, shall be left loose to fly in the
breeze and the pole shall be a maximum of fifteen feet (15') in height.
         l.   Art: Sculptures, fountains, mosaics and design features which do
not incorporate advertising or identification.
         m.   Murals: Murals shall be considered art and not signs as long as
the mural is not used to advertise the business. Murals shall be artistic and
nostalgic in nature and shall follow the theme of Spring Valley architecture.
After receiving a recommendation from the Eagle arts commission, all murals
shall be reviewed by the design review board and approved by the city council.
         n.   Historic Signage: Signs pertaining to any local historical
significance are exempt from the provisions of this title.
         o.   Window Signs (Nonilluminated): Nonilluminated window signs as
long as the total window area covered does not exceed twenty five percent (25%)
of the total window area of all windows facing public streets.
         p.   Window Signs (Neon): Neon window signs no larger than four (4)
square feet or ten percent (10%) of the window where it is placed, whichever is
larger, but no more than two (2) neon window signs per street frontage shall be
allowed.
         q.   Door Signs: Door signs identifying the business and/or indicating
business hours, emergency phone numbers, etc., shall be permitted up to a
maximum of two (2) square feet.
         r.   Party Balloons: Latex and mylar style party balloons twenty four
inches (24") or less in diameter.
         s.   Displays: Display of items for sale located at any city approved
business site, but not within any landscape area or required parking area,
except as a part of a community event.
         t.   Signs Located Inside Buildings: Signs located in the interior of
any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of
buildings, which signs are designed and located to be viewed exclusively by
patrons of such use or uses.
      16.   Signs On City Owned Property:
         a.   No person shall erect a sign upon any property owned or
controlled by the city without first having procured prior written permission
from the city. Before any permit shall be granted for the erection and
maintenance of a sign upon property of the city, a sign approval application
shall be required with any additional information which the administrator shall
deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this title. In the event
the permit does not specify a term, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months
from the date of issuance.
         b.   In the event that any sign is erected or maintained in violation
of the provisions of this subsection, the city may direct the removal of such
sign. In the event the permittee deems such removal to be without cause, they
may, within thirty (30) days after such removal, make written appeal to the
city council. The findings of the city council, after notice to the permittee
and due hearing, shall be final.
   E.   City Entry Statement And Cooperative Sign Plan: The city may develop a
city entry statement and cooperative sign plan which includes the city entry
signs and streetlight signage and which specifies the design criteria,
aesthetics, locations and funding methods for future public, private or public/
private partnership construction of cooperative business identification and
directional signage.
   F.   Violations And Penalties For Noncomplying Signs: In addition to or in
lieu of removal of noncomplying signs by the city as permitted by this title,
the sheriff, deputy sheriff, or zoning officer sworn as a limited purpose
deputy, may issue to the known owner of such sign an infraction citation which
shall be an infraction. Such citation shall impose upon the owner a fine of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation, fifty dollars ($50.00)
for the second violation, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third and
subsequent violations. Each day a sign continues in violation of this title
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   EXHIBIT 3-Q
   COMMUNITY ENTRY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-259.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-R
   COMMUNITY ENTRY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-257.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-S
   COMMUNITY ENTRY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-255.png] 
 
   EXHIBIT 3-T
   COMMUNITY FACILITY/AMENITY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-253.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-U
   COMMUNITY FACILITY/AMENITY SIGN
 
   EXHIBIT 3-V
   COMMUNITY FACILITY/AMENITY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-249.png] 
 
   EXHIBIT 3-W
   COMMUNITY FACILITY/AMENITY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-247.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-X
   SUBDIVISION/NEIGHBORHOOD ENTRY SIGNS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-245.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-Y
   REGIONAL AND COMMUNITY TRAIL SIGNS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-243.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-Z
   TRAILHEAD PORTAL SIGN AND MONUMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-241.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-AA
   COMMUNITY AND BUILDER DIRECTIONAL SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-239.png] 
 
   EXHIBIT 3-BB
   TEMPORARY COMMUNITY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-237.png] 
 
   EXHIBIT 3-CC
   TEMPORARY COMMUNITY SIGNS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-235.png]
 
   EXHIBIT 3-DD
   TEMPORARY COMMUNITY SIGN
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-233.png]
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-9 LIGHTING:
   A.   General:
      1.   Exterior lighting design shall provide a cohesive theme for the
community, neighborhood or project and consider the aesthetics, color,
photometric performance, glare and light trespass of exterior lighting in the
lighting design. Lighting types to be considered include, but are not limited
to, street lighting, parking lot lighting, building exterior lighting,
landscape lighting, plaza, walkway and trail lighting, and sports field
illumination.
      2.   All exterior lighting, including sports and recreational lighting
fixtures, shall provide acceptable qualities and quantities of illumination for
its function and minimize off site glare and light trespass. Any lights used to
illuminate a site shall be arranged to reflect light away from the adjoining
property.
      3.   Lighting design shall promote dark sky principles which seek to
minimize light pollution and degradation of the nighttime visual environment by
incorporating lighting practices that minimize the amount and area of
illumination. Such practices include:
         a.   Providing lighting fixtures with lamp wattages designed for the
minimum level required by the use.
         b.   Providing energy efficient light sources.
         c.   Minimizing light trespass and glare by aiming fixtures downward
and shining light only where it is needed and providing appropriate shielding
as necessary to ensure that little or no unwanted light falls directly onto
adjacent property.
         d.   Minimizing the duration of illumination of certain light sources
(sports fields and court lighting) by having lights out as long as practical.
   B.   Street Lighting:
      1.   The master developer or subdivision developer shall install
streetlights at locations described in subsection B4 of this section and as
approved by the administrator. After installation and acceptance by the
administrator, the owners' association shall pay the cost of maintenance and
power and assume ownership of the streetlights.
      2.   Streetlights along public streets in Spring Valley shall consist of
two (2) types as shown on exhibit 3-EE of this section:
         a.   Type A streetlights shall be used along principal and minor
arterial roadways to emphasize the importance of such roadways.
         b.   Type B streetlights shall be used on collector and local streets.
         c.   Either type A or type B streetlights shall be used on urban
streets depending on whether they are arterial, collector or local streets.
Private streets may contain different streetlights than the type B light, but
they shall be appropriate to the character of the neighborhood or project and
shall not be higher than the Spring Valley type B streetlight standard.
         d.   Type A and B streetlights shall be in accordance with the
examples shown on exhibit A and consist of the following components as shown on
the manufacturers' cut sheets at the end of this section:
            (1)   Type A pole: Ameron concrete wood grained pole, square
straight aluminum pole with Bella Vista angle shade, or approved equal, with a
pole height of nineteen feet six inches to twenty nine feet four inches (19'6"
- 29'4").
            (2)   Type B pole: Ameron concrete wood grained pole, square
straight aluminum pole with Bella Vista angle shade, or approved equal, with
pole height of fourteen feet seven inches to nineteen feet six inches (14'7" -
19'6").
            (3)   Luminaire: Gallery 1970-S FG BF or approved equal.
            (4)   Lamps: LED (2,700 Kelvin +/- 275 Kelvin) or metal halide (320
watts maximum) but shall be consistent in their application within each roadway
type.
      3.   Luminaires shall conform to Illuminating Engineering Society Of
North America (IESNA) standards for street lighting based on roadway
classification and approval by the city.
      4.   Streetlights shall be generally placed at intersections, at the end
of cul-de-sacs and other locations as necessary and subject to city approval to
provide for roadway and neighborhood safety. Streetlight spacing between
intersections shall be as follows:
            (1)   Type A streetlight: One thousand feet (1,000') maximum or as
otherwise determined by the city.
            (2)   Type B streetlight: One thousand three hundred feet (1,300')
maximum or as otherwise determined by the city.
   C.   Parking Area Lighting:
      1.   All parking areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection.
      2.   Parking area lights for all parking areas in Spring Valley shall be
the type B streetlight, or equal, with single or double mast arms.
      3.   All lights used to illuminate a parking area shall be arranged to
reflect the light away from the adjoining property.
      4.   All parking area lighting shall direct all light downward and the
light shall not trespass more than 0.5 foot-candle, as measured at ten feet
(10') within the property line of any residentially zoned parcel or land or
parcel of land used for residential purposes. Luminaires shall not provide
light above the zero azimuth.
      5.   Light pole fixtures shall have a maximum height of:
         a.   Thirty feet (30') for parking lots with less than five hundred
(500) spaces;
         b.   Thirty five feet (35') for parking lots with more than five
hundred (500) spaces;
         c.   Twenty five feet (25') for any pole within fifty feet (50') of a
property line of any residentially zoned parcel of land or parcel of land used
for residential purposes.
      6.   LEDs (2,700 Kelvin +/- 275 Kelvin) and metal halide (320 watt
maximum) shall be the only type of parking area lighting permitted. Lamp type
shall be consistent throughout the parking area.
      7.   A photometric plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
administrator prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit.
   D.   Pathway/Trail Lighting:
      1.   Pathway/trail lighting shall consist of two (2) types: pole lights
and bollard lights. Pole lights are identical to parking area lights and are
located at trailheads, pathway/trail entries and intersections and other focal
points, such as seating areas. Bollard lights shall be located along the paved
section of the Big Gulch regional trail. Bollard lights shall be a concrete
rusted finish pole, or equal, as shown in exhibit 3-EE of this section. Lamps
shall be LED (2,700 Kelvin +/- 275 Kelvin) or an approved equal. All lamps
shall be consistent in their application within each use area.
   E.   Sign Lighting:
      1.   Sign lighting shall be in accordance with the requirements in the
signage regulations section.
   F.   Sports Lighting:
      1.   General Requirements: All exterior sports and recreational lighting
installations shall require a conditional use permit and comply with applicable
city codes and ordinances. Photometric calculations by a licensed electrical
engineer are required in all applications. The maintained average level of
horizontal illuminance at grade level at the property line shall not exceed one
foot-candle.
      2.   Mounting Height: Sports lighting fixture mounting heights shall
comply with IESNA RP-6-01, "Recommended Practice For Sports And Recreational
Area Lighting".
      3.   Lamps: Lamps shall be LED (4,000 Kelvin +/- 275 Kelvin), metal
halide, or approved equal as technologies advance.
      4.   Sports Courts: Lighting for sports courts (tennis courts, basketball
courts and similar uses) shall comply with the following criteria:
         a.   Luminaires shall be square cutoff fixtures.
      5.   Field Sports: Lighting for baseball, softball, football and soccer
fields shall be considered sports class IV as defined by IESNA standards and
shall be fully shielded and comply with all requirements regarding light spill
and glare.
         a.   Pole heights shall be determined by the manufacturer's
recommended luminaire mounting height.
         b.   Poles shall be finished to match the luminaires or may be zinc
galvanized.
   EXHIBIT 3-EE
   COMMUNITY LIGHTING EXAMPLES
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-231.png]
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
11A-3-10 ADMINISTRATIVE AND BOARD LEVEL APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Administrative Level Design Review Applications: Shall be scheduled as
stipulated in subsection
11A-3-13A of this chapter. All design review applications shall be reviewed and
shall be acted on by the administrator, except for those listed in subsection B
of this section.
   B.   Board Level Design Review Applications: Shall be scheduled as
stipulated in subsection
11A-3-13A of this chapter. Design review applications for the following shall
be reviewed, and shall be acted on by the design review board:
      1.   Any application that includes one or more new buildings.
      2.   An addition to an existing building which is greater than twenty
five percent (25%) of its gross floor area.
      3.   New building facades with material changes.
      4.   Any addition to an existing twenty thousand (20,000) square foot or
larger building.
      5.   Master sign plans which include five (5) or more businesses.
      6.   Community master sign plan.
      7.   Any application which can only be approved with suspension or
relaxation of some or all requirements found in this title in accordance with
section 8-2A-3 of the Eagle city code.
   C.   Concurrent Sign And Building Applications: All sign applications
(including master sign plans) made pursuant to this title are required to be
submitted for review at the time the respective building design review
application is made. This section is not intended to apply to sign applications
made for the advertisement of businesses in existing buildings where no changes
are proposed to the building at the time of the application.
   D.   Administrator Decision: The ultimate decision of whether an
administrative level review or board level review will be required shall be
determined by the administrator. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-11 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to application for a permit to erect, construct, alter, move, remodel,
reface or repaint or otherwise change the use of the building or structure in
Spring Valley, the applicant must file an application, upon a form prescribed
by the council, with the administrator. All application materials supplied or
presented to the city including presentation boards, materials boards and
documentation are part of the public record and shall become the property of
the city. The applicant may be required to supply the city with colored photos
of the presentation boards if determined by the administrator. The size of the
photos shall be determined by the administrator and the boards may be returned
to the applicant if the photos are provided to the city.
Design review applications for any commercial building larger than one hundred
twenty (120) square feet shall be prepared by or under the responsible control
of a licensed architect, unless exempted under Idaho Code section 54-309(2),
with said plans to be duly stamped to clearly identify the preparer.
Applications within Spring Valley shall have a letter from the Spring Valley
design review committee at the time of submittal.
Applications shall be accompanied by appropriate architectural and site
development plans as may be required by the administrator and in accordance
with the requirements set forth in this title. The plans shall be legible, to
scale and shall include, at a minimum:
   A.   Site Plans: Site plans showing:
      1.   Roofline and foundation plan of building, located on the site;
      2.   Location of existing trees and structures, if any;
      3.   Location and dimensions of streets and highway designations;
      4.   Location and dimensions of off street parking and loading
facilities;
      5.   Location and dimensions of points of entry and exit for vehicles and
internal circulation patterns;
      6.   Location of walls and fences and indication of their height and
material of construction;
      7.   Exterior lighting standards and devices including detailed cut
sheets and photometric plan (pedestrian, vehicle, security, decoration);
      8.   Landscape plan;
      9.   Scale and north arrow;
      10.   Location and designation of all rights of way and property lines.
   B.   Architectural Plans: Architectural plans showing:
      1.   Building materials;
      2.   Four (4) elevations to include all sides of development.
Perspectives, models or other suitable graphic materials may be submitted at
the option of the applicant and if determined by the administrator;
      3.   Proposed color schemes of entire building, including roof;
      4.   Site photographs (snapshots) of the site itself and adjacent
properties to intersections;
      5.   Color and texture chips of actual samples of materials may be
submitted at the option of the applicant and as may be required by the
administrator;
      6.   Scale drawings of all signs showing size, material, text or other
graphic symbols, colors and illumination; and
      7.   Scale drawings showing the placement and size of all roof mounted
mechanicals and the screening of such equipment by a parapet wall or within the
roof system.
   C.   Engineered Grading And Drainage Plans:
      1.   A generalized drainage plan showing direction drainage with proposed
on site retention.
      2.   Upon submittal of building/construction plans for an approved design
review application, a detailed site grading and drainage plan, prepared by a
registered professional engineer (PE) or licensed landscape architect (ASLA),
shall be submitted to the city for review and approval by the city engineer.
      3.   a. Upon the completion of the site grading and drainage structure
installation, or other improvements subject to city engineer approval, a
written certification of completion shall be prepared by the registered
professional engineer (PE) or licensed landscape architect (ASLA) responsible
for the plan. The certification of completion shall state that the installation
of all drainage improvements are in substantial compliance with the city
approved drainage plan. This certification shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in
lieu of, the inspections performed and certificates issued by the city.
         b.   In the event that deficiencies are present after the site grading
and drainage structure installation, or other improvements subject to city
engineer approval, the registered professional engineer (PE) or licensed
landscape architect (ASLA) shall prepare and file with the city a report noting
the deficiencies in the installation. The city will not accept the
certification of completion, or issue a certificate of occupancy, until the
registered professional engineer (PE) or licensed landscape architect (ASLA)
has verified that the deficiencies have been corrected.
   D.   Existing Structures And Sites: Applications involving conversion,
remodeling, restoration, renovation, enlargement, or expansion of existing
structures or sites shall contain information sufficient in content and detail
so that the design review board and/or administrator may be assured the
applicant complies with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-12 NOTIFICATION:
The administrator shall direct mail notice to applicant, owner, purchaser of
record, at least seven (7) days prior to the design review board meeting. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-13 DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION PROCESSING:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty five (35) days
prior to action by the administrator or design review board, anyone required to
comply with this title shall submit their application, together with the
required fee, to the administrator. The administrator may extend the review
time for design review applications that are unusually large or complicated and
may decrease review times for applications that are minor or do not require
transmittals to other agencies. At least seven (7) days prior to any scheduled
design review board meeting, all applications to be considered at that meeting
shall be made available to each member of the board.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the administrator or design review board, whichever is
applicable, shall approve the application as presented, approve the application
with supplementary conditions, continue the application for further review, or
deny the application.
      1.   City Findings: The city shall make findings which address the
following:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for the approval or denial;
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
      2.   General Standards For Design Review: The administrator or design
review board, whichever is applicable, shall review the particular facts and
circumstances of each proposed design review in terms of the following
standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such design review at
the proposed location:
         a.   Will function in conformance with the applicable strategies of
the Eagle comprehensive plan and is in accordance with the regulations of this
code;
         b.   Is of a scale, intensity, and character that is in harmony with
existing conforming and planned development in the vicinity of the site;
         c.   Is designed with adequate off street parking facilities in such a
way as to not interfere with ingress/egress to the site and will serve the
intended use so as to not cause conflict with adjacent uses as anticipated
within the zoning district;
         d.   Will not interfere with the visual character, quality, or
appearance of the surrounding area and city, and where possible, enhance the
continuity of thematically common architectural features;
         e.   Will have facades, features, and other physical improvements that
are designed as a whole, when viewed alone as well as in relationship to
surrounding buildings and settings;
         f.   Will not obstruct views and vistas as they pertain to the urban
environment and in relation to artistic considerations;
         g.   Will provide safe and convenient access to the property for both
vehicles and pedestrians through patterned traffic circulation and connectivity
to abutting development;
         h.   Is in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare
promoting a pedestrian friendly and walkable environment in balance with
protecting a viable commercial center in the area;
         i.   Will have signs, if proposed, that are harmonious with the
architectural design of the building and adjacent buildings, and will not cover
or detract from desirable architectural features; and
         j.   Will be consistent with the Spring Valley PADA.
   C.   Appeals: Administrative level applications may be appealed to the
design review board and design review board actions may be appealed to the city
council. An appeal fee, as may be adopted by resolution of the city council,
shall be required for any appeal. Appeals shall comply with the following:
      1.   Any such appeal shall be submitted within ten (10) calendar days
after the decision by filing with the administrator a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds for the appeal. The administrator shall transmit to the
appellate body, either the design review board or the city council, all
documents constituting the record upon which the appeal is based. An appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken.
      2.   Within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of an appeal, the
administrator shall fix a date for the application to be heard and shall notify
the appealing party and applicant, if not the appealing party, with no further
notification being required.
      3.   The grounds for the appeal may address, but is not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Inconsistency with the required findings specified within
subsection B of this section;
         b.   Inconsistency with the purpose and objectives of this title;
         c.   Lack of nexus between the requirement and the proposal;
         d.   Discriminatory action;
         e.   Unwarranted prevention of an allowed land use;
         f.   Undue interference with the design integrity of the proposal;
         g.   Prohibition or unwarranted restriction of building type or
material;
         h.   Violation of law.
      4.   The appellate body, either the design review board or the city
council, shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or deny
the design review application as presented and shall adopt findings as required
within subsection B of this section. Within seven (7) calendar days after a
written decision has been rendered by the city council, the administrator shall
provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-14 APPEALS:
See section
11A-8-8 of this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-15 TERMS OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Any approval given pursuant to the provisions of this title shall lapse
and become null and void twelve (12) months following the date on which it was
given, unless, prior to the expiration date, construction or development is
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the
subject of the application.
      1.   A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of the
approved design review application may be approved by the city council, at its
sole discretion, if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding city code or design review conditions of
approval violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may
be conditioned by the city council to be cured as a condition of the extension
of time;
         b.   The design review application, as previously approved, remains in
the best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this code between the
date of application approval and the application date of the time extension
request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates that the project will commence within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress of the project.
      2.   The city council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This section does not limit the number of extensions the city
council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in
subsection A1 of this section are met. Nothing in this section requires the
city council to grant any extension of an approval period. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
11A-3-16 MODIFICATIONS:
After approval of a design review application, the applicant may request a
modification(s) to the approved development plans or conditions. Such request
shall be made upon an application form prescribed by the council and shall be
determined pursuant to the standards set forth in this title.
   A.   Administrative Level Approvals: The administrator is authorized to
approve all modifications to approved design review applications except for
those listed in subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   Board Level Approvals: The following modifications to an approved
design review application shall require approval from the design review board:
      1.   Any change that may impact an adjoining residential neighborhood.
      2.   Any requests that, in the opinion of the administrator, would
significantly alter the approved design of the site and/or building(s) in a
manner such that design review board review and approval should be required.
   C.   City Council Approvals: City council approval is required for any
request to change or delete a condition of approval which was established by
the council as part of their approval of any design review application which
was appealed to the city council for their action.
   D.   Appeal: Any action on a modification to an approved design review
application by either the administrator or design review board may be appealed
in accordance with
chapter 8 of this title.
   E.   Failure To Obtain Approval: Failure of the applicant to obtain approval
of any modifications constructed contrary to the approved design review plans
may result in the requirement to reconstruct the development to comply with the
original city approved design review plan. The city will not issue a final
occupancy or accept a certificate of completion from the licensed architect or
licensed landscape architect until the issue of the modification has been
resolved. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-17 RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:
   A.   Building/Zoning Permits: The administrator shall not issue a building/
zoning permit to any applicant from within the design review overlay district
until the design review application has been specifically approved in writing
by the administrator or design review board and is in full compliance with this
code. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-18 SURETIES:
Prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, a surety in the
form of an irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or cash, in
the amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated
construction costs of site improvements, landscaping and irrigation shall be
provided by the owner/developer to the city to be held and deposited by the
city until said construction, landscaping and irrigation is complete. Surety
bonds shall only be accepted upon written approval of the city attorney and the
city council. In the case of a habitat area of special concern the surety
amount shall be consistent with subsection
11A-3-7F17d of this chapter. Construction cost estimates shall be reviewed and
approved by the city administrator prior to city acceptance of said surety. The
surety initiation and extension fees shall be established by resolution of the
city council. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
required construction, landscaping and irrigation is complete pursuant to
section
11A-3-19 of this chapter. In the event the owner/developer fails to complete
all improvements required pursuant to the city approved plans the city may,
after written notice of intent to proceed, draw on the surety to completely
install, repair, or replace any and all improvements which are the subject of
noncompliance. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-3-19 INSPECTION:
   A.   When Required: For any development that is the subject of a design
review application, the administrator shall cause an inspection of the
development to be performed to verify that the development has been completed
in accordance with the specifications set forth in this title.
   B.   Certification Of Completion:
      1.   a. Upon the completion of a building, or any other improvement
subject to design review approval, the licensed architect responsible for the
plan shall prepare and file with the city a written certification of
completion. The certification of completion shall state that the construction
of the building is in substantial compliance with the city approved
architectural plan. This certification shall be submitted prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in lieu of,
the inspections performed and certificates issued by the city.
         b.   In the event that deficiencies are present in the construction of
the building, or any other improvement subject to design review approval, the
licensed architect shall prepare and file with the city a report noting the
deficiencies in the construction. The city will not accept a certification of
completion, or issue a certificate of occupancy, until the licensed architect
has verified that the deficiencies have been corrected.
         c.   The licensed architect may, at his discretion, appoint an
authorized designee to certify the project provided that the designee is a
licensed architect.
   C.   Certificate Of Occupancy: The building inspector shall not issue a
final certificate of occupancy to the applicant until all of the requirements
of the design review applications, as approved by the design review board, have
been complied with. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
SECTION:
11A-4-1: Purpose
11A-4-2: Supplemental General Provisions
11A-4-3: Commercial And Industrial Uses Restricted
11A-4-4: Specific Land Use Standards
11A-4-1 PURPOSE:
The purpose of specific use standards is to set specific conditions for various
uses where problems are frequently encountered. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-4-2 SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted
to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
      1.   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by
chapter 2 of this title for new structures in the land use district;
      2.   The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district and the number of dwelling units per acre is less
than or equal to the requirement in that district;
      3.   The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that
which is required for new construction in that district;
      4.   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
ordinances; and
      5.   The conversion does not exceed the total number of units allowed in
Spring Valley; see
chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, construction trailers,
equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work only may be
permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress,
but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the
completion date of the project shall require a zoning permit authorized by the
administrator.
   C.   Parking And Storing Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked
or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely
enclosed building or carport. Further, no boats, motor homes or other
recreational vehicles may be parked more than seventy two (72) consecutive
hours in front of any residentially zoned property. One boat and one
recreational vehicle may be stored in the side or rear yard.
   D.   Enclosed Trash And Recycle Receptacle Areas: All trash and/or garbage
and recycle collection areas for commercial, industrial and multi-family
residential uses shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a solid wall
or fence that is constructed to be a minimum of 1-foot (1') above the height of
the trash and/or recycle receptacle within the collection area measured from
finish surface, and a solid wood gate on a metal frame shall enclose the fourth
side, or shall be within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate vehicular
access to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage as
determined by the administrator shall be provided. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd.
Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
11A-4-3 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES RESTRICTED:
   A.   Performance Requirements: No land or building in any district shall be
used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding
areas or adjoining premises; except, that any case permitted by this title may
be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce
dangerous and objectionable conditions to acceptable limits as established by
the following performance requirements:
      1.   Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable
or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved
as specified in the international fire code and the national safety foundation
publications.
      2.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit
harmful radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the
creator of such disturbance.
      3.   Noise: Objectionable noise, as determined by the administrator,
which is due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise
controlled. Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes are exempt from this requirement.
      4.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
      5.   Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
      6.   Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is
visible from any property outside a manufacturing district or from any street.
      7.   Erosion: No erosion by man, wind or water shall be permitted which
will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
      8.   Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the
requirements and regulations established by the health authority.
   B.   Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of
the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards
Institute, New York, the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington,
D.C., the United States bureau of mines and the health authority.
   C.   Enforcement: The administrator, prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the
manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and
in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits
and tolerances. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-4-4 SPECIFIC LAND USE STANDARDS:
Certain land uses may pose special circumstances that may have detrimental
effects on surrounding land uses and require specific conditions. In addition
to the other requirements of these standards, the following standards apply to
the uses listed in this chapter. If the proposed use does not meet the
standards contained herein, and is otherwise not subject to a conditional use
permit, then a conditional use permit shall be required.
   A.   Aggregate Processing, Asphalt, And Concrete Batch Plants: Aggregate
processing, asphalt, and concrete batch plants are permitted with a conditional
use permit subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The operator shall obtain all required permits and comply with all
applicable local, state and federal regulations.
      2.   The plant(s) shall be erected as a temporary use for the sole
purpose of providing asphalt or concrete to support the development of Spring
Valley. Aggregate mining operations are prohibited. Retail or wholesale sales
outside of Spring Valley shall be prohibited. The plant(s) and all associated
structures shall be removed from Spring Valley following cessation of
operations.
      3.   The plant operator shall treat all haul routes and parking areas
with an effective dust inhibiting surface. All truck tires shall be washed as
they leave the plant sites and pass onto paved access roads to minimize dust
associated with the tracking of mud on the paved road. Each load of aggregate
shall be wetted by a spray/washing system. To further control dust emanating
from trucks, the operator will cover all trucks with tarps.
      4.   Plant operations must be conducted employing portable equipment
which contain and utilize state of the art pollution control features. A
seventy foot (70') high silo will be the maximum allowable height for these
operations. All other activities shall be maintained within thirty five feet
(35') or less in height. The operator shall shield such activities by the use
of berms or by recessing operations below grade or by using similar measures to
reduce noise, visual impact, and dust on existing and future commercial and
residential developments within Spring Valley. Concrete operations shall
incorporate an automatic shutoff valve for the cement and fly ash fill tubes.
The shutoff valve will prohibit bulkers from overfilling silos and adding
particulate matter to the atmosphere.
      5.   The operator shall take such steps as are necessary to mitigate the
visual, noise, dust, and any other impacts on nearby residential and/or
commercial development related to the aggregate processing plants, including
the primary processing plants, the ready mixed concrete and asphaltic concrete
plants. The operator shall comply with the following:
         a.   Prior to startup, all plant facilities shall be shielded, both
visually and audibly through berming, walls, and/or recessing such facilities
below ground level from the existing and future residential and commercial
development. The maximum noise level at the property line shall be seventy (70)
dB. See also buffer area and screening requirements in
chapter 3 of this title.
         b.   The operator shall pave or treat all access roads, haul roads and
parking areas with an effective dust inhibiting surfacing. The operator shall
submit a plan to the city showing planned treatment of all access roads, haul
roads, and parking areas.
         c.   The operator shall install and utilize an effective truck spray/
washing system at the plant site exit. All trucks will be washed as they leave
the plant site. The operator shall clean the access road(s) at a frequency that
effectively controls material buildup and associated dust or other hazards.
         d.   The operator shall at all times keep the plant sites and
excavation sites free from the accumulation of waste materials, rubbish, debris
and toxic or hazardous materials caused by his/her operations and operations of
any subcontractors.
         e.   Ready mixed concrete and asphaltic concrete batch plants shall be
portable facilities employing state of the art production and pollution control
features.
         f.   The operator shall install and utilize an effective system to
control spillage of diesel fuel and other materials used to clean or coat
trucks used to transport asphaltic concrete.
         g.   The operator shall comply with fire department regulations for
all tanks containing fuel or hazardous materials.
         h.   The operator shall take steps necessary to eliminate dust, sand
and other materials from being blown from trucks leaving the plant sites and
excavation sites. These steps shall include wetting of material after loaded
onto trucks and truck covers.
         i.   The primary processing plant shall be located and operated in
those locations where it does not have a sustained noticeable impact on
residential and/or commercial developments. It is anticipated that the impact
from the primary plant will be dependent on its distance from residential/
commercial development, combined with the length of time the plant shall be
located at the specific plant site. At a minimum, the plant shall be located
five hundred feet (500') from any residential property.
         j.   Trucks shall not use compression brakes within Eagle city limits,
except as allowed under subsection 5-7-1A of the Eagle city code.
         k.   All lights, except those on mobile equipment, shall be directed
downward and shielded to the extent possible so as not to shine toward any
occupied residences within one-half (1/2) mile.
         l.   Location of the aggregate processing equipment and plant and
hours of operation shall be submitted to the city for administrative approval.
Normal operations are six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
Monday through Saturday from June through September and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday during other months.
      6.   Plants shall require site plan review and conditional use approval
by the city.
      7.   The operator shall submit a demobilization and site cleanup plan
with the conditional use permit application. The plan shall include the
requirement for the operator to engage a licensed engineer to perform a phase 1
environmental site assessment (ESA) upon demobilization of the plants, and, if
recommended by the phase 1 ESA, the operator shall perform a phase 2 ESA and
perform all required cleanup operations.
      8.   The conditional use permit shall set forth the duration of the use.
      9.   A change in location, expansion, or an extension of time period for
use shall require a new conditional use permit.
   B.   Agriculture:
      1.   The feeding or sheltering of livestock or poultry in penned
enclosures shall not occur within one hundred feet (100') of any residential
property other than on the property for which the livestock is being fed or
sheltered. The operation or maintenance of a commercial feedlot or stockyard
where large numbers of livestock are fed concentrated feeds particularly for
the purpose of fattening for market is prohibited.
      2.   Structures, unless otherwise noted above, requiring a building
permit that are associated with any agricultural use located within the
Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere
to the required land use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acre         50'    30'   20'            30'          35'
 
   C.   Auto Body Shops:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from
any residential property as measured from the building to the residential
property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be buffered from
the residential property and landscaped pursuant to the buffer area and
screening requirements in
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment may be located in
any open area outside of an enclosed building.
      3.   All disabled or wrecked vehicles shall be stored in an area which is
screened from view from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets
pursuant to the requirements for outdoor storage in this section. Such vehicles
shall not be stored on the property longer than twenty one (21) days.
      4.   All repair work shall be performed within an enclosed building.
      5.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the lot.
   D.   Auto Gas Stations/Service Shops:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from
any residential property as measured from the building to the residential
property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be buffered from
the residential property and landscaped pursuant to the buffer area and
screening requirements in
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   Uses permissible at auto gas stations/service shops do not include
major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found at an automotive gas station/service shop. An auto gas station/
service shop is not a repair garage or a body shop.
      3.   The following services may be provided:
         a.   Sales and service of spark plugs, batteries and distributors'
parts.
         b.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
         c.   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts,
brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like.
         d.   Radiator cleaning and flushing.
         e.   Washing, polishing and sale of washing and polishing materials.
         f.   Greasing and lubrication.
         g.   Replacing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines.
         h.   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors.
         i.   Adjusting and repairing brakes.
         j.   Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor.
         k.   Sales of beverages, packaged food, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for service station customers, as accessory and incidental to
principal operations.
         l.   Sales of alternative fuels such as natural gas and ethanol.
         m.   Provisions of road maps and other informational materials to
customers and provision of restroom facilities.
         n.   Warranty maintenance and safety inspections.
         o.   Emissions testing.
         p.   Car washing that meets the requirements for car washes in this
section.
      4.   Such uses shall be buffered from a residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      5.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the lot.
      6.   Sales of alcoholic beverages shall conform to the provisions of
Idaho and city code. The sale of packaged liquor, beer, wine and coolers is
subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the city.
   E.   Auto Repair And Service Shops, Major (Including Tow Service):
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from
any residential property as measured from the building to the residential
property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be buffered from
the residential property and landscaped pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   The operating hours shall be limited to between seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      3.   The use shall be located on a site with other commercial development
with an overall minimum size of ten (10) acres.
      4.   All repair and service work shall be done within a completely
enclosed building.
      5.   Storage of stock, equipment or used or discarded auto parts located
in any open area outside of an enclosed building shall be screened from view
pursuant to the requirements for outdoor storage in this chapter.
      6.   All disabled vehicles shall be stored in an area which is screened
from view from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets pursuant to the
requirements for outdoor storage in this section.
      7.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the lot.
   F.   Auto Repair And Service Shops, Minor:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from
any single-family residential property and a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
from any multi-family property as measured from building to the residential
property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be buffered from
the residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   The use shall be located on a site with other commercial development
with an overall minimum size of five (5) acres.
      3.   All repair and service work shall be done within an enclosed
building or otherwise screened from adjacent properties.
      4.   Storage of stock, equipment, or used or discarded automotive parts
located in any open area outside of an enclosed building shall be screened from
view pursuant to the requirements for outdoor storage in this section.
      5.   All disabled vehicles shall be stored in an area which is screened
from view from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets pursuant to the
requirements for outdoor storage in this section.
      6.   Permitted minor auto mechanical repair and service facilities shall
be limited to the following kinds of activities:
         a.   Electronic tune ups.
         b.   Brake repairs (including drum turning).
         c.   Air conditioning repairs.
         d.   Generator and starter repairs.
         e.   Tire installation and repairs.
         f.   Front end alignments.
         g.   Battery recharging.
         h.   Emissions testing.
         i.   Lubrications.
         j.   Selling/installing minor parts and accessories.
         k.   Repairing and installing other minor elements of an automobile
such as windshield wipers, hoses and windows, but excluding engine,
transmission and differential repair or installation.
      7.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the lot.
   G.   Auto/Truck Rental Agencies:
      1.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
      2.   Any used or discarded automotive parts or equipment located in any
open area outside an enclosed building must be screened from view pursuant to
the requirements for outdoor storage in this section.
      3.   Such uses shall be buffered from any residential property pursuant
to the buffer area and screening requirements in
chapter 3 of this title.
      4.   All exterior lighting shall be screened or otherwise designed so as
not to shine directly onto any adjacent parcel of land.
   H.   Auto And Recreational Vehicle Sales, New And/Or Used:
      1.   Major and minor auto repair and service shops are permitted as part
of the facility.
      2.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the lot.
      3.   Any used or discarded parts or equipment located in any open area
outside an enclosed building shall be screened from view pursuant to the
requirements for outdoor storage in this section.
      4.   Such uses shall be buffered from any residential property pursuant
to
chapter 3 of this title.
      5.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
      6.   All exterior lighting shall be screened or otherwise designed so as
not to shine directly onto any adjacent parcel of land.
      7.   No commercial activities, other than those included in and
incidental to the operation of the facility, shall be conducted on site.
   I.   Bars, Pubs, Clubs (Public And Private), And Nightclubs:
      1.   Bars, pubs, public and private social clubs, and nightclubs serving
alcohol shall comply with city code and shall obtain a permit from the city.
Such uses shall also comply with Idaho Code.
      2.   When a bar, pub, public and private social club or nightclub is
provided as a part of a restaurant, it is considered an accessory use to the
restaurant.
      3.   Such uses shall be buffered from any residential property per
chapter 3 of this title.
   J.   Bed And Breakfast Facilities:
      1.   The facility shall have no more than four (4) guestrooms and twelve
(12) guests at one time.
      2.   No cooking shall be allowed in guestrooms. The only meal to be
provided guests shall be breakfast, and it shall only be served to guests
taking lodging in the facility.
      3.   Bath facilities shall be shared by no more than two (2) guestrooms.
      4.   One off street parking space shall be provided for each guestroom
and each employee.
      5.   One freestanding, unlighted identification sign, not exceeding
twenty (20) square feet in area, shall be allowed in the front yard. One small,
unlighted announcement sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, may be
attached to and parallel with the front porch or wall of the building.
   K.   Car Washes:
      1.   All businesses providing self-service or drive-through car wash
facilities shall identify the stacking lane and wash location on the site plan.
      2.   If within the NC district, a car wash facility shall be allowed only
as an accessory use to a gasoline or diesel fuel sales facility. The car wash
facility shall be limited in capacity to a single vehicle.
      3.   A one hundred foot (100') separation shall be maintained between a
car wash facility (which includes, without limitation, buildings and vacuum
islands) and any residential property line. In addition, such facility shall be
buffered from any residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      4.   Drive aisles along any property lines shall be screened pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      5.   Vehicle stacking lanes shall be available on the property but
outside the car wash facility entrance. Stacking lanes shall have sufficient
capacity to prevent obstruction of the public right of way by patrons. Such
stacking lanes shall be separate from areas required for access and parking.
      6.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
   L.   Carnivals And Circuses:
      1.   All structures or outdoor use areas shall maintain a minimum setback
of two hundred feet (200') from all abutting residential districts.
      2.   Such uses shall require a temporary use permit and a vendor permit
from the city and shall be permitted for not more than seven (7) days.
   M.   Childcare Facilities:
      1.   There shall be a minimum of thirty five (35) square feet of net
floor area indoors per child. This space shall be measured wall to wall in
rooms that are regularly used by the children, exclusive of halls, bathrooms,
and kitchen.
      2.   On site vehicle pick up and turnaround areas shall be provided to
ensure safe discharge and pick up of children.
      3.   No portion of the facility shall be within three hundred feet (300')
of hazardous material storage, flammable substance storage, gasoline or diesel
fuel sales facility, brewery or winery.
      4.   An outdoor play area shall be provided that is sized to provide one
hundred (100) square feet per child for the number of children using the play
area at any one time. This requirement may be waived if the facility is within
two hundred fifty feet (250') of a park or open space lot or a pathway
connecting to a park or open space lot that can be used by the children.
      5.   Family/home daycare facilities require a home occupation permit and
are subject to the childcare regulations of the city.
   N.   Community Information Centers:
      1.   A community or residential sales office use is allowed within the
center until project build out.
      2.   Community information centers located within the Community Open
Space (COS) district shall adhere to the required land use standards, as
follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area    Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                    Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
17,000- square feet 25'    25'   25'            25'          35'
 
   O.   Construction Office, Temporary:
      1.   A construction office requires a zoning permit from the city.
      2.   A construction office requires a site plan review and approval by
the zoning administrator.
      3.   The applicant shall provide a specific time line for the duration of
the use.
      4.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to
chapter 5 of this title.
      5.   A construction office is allowed during the construction of the
associated project and shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit for the last home/structure within the project.
   P.   Construction Yard, Temporary:
      1.   A construction yard requires a zoning permit from the city.
      2.   A construction yard requires a site plan review and approval by the
zoning administrator.
      3.   The applicant shall provide a specific time line for the duration of
the use.
      4.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to
chapter 5 of this title.
      5.   A construction office is allowed during the construction of the
associated project and shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit for the last home/structure within the project.
      6.   When located within or adjacent to a developed and occupied area and
the duration of use exceeds eighteen (18) months the yard shall be screened
from view.
   Q.   Convenience Stores:
      1.   A convenience store that includes fuel sales shall be located on a
site within a commercial development with an overall minimum size of one acre
and the use shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from any
residential property. The distance shall be measured from building to
residential property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be
buffered from a residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   A convenience store that sells alcoholic beverages shall conform to
the following:
         a.   Approval of a conditional use permit by the city.
         b.   Provisions of Idaho and city code.
      3.   A convenience store that includes fuel sales shall be regulated as a
gas station.
      4.   Any convenience store (with or without fuel sales) wishing to
operate before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or
for twenty four (24) hours a day will require a conditional use permit.
   R.   Dwelling, Accessory:
      1.   No more than one accessory dwelling shall be permitted on a lot.
      2.   The minimum lot size that will support an accessory dwelling is six
thousand (6,000) square feet.
      3.   The maximum size of an accessory dwelling shall be as follows:
 
Lot Size                   Maximum Size
6,000 - 7,500 square feet  500 square feet
7,501 - 10,000 square feet 640 square feet
Over 10,000 square feet    800 square feet
 
      4.   An accessory dwelling shall meet the setback requirements for the
principal dwelling and:
         a.   Shall be limited to one bedroom.
         b.   Shall be no taller than the principal dwelling.
         c.   Shall be architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling
and shall be similar in appearance, materials and color as the principal
dwelling.
         d.   If located in the front of the principal dwelling, shall not
dominate the facade of, nor obstruct the view of the main entrance to the
principal dwelling when viewed from the street.
         e.   Shall not have direct access visible from the street on which the
principal dwelling fronts.
         f.   Shall have a minimum separation of six feet (6') from the
principal dwelling if detached from the principal dwelling.
         g.   Shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) coverage of the rear or
side yard area.
      5.   If the accessory dwelling is above the ground floor and access
thereto is by a stairwell, the stairwell shall be enclosed within the structure
or have a solid guardrail that extends to the ground and shall not be
perpendicular to an adjacent street, alley or residence.
      6.   Parking for an accessory dwelling shall be in addition to the
required parking for the principal dwelling. Parking may be provided in tandem
on a driveway with the principal dwelling.
      7.   The principal dwelling shall be owner occupied.
      8.   An accessory dwelling shall not be sold separately from the
principal dwelling.
   S.   Electric Substations:
      1.   A substation located subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a
conditional use.
      2.   Such use shall be buffered from adjacent uses pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      3.   Electric substations located within the Community Open Space (COS)
district shall adhere to the required land use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
2.0-acres        25'    25'   25'            25'          75'
 
   T.   Entertainment Facilities:
      1.   Golf Driving Ranges: Accessory sales and rental of golf equipment
shall be allowed. Golf driving ranges shall be designed to protect abutting
property and roadways from golf balls. An illuminated golf driving range shall
be located a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from a residential property
as measured from any light standard to the residential property line in a
straight line. The distance shall be measured from the edge of the driving
range to the residential property in a straight line. Such lighting shall
comply with the sports lighting criteria in
chapter 3 of this title and shall be turned off by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      2.   All entertainment facilities located within the Community Open Space
(COS) district shall adhere to the required land use standards, as follows,
unless otherwise noted within Article T of this section:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
5.0-acres        50'    50'   50'            50'          40'
 
   U.   Equestrian Centers:
      1.   Equestrian centers in the RR and ER districts which are open to the
public and are located prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary plat
within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. Such equestrian centers located
subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a conditional use. Equestrian centers
in the RR and ER districts which are for personal use are permitted uses.
      2.   Stables and loafing sheds shall have a minimum separation of three
hundred feet (300') from any residence, except for an owner's residence. In
addition, all facilities shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty feet
(30') from any property line.
      3.   Equestrian centers shall be designed and located with full
consideration given to their proximity to adjacent uses and their effect on
adjacent and surrounding properties as to the storage of horse trailers and the
factors of noise and odor.
      4.   The owner or operator of such use shall have a continuous obligation
to maintain adequate housekeeping practices and to prevent the creation of a
nuisance.
      5.   Equestrian center facilities located within the Community Open Space
(COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere to the required land
use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acres        50'    30'   30'            50'          35'
 
   V.   Equestrian Lots:
      1.   Horses may be kept on residential lots only in the RR and ER
districts and are restricted to lots that are a minimum of two (2) acres. Two
(2) horses are allowed on a two (2) acre lot and one additional horse is
allowed for each additional one-half (1/2) acre. Acres shall be rounded to the
nearest whole number to determine total horses per lot.
      2.   Accessory structures such as barns and stables, indoor and outdoor
riding facilities, storage buildings and similar structures shall meet the
setback requirements of the applicable residential district.
      3.   Barns and stables, covered or indoor riding facilities, storage
buildings and similar structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the
lot area.
   W.   Farmers' Markets: Farmers' markets shall operate for no more than one
hundred twenty (120) days in a calendar year and shall require a temporary use
permit and vendor permit from the city.
   X.   Fire/Police Stations:
      1.   A fire or police station located prior to or in conjunction with a
preliminary plat within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. A station located
subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
      2.   Fire or police stations located within the Community Open Space
(COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere to the required land
use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acre         25'    25'   25'            25'          35'
 
   Y.   Flex Space:
      1.   The gross floor area of each building used as flex space shall be a
maximum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
      2.   Loading docks, if present, shall be at the rear of the structure and
shall be screened from view from street and neighboring uses. Loading ramps
shall be designed to discourage tractor-trailer use. Such structures shall be
buffered from neighboring uses pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      3.   Hours of operation shall be limited to between six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   Z.   Holiday/Seasonal Sales:
      1.   All holiday/seasonal sales require a zoning permit and a vendor's
license for the city.
      2.   All holiday/seasonal sales require a site plan review and approval
by the zoning administrator.
      3.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to
chapter 5 of this title.
      4.   Holiday/seasonal sales are allowed for up to thirty (30) days. All
zoning permits shall establish a sunset date for the use.
   AA.   Home Occupations: The provisions herein are to permit the
establishment of home occupations that are compatible with the districts in
which they are located. The intent of the regulations of this chapter is to
establish performance standards for all home occupations. Home occupations
shall be classified as either Class "A", "B" or "C" home occupations and shall
be regulated as follows:
      1.   Class A home occupations:
         a.   Shall be limited to those uses identified on the Official
Schedule of District Regulations section within this title as permitted within
the underlying zone of the property. For instance, if the zone of the property
is RR, ER, SF1, SF2, SF3, SFZL, SFSL, SFA, MF1, or MF2 the underlying zone is
Residential.
         b.   Shall require a city issued business license.
         c.   Shall not require a home occupation permit.
      2.   Class B home occupations:
         a.   Shall be those uses conducted entirely within the dwelling or
accessory structure, except that, outdoor swimming lessons and dog training
classes shall be permitted.
         b.   Shall require a city issued business license.
         c.   Shall not require a home occupation permit.
      3.   Class C home occupations:
         a.   Shall be those uses including activities conducted outside of the
dwelling or accessory structure, except for those uses classified as Class A or
B home occupations.
         b.   Shall require a city issued business license.
         c.   Shall require City Council approval of a conditional use permit
for the home occupation permit if deemed to be in compliance with Eagle City
Code with conditions assuring said compliance.
         d.   Shall have the outdoor area of use designed to assure no damage
results to adjacent property.
         e.   No outdoor display or storage of unregistered vehicles, vehicle
parts, materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed on the
premises, except for lawfully parked registered vehicles.
         f.   Shall have a minimum of forty feet (40') between the outdoor area
of use and the property line.
         g.   Shall have a minimum of two (2) acres for sports fields, sports
courts, horse riding lessons, and other similar uses as may be determined by
the City Council.
         h.   Shall have a minimum of three (3) acres for uses such as small
wedding venues and other similar uses as may be determined by the City Council.
         i.   Shall include conditions of approval specified by the City
Council to regulate the hours of operation, days of operation, number of
events, numbers of employees/customers/patrons/attendees, and other conditions
specifically related to the proposed use to assure compliance with this
chapter.
         j.   Within seven (7) calendar days after a written decision has been
rendered by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the
applicant with written notice of the action on the request.
         k.   The home occupation permit shall be valid for a maximum of five
(5) years at which time a new permit shall be required.
      4.   Regulations Applicable to All Home Occupations:
         a.   The operator of every home occupation shall reside in the
dwelling unit on the property where the home occupation operates or on an
adjacent property owned by the same.
         b.   A home occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit,
within an approved accessory structure, or outdoors in accordance with this
section. Parcels on which the home occupation is located may be adjacent to the
parcel in which the dwelling unit is located so long as the adjacent parcels
are under the same ownership.
         c.   For home occupations conducted within a dwelling unit the total
area used for the home occupation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the total floor area of the dwelling.
         d.   For home occupations conducted within an accessory structure, the
entire area of an accessory structure may be used for the home occupation
provided the use within the structure is permitted by the building code adopted
by the city.
         e.   The home occupation business must be clearly incidental to the
residential use of the property.
         f.   No alteration of the exterior of the dwelling in which the home
occupation is being conducted shall be made which changes the character thereof
as a dwelling.
         g.   No advertising or business signs are permitted in conjunction
with the home occupation.
         h.   No outdoor display or storage of unregistered vehicles, vehicle
parts, materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed on the
premises, except for lawfully parked vehicles.
         i.   On-site parking for any vehicle primarily used in connection with
the home occupation (employees/customers/patrons/attendees) shall be provided
on a dust free surface in addition to parking required for the dwelling unit.
         j.   The minimum number of covered parking spaces for the dwelling
unit shall not be reduced below the minimum number required by this title.
         k.   Sale of goods on the premises shall be limited to the products
produced by the home occupation.
         l.   Deliveries of bulk material other than by mail, local courier, or
inter-city courier pertaining to the home occupation shall not exceed one (1)
per week and shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday. Further, traffic circulation shall not be restricted or
disturbed as a result of a delivery to a home occupation.
         m.   The home occupation shall not interfere with the delivery of
utilities or other services to the area.
         n.   The home occupation shall not generate any noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare or electrical interference with radio or
television transmission in the area that would exceed that which is normally
produced by a dwelling unit use.
         o.   No toxic, explosive, flammable, radioactive or other restricted
or hazardous material shall be used, sold or stored on the site.
         p.   The home occupation shall at all times comply with all applicable
city codes and the requirements of other regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction.
      5.   Prohibited Home Occupations:
         a.   The following uses are prohibited for home occupation use:
Residential:
Mobile home (single unit) (primary residence)
Mobile home (single unit) (temporary living quarters)
Mobile home court (RV)
Mobile home park
Multi-family dwelling
Planned unit development
Two-family dwelling
Commercial:
Adult business
Airport
Ambulance services
Arts and crafts shows
Auction facility
Automotive body shop
Automotive emission testing facility
Automotive gas station or fuel islands
Automotive gas station/service shop
Automotive, mobile home, travel trailer, and/or farm implement sales
Automotive repair
Automotive storage
Automotive vehicle vinyl wrap shop
Automotive washing facility
Bakery plant (wholesale)
Banks/financial institutions (no drive-up service)
Banks/financial institutions (with drive-up service)
Bar
Building supply outlet
Cabinet shop
Cemetery
Childcare:
Group Daycare Facility (7-12 children)
Daycare Center (13+ children)
Christmas tree sales
Circuses and carnivals
Club or lodge
Coffee roasting facility
Commercial entertainment facilities (indoor)
Commercial entertainment facilities (outdoor)
Communication facilities
Contractor's yard and/or shop
Convenience store with fuel service
Convenience store with no fuel service
Detention facilities
Drive-in theater
Drugstore
Electronic sales, service, or repair shop
Emergency healthcare
Emergency services
Equipment rental and sales yard
Flex space
Food and beverage sales
Hardware store
Heliports
Home and business services
Hospital
Hotel
Institution
Kennel
Laboratories
Laundromat
Laundry (with drive-up service)
Laundry (with no drive-up service)
Live entertainment events
Microbrewery
Mobile office
Mortuary
Motel
Nonprofit rehabilitation center
Nursing/convalescent home
Office, medical and dental - however, counseling services are permitted
Parking lot, parking garage
Parking lot, parking garage, commercial
Pawnshops (auto)
Pawnshops (general)
Personal wireless facilities (enclosed building, height - 35' or less)
Personal wireless facilities (enclosed building, height - over 35')
Personal wireless facilities (height - 35' or less)
Personal wireless facilities (height - 36' - 50')
Personal wireless facilities (height - over 50')
Restaurant (drive-in)
Restaurant (no drive-through)
Restaurant (with drive-through)
Retail sales (general)
Retail sales (limited)
Retail sales (pharmacies and medical)
Shopping center
Shopping mall
Sign shop, including painting
Small engine repair (mower, chain saws, etc.)
Storage (fenced area)
Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments
Tire shop, including recapping
Trade fair
Travel services
Truck stop
Upholstery shop
Vet clinic (animal hospital)
Welding, tool shop
Winery
 
         b.   As determined by the Zoning Administrator, uses that are not
consistent with this chapter and that impair the integrity of and/or exert a
negative influence on the residential neighborhood in which they are located,
and/or other uses similar to those prohibited home occupation uses listed in
this section shall be prohibited.
         c.   All uses listed under the Industrial classification within the
Official Schedule of District Regulations shall be prohibited.
         d.   Repair or painting of motorized vehicles such as repair or
painting/wrapping of autos, trucks, trailers and boats, except that hobbyist
restoration of vehicles is permitted if entirely enclosed within an accessory
structure or garage and all other conditions herein are satisfied.
         e.   Upon the submittal of a waiver application and findings adopted
by the zoning administrator addressing compliance with the following criteria,
the use(s) noted in subsection a. above may be permitted:
            (1)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
            (2)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighborhood uses;
            (3)   Will be compatible with the scale and design of the
structures and overall existing development pattern of the surrounding area;
            (4)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
            (5)   If the waiver application is denied, the decision may be
appealed in accordance with chapter 7 of this title. If no appeal is submitted,
the decision is final.
   BB.   Hotels And Motels:
      1.   Hotels and motels shall be designed and developed to fit into the
unique and special environs of Spring Valley and shall be subject to the
setback standards of the land use district within which the use is located.
      2.   A maximum height of fifty two feet (52') may be allowed in the CC
district with a conditional use permit.
   CC.   Kennels And Pet Shops:
      1.   All animals shall be confined within an enclosed area or on a leash
at all times.
      2.   Kennels and pet shops shall comply with all state and local
regulations relative to such an operation and maintain adequate housekeeping
practices designed to prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce the
factors of noise and odor to a minimum.
      3.   Pet boarding kennels shall be operated with an attendant present on
the premises twenty four (24) hours a day.
      4.   Outside runs shall have a minimum five hundred foot (500')
separation between any dwelling, except the owner's dwelling, as measured from
the run to the dwelling in a straight line. The administrator may modify this
requirement if the animals are completely housed in soundproof structures that
completely screen them from view from the abutting residential property.
      5.   Adequate fencing shall be provided for outdoor runs to restrain
animals from running at large. At a minimum, the animals shall be enclosed
within a six foot (6') fence or wall. Electronic fences shall not be used as
the sole method of restraining animals.
      6.   In residential districts, pet boarding kennels will only be allowed
in ER or RR districts as an accessory use. In addition, the use shall be
buffered from other residential properties pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
   DD.   Libraries:
      1.   A library approved prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary
plat within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. A library approved subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
      2.   A library located within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional
Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere to the required land use standards, as
follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
2.0-acres        15'    25'   15'            20'          35'
 
   EE.   Liquor Stores: All businesses which sell alcoholic beverages shall
conform to the provisions of the Idaho and city code. The sale of packaged
liquor, beer, wine and coolers is subject to approval of a conditional use
permit by the city.
   FF.   Living Quarters, Accessory:
      1.   No more than one living quarters structure shall be permitted on a
lot.
      2.   The minimum lot size that will support living quarters is five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
      3.   The maximum size of a living quarters structure shall be as follows:
 
Lot Size                   Maximum Size
5,000 - 7,500 square feet  500 square feet
7,501 - 10,000 square feet 640 square feet
Over 10,000 square feet    800 square feet
 
      4.   A living quarters structure shall meet the setback requirements for
the principal dwelling and:
         a.   Shall be limited to one bedroom.
         b.   Shall not contain cooking facilities (220V wiring).
         c.   Shall be no taller than the principal dwelling.
         d.   Shall be architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling
and shall be similar in appearance, materials and color as the principal
dwelling.
         e.   If located in the front of the principal dwelling, shall not
dominate the facade of, nor obstruct the view of the main entrance to the
principal dwelling when viewed from the street.
         f.   Shall not have direct access visible from the street on which the
principal dwelling fronts.
         g.   Shall have a minimum separation of six feet (6') from the
principal dwelling if detached from the principal dwelling.
         h.   Shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) coverage of the rear or
side yard area.
      5.   If the living quarters are above the ground floor and access thereto
is by a stairwell, the stairwell shall be enclosed within the structure or have
a solid guardrail that extends to the ground and shall not be perpendicular to
an adjacent street, alley or residence.
      6.   The principal dwelling shall be owner occupied.
      7.   Living quarters shall not be sold separately from the principal
dwelling.
   GG.   Manufacturing, Light:
      1.   Light manufacturing operations are permitted to produce products for
retail sale and wholesale distribution. It is intended that such uses shall not
generate conditions which are typical of many manufacturing and industrial
operations, such as noise, smoke, objectionable odors, dust, noxious gases and
other industrial wastes, vibrations, glare, heat and fire hazards.
      2.   All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or
enclosures which screen such material from surrounding properties and abutting
streets and comply with the requirements for outdoor storage requirements in
this chapter. Storage containers for flammable materials shall be constructed
of nonflammable material and shall meet the requirements of the international
fire code.
      3.   No dust fumes, smoke, or vibrations above ambient levels (levels of
the surrounding environment) shall be detectable from adjacent parcels.
      4.   Such use shall be buffered from any residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
   HH.   Mortuaries/Funeral Homes: All phases of the operation of a mortuary/
funeral home, other than those related to transport and servicing, shall be
within a completely enclosed building.
   II.   Motion Picture/Radio/Television Production Facilities: Outdoor
facilities shall be buffered from residential properties pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
   JJ.   Outdoor Storage:
      1.   Outdoor storage areas shall be screened by a minimum six foot (6')
high solid wall or fence along any property line that adjoins a residential lot
and the use shall be buffered from a residential lot pursuant to the buffer
area and screening requirements in
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   Outdoor storage of chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers shall have
fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved by the fire
district.
      3.   Outdoor storage shall not be located in any front yard setback area
and shall not block sidewalks or parking areas or impede vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
      4.   No commercial activities, other than those associated with the
principal use of the property are permitted.
      5.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited.
      6.   The operation of spray painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      7.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
      8.   Outdoor storage in a residential district shall only be allowed as
an accessory use.
      9.   Outdoor storage is an accessory use within the Community Open Space
(COS) and Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, pursuant to 11-2-3: Land Use
Standards. The setbacks and general lot development regulations of any outdoor
storage shall adhere to the requirements of the primary use to which it is
accessory to.
   KK.   Plant Nurseries/Sod Farms, Retail And Wholesale:
      1.   Outdoor mechanical equipment (including, but not limited to, heaters
and fans) shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of a property line. To
reduce noise, permanently mounted mechanical equipment shall be enclosed to the
maximum extent possible.
      2.   Outdoor storage areas for materials shall comply with the
requirements for outdoor storage in this section. The following nursery
materials shall be exempt from this requirement:
         a.   Growing plants in ground or in containers.
         b.   Wood chips, bark, rock, gravel, or similar ground cover material
where such storage piles do not exceed six feet (6') in height.
      3.   The application of fertilizer or process wastewater at agronomic
rates shall be deemed a component of the nursery use and shall follow state and
local regulations.
      4.   The following additional standards shall apply for a wholesale and/
or retail nursery located within a residential district or adjoining a
residential district:
         a.   Any storage area for material in the process of being converted
into compost shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from any
property line.
         b.   No aerial spraying of the property shall be allowed.
      5.   Retail plant nurseries are not permitted in the COS and ROS
districts (wholesale nurseries only are permitted).
      6.   Retail plant nurseries are considered an accessory use in the RR and
ER residential districts and subject to a conditional use permit.
      7.   Plant nurseries for the express purpose of growing plant materials
for use in Valnova or for the city shall be allowed on any parcel as a
temporary use. (See temporary construction offices/yards.)
      8.   Any structure requiring a building permit associated with wholesale
nurseries located within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space
(ROS) districts shall adhere to the required land use standards for any
structure(s), as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
5.0-acres        30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   LL.   Radio And Television Broadcast Stations: Outdoor facilities shall be
buffered from residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
   MM.   Recreation Fields, Courts And Other Sports Facilities:
      1.   Sports field lighting shall meet the criteria requirements in the
sports lighting section of
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   Any structure requiring a building permit associated with
recreational fields, courts, and other sports facilities located within the
Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere
to the required land use standards as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
5.0-acres        20'    20'   20'            20'          35'
 
   NN.   Recreational Vehicle Storage:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from
any single-family residential property and one hundred feet (100') from any
multi-family residential property as measured from the building or storage yard
to the residential property line in a straight line.
      2.   All vehicles shall be stored in an area which is screened from view
from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets and shall meet the
requirements for outdoor storage in this section.
      3.   No vehicles shall be stored in the required front setback area.
      4.   No commercial activities, other than those associated with the
principal use of the property are permitted.
      5.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited unless the storage facility is adjunct to a body
shop, service and repair facility, or recreational vehicle sales establishment.
      6.   The operation of spray painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      7.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
   OO.   Recycling/Solid Waste Transfer Centers:
      1.   Outdoor storage areas shall comply with the requirements for outdoor
storage in this section.
      2.   No unsorted material shall be stored outdoors except for after hours
donation containers.
      3.   Any container provided for after hours donation of recyclable
materials shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from a residential district,
shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, and shall have sufficient capacity
to accommodate materials collected.
      4.   Power driven processing (including, but not limited to, aluminum
foils and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing
activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of materials)
may be allowed when located within an enclosed structure.
      5.   All recycling center grounds and facilities shall be maintained in
an orderly manner so as not to create a public nuisance.
   PP.   Rental Service/Storage Yards (Large Equipment):
      1.   Such uses shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from
any single-family residential property and a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
from any multi-family property as measured from any building or storage yard to
the residential property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be
buffered from the residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
      3.   Outdoor storage areas shall comply with the requirements for outdoor
storage in this section.
   QQ.   Resorts:
      1.   A resort located prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary plat
within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. A resort located subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
      2.   A maximum height of fifty two feet (52') may be allowed in
residential districts with a conditional use permit.
      3.   Resorts shall be designed and developed to fit into the unique and
special environs of Valnova.
      4.   A resort located within the Community Open Space (COS) district
shall adhere to the required land use standards for any structure(s), as
follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
5.0-acres        50'    30'   20'            30'          35'
 
   RR.   Restaurants (With Drive-Through):
      1.   Such uses shall be designed with landscape/berm(s)/decorative walls
to prevent trash from moving onto other properties.
      2.   A minimum six foot (6') high solid wall or fence shall be provided
along any property line that adjoins a residential property and the use shall
be buffered from such residential property pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      3.   Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided.
      4.   Night lighting shall be shielded and not directed toward any
residence.
      5.   Drive-throughs shall be designed so headlights are screened by
landscape, berm(s), decorative walls or buildings so they are not visible from
the public right of way when vehicles are stopped at the drive-up window.
   SS.   Roadside Stands:
      1.   Roadside stands shall operate for no more than one hundred twenty
(120) days in a calendar year and shall require a zoning certificate and vendor
permit from the city.
      2.   All structures shall be located outside of the public right of way
and shall comply with the accessory structure requirements of the city.
   TT.   Sales Offices/Trailers, Temporary:
      1.   A sales office/trailer requires a zoning permit from the city.
      2.   A sales office/trailer requires a site plan review and approval by
the zoning administrator.
      3.   The applicant shall provide a specific time line for the duration of
the use.
      4.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to
chapter 5 of this title.
      5.   A sales office/trailer is allowed during the construction of the
associated project and shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit for the last home/structure within the project.
   UU.   Satellite And Microwave Dishes:
      1.   Satellite and microwave dishes approved prior to or in conjunction
with a preliminary plat within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. Satellite and
microwave dishes approved subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a
conditional use.
      2.   Satellite and microwave dishes located within the Community Open
Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere to the required
land use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acre         30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   VV.   Shooting Ranges/Gun Clubs:
      1.   The applicant or owner shall obtain written approval from the
federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco, and firearms (ATF) when either the repair
or sale of firearms or ammunition are proposed to be conducted on site.
      2.   Indoor facilities shall be housed totally within an enclosed
structure and designed for safety and noise factors involved in the type of
use.
      3.   If located on the ground level, accessory uses such as gun sales,
gun repair, and training courses may be allowed when such uses take up no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area on the ground level.
      4.   If gun sales or gun repair is conducted within the facility, the
owner of the indoor shooting range shall secure and maintain a valid federal
firearms license from the ATF.
      5.   The applicant shall provide written documentation that the proposed
target backstops conform to the standards for indoor ranges in "The NRA Range
Source Book" published by the National Rifle Association.
      6.   Outdoor shooting ranges are only permissible if owned and operated
by a government entity.
      7.   All ranges shall comply with Idaho Code sections 55-2601 and 67-
9102.
   WW.   Special Care Facilities: Such uses shall comply with Idaho Code.
   XX.   Special Events:
      1.   The special event shall require a zoning permit and not operate for
a duration longer than seven (7) calendar days without a conditional use
permit.
      2.   Parking shall be provided as required by
chapter 5 of this title.
      3.   Sales of items and goods which are reasonably related to the special
event program shall be permitted with a vendor permit from the city.
   YY.   Veterinary Animal Hospitals And Clinics: If overnight accommodations
are provided, they shall comply with the requirements for kennels in this
section.
   ZZ.   Vocational/Trade Schools:
      1.   Vocational/trade schools located prior to or in conjunction with a
preliminary plat within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. Schools located
subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
      2.   Vocational/trade schools located within the Regional Open Space
(ROS) district shall be limited to agriculture or related schools and
facilities.
      3.   Vocational/trade schools located within the Regional Open Space
(ROS) district shall adhere to the required land use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
10.0-acres       30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   AAA.   Warehousing, Storage And Ministorage:
      1.   Ministorage facilities may include the storage of boat and
recreational vehicles.
      2.   The use shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from
any single-family residential property and fifty feet (50') from any multi-
family residential property as measured from the building to the residential
property line in a straight line. The use shall be buffered from the
residential property by a solid wall or fence or berm(s) and landscape, or a
combination of both, pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      3.   No more than one manager's or security residence is permitted. Such
residence shall not be considered a dwelling unit for the purposes of
calculating residential density for Spring Valley.
      4.   All storage must be within an enclosed building except for the
storage of recreational vehicles, which shall be screened from view from
surrounding properties and abutting streets and meet the requirements for
outdoor storage in this section.
      5.   No outdoor storage shall be allowed in the required front setback
area.
      6.   No more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross area of the site may
be used for outdoor and vehicle storage and shall meet the requirements for
outdoor storage in this section.
      7.   No commercial activities, other than those included in the operation
of the ministorage facility, shall be conducted on the site.
      8.   Retail sale of stored items on the premises is prohibited.
      9.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited.
      10.   The operation of spray painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      11.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
   BBB.   Wastewater Treatment Facilities:
      1.   Wastewater treatment facilities approved prior to or in conjunction
with a preliminary plat within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. Wastewater
treatment facilities approved subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a
conditional use.
      2.   Any structures associated with wastewater treatment facilities
located within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS)
districts shall adhere to the required land use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
10.0-acres       30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   CCC.   Water Storage Facilities:
      1.   Water storage facilities approved prior to or in conjunction with a
preliminary plat within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. Water storage
facilities approved subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a conditional
use.
      2.   Any structures associated with water storage facilities located
within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts
shall adhere to the required land use standards, as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area    Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                    Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
11,000- square feet 30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   DDD.   Wholesaling, Distribution And Storage:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from
any single-family residential property and fifty feet (50') from any multi-
family residential property as measured from the building to the property line
in a straight line. The use shall be buffered from the residential property by
a solid wall or fence, or berm(s) and landscape, or a combination of both,
pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title.
      2.   No more than one manager's or security residence is permitted. Such
residence shall not be considered a dwelling unit for the purposes of
calculating residential density for Spring Valley.
      3.   No more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross area of the site may
be used for outdoor storage and shall meet the requirements for outdoor storage
in this section.
      4.   No commercial activities, other than those included for the
operation of the facility, shall be conducted on the site.
      5.   Retail sale of stored items on the premises is prohibited.
      6.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited.
      7.   The operation of spray painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      8.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
   EEE.   Wineries:
      1.   Wineries approved prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary plat
within a PUMP shall be a permitted use. Wineries approved subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
      2.   Wineries located within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional
Open Space (ROS) districts shall adhere to the required land use standards, as
follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acre         25'    25'   25'            25'          35'
 
   FFF.   Personal Wireless Facilities: Personal wireless facilities, spires,
poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and other such structures. Wireless
communication facilities and towers shall comply with the following:
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To accommodate the communication needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community, the council finds that regulations regarding personal wireless
facilities, spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and other such
structures are necessary in order to:
            (1)   Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication
services to the residents and businesses of the city;
            (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of spires, poles, antennas,
steeples, towers, and other such structures through careful design and sitting
standards;
            (3)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from spire,
pole, antenna, steeple, tower, and other such structures' failure, through
structural standards and setback requirements; and
            (4)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and
buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to
reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community, like church
steeples, windmills, bell towers, clock towers, cupolas, light standards,
flagpoles, or trees.
      2.   Towers And Personal Wireless Facilities In Zoning Districts:
         a.   Village Center: Personal wireless facilities shall be camouflaged
or concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in the village center
district.
         b.   Mixed Use Districts: Personal wireless facilities shall be
camouflaged or concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be
aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in the
mixed use district.
         c.   Residential Districts:
            (1)   On residentially zoned parcels, towers supporting amateur
radio antennas shall not be permitted in the front, side or street side yard.
            (2)   Personal wireless facilities shall be camouflaged or
concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in all residential (R)
districts.
         d.   Open Space Districts:
            (1)   Personal wireless facilities may be permitted to be attached
to city-owned infrastructure/buildings, existing light standards and power line
support devices (or replacement equivalent of same height) provided, however,
the antenna(s) are either flush mounted or mounted in a manner that provides
minimum visual impact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all provisions of this
subsection S shall be applicable to wireless antennas located on city-owned
infrastructure/buildings, existing light standards and power line support
devices.
            (2)   Personal wireless facilities shall be camouflaged or
concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in the public/semipublic
district unless installed in accordance with subsection S2d(1) of this section.
      3.   Collocation Requirements:
         a.   A proposal for a new tower mounted personal wireless facility in
excess of thirty five feet (35') in height shall not be approved unless the
city council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within the following radii of the proposed tower:
            (1)   A two (2) mile radius for towers with a height over one
hundred ten feet (110').
            (2)   A one mile radius for towers with a height over eighty feet
(80') but not more than one hundred ten feet (110').
            (3)   A one-half (1/2) mile radius for towers with a height over
fifty feet (50') but not more than eighty feet (80').
            (4)   A one-fourth (1/4) mile radius for towers with a height over
thirty-five feet (35') but not more than fifty feet (50').
         b.   It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the
proposed tower or antenna cannot be accommodated on an approved tower or
building within the required search radius due to one or more of the following
reasons:
            (1)   Unwillingness of another tower or facility owner to entertain
shared use.
            (2)   The proposed collocation of an existing tower or facility
would be in violation of any local, state or federal law.
            (3)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
            (4)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
            (5)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer.
            (6)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, or
other professional qualified to provide necessary documentation.
         c.   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower
shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least
two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred ten feet (110') in
height, for at least one additional user if the tower is over fifty feet (50')
in height.
         d.   Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
         e.   Personal wireless facilities proposed at a location which has an
approved conditional use permit (approved after the effective date hereof) for
an existing facility which was required to allow collocation shall not be
required to obtain a separate conditional use permit as long as all the
requirements of the previously approved conditional use permit will be complied
with. Design review, and subsequent building permit, will be required for any
such proposal.
      4.   Tower And Antenna Design Requirements:
         a.   All personal wireless facilities shall be required to obtain
design review approval prior to construction.
         b.   Personal wireless facility towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the city council determines that an alternative design would better
blend into the surrounding environment.
         c.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
and connection lines approved by the issuing authority, no part of any antenna
or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with
either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right of way,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
         d.   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons. The climbing pegs
within the bottom twenty feet (20') of the tower shall be removed and shall
only be used when the tower is being serviced.
         e.   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material.
         f.   Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances.
      5.   Tower Setbacks:
         a.   Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district
except for within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS)
districts where he required land use standards, based on height and facility
typology, shall be as follows unless otherwise specified in b-g below:
 
              Minimum Lot Minimum Setbacks
Facility Type Area        Front: Rear: Interior Street Side: Maximum Height
                                       Side:
Enclosed      Refer to the land use district standards for the primary use
Building      on site pursuant to Eagle City Code Section
Height: 35'   11A-2-3
or less
Enclosed      Refer to the land use district standards for the primary use
Building      on site pursuant to Eagle City Code Section
Height: Over  11A-2-3
35'
Height: 35'   0.5-acre    40'    40'   40'      40'          35' or less
or less
Height: 36'-  1.0-acres   60'    60'   60'      60'          36'-50'
50'
Height Over   2.0-acres   75'    75'   75'      75'          50'+
50'
 
         b.   The base of the personal wireless facility shall be set back a
minimum distance of two (2) times the height of the tower from the property
line of any residential dwelling.
         c.   If the tower does not exceed the height limitations of the zone
in which it is located, the tower shall meet the setback requirement of the
zone except as allowed in subsection S5a of this section. If the tower exceeds
the height limit of the zone in which it is located, the tower shall be set
back one foot (1') for every ten feet (10') in total tower height. In either
case, the tower shall be constructed to the telecommunications industry
association/electronic industries association (TIA/EIA) 222 revision F standard
entitled "Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Supporting Structures" or as
hereinafter may be amended. Otherwise, the tower shall be located a minimum of
one foot (1') for each foot of height from all property lines (the fall zone).
No storage or structures other than the accessory utility buildings, are
permitted in the fall zone, except as may be specifically permitted by the city
council through a conditional use process.
         d.   Towers shall be set back from all existing public right of way
lines (or planned right of way lines if additional is to be acquired in the
future) by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the tower including
all antennas and attachments.
         e.   Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street.
         f.   A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied, at the sole discretion of the city council, to allow the
integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church
steeple, light standard, power line support device, water tank/tower, or
similar structure.
         g.   If any tower setback requirement conflicts with other setback
requirements of this code the setback with the greater distance shall prevail,
except as may be allowed in subsection S5f of this section.
      6.   Tower Lighting, Signage, And Attachments:
         a.   No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any
way, except during time of repair or installation, any stationary lights,
strobe lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as
specifically required by the federal aviation administration, federal
communications commission, or other federal or state authority.
         b.   When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be
attached to the tower if approved by the city.
         c.   The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning
or equipment information signs, is prohibited.
         d.   No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in
any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during
periods of construction or repair.
      7.   Amateur Radio Antennas:
         a.   In accordance with the federal communications commission's
preemptive ruling PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting
amateur radio antennas may exceed thirty feet (30') in height provided that a
determination is made by the city that the proposed tower height is technically
necessary to successfully engage in amateur radio communications. A conditional
use permit is required for any amateur radio antenna in excess of thirty five
feet (35').
      8.   Accessory Utility Buildings:
         a.   All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower are
required to have design review approved by the city prior to construction.
      9.   Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers:
         a.   As a condition of approval of any required conditional use permit
for personal wireless facilities, all abandoned or unused towers and associated
facilities shall be required to be removed within sixty (60) days of cessation
of use as a personal wireless facility unless a time extension is granted by
the city. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of the
use as a personal wireless facility, shall be submitted at the time of
application. In the event that the tower and associated facilities are not
removed within the sixty (60) days, the tower and associated facilities may be
removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property.
      10.   Additional Application Submittal Requirements:
         a.   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this code,
development applications for personal wireless facilities, shall include the
following supplemental information:
            (1)   Documentation from a qualified and licensed professional
engineer showing that the proposed facility will be in compliance with the FCC
standards regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
            (2)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
which describes the tower height and design (including a cross section and
elevation); documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas; describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate; documents what steps the applicant will take
to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications;
includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and includes other
information necessary to evaluate the request.
            (3)   For all personal wireless facilities, a letter of intent
committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of
the tower, as required by this code, if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
               (4)   Documentation showing that the proposed tower complies
with regulations administered by federal aviation administration.
            (5)   Written approval of the site location with specific reference
to the height of the antenna structure and any lighting issues, from the
federal aviation administration, the chief of the Idaho bureau of aeronautics,
and the Boise airport commission and an aviation easement approved by the Boise
airport commission.
            (6)   Propagation charts showing existing and proposed transmission
coverage at the subject site and within an area large enough to provide an
understanding of why the facility needs to be in the chosen location.
            (7)   A written analysis demonstrating that the proposed site is
the most appropriate site within the immediate area. For the purposes of this
subsection, the analysis shall include all properties within the search radii
stated above. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
               (A)   Description of the surrounding area, including topography;
               (B)   Natural and manmade impediments that would obstruct
adequate cellular telephone transmissions;
               (C)   Physical site constraints that would preclude construction
of a cellular telephone facility on any other site;
               (D)   Technical limitations of the system that limit siting
options.
      11.   Permits:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, re-
erect, or replace, any tower without first making application to the city and
securing a building/zoning permit.
         b.   A building/zoning permit shall not be required for antennas and/
or towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for emergency communication,
or for broadcast remote pick up operations. Temporary antennas shall be
permitted for a maximum of seventy two (72) hours unless specifically approved
by the city council.
         c.   In addition to the findings required and conditions permitted for
conditional use permits, as stated within section
11A-8-4 of this title, the city council shall make an additional finding
concerning the duration of the conditional use permit. Upon finding that the
conditional use permit is to be limited in duration, a condition limiting the
duration and the basis for such a condition shall be included within the
findings of fact and conclusions of law for the conditional use permit.
      12.   Additional Requirements For Notice Of Public Hearing:
         a.   All personal wireless facilities requiring a conditional use
permit shall comply with the conditional use notice requirements within this
code. Tower mounted personal wireless facilities shall comply with the
following additional requirements:
            (1)   All property owners within one thousand feet (1,000') of all
property lines of the site (or lease boundary lines, if applicable) shall be
notified of the public hearing by the city, by mail, a minimum of fifteen (15)
days before the scheduled public hearing. The applicant will be required to
provide the names of the property owners to the city.
      13.   Restricted Areas:
         a.   Telecommunications towers in excess of thirty-five feet (35') in
height shall not be permitted within the Willow Creek Road corridor.
   GGG.   Oil and Gas Extraction:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
                  A regulatory review and/or action performed by an employee or
ADMINISTRATIVE:   contractor of the City and not deemed a legislative or quasi-
                  judicial action.
                  Any person, owner, operator, partnership, company,
APPLICANT:        corporation and its subcontractors and agents who has an
                  interest in real estate for the purpose of exploring or
                  drilling for, producing, or transporting oil or gas.
DEPARTMENT:       The Idaho Department of Lands.
                  Activities necessary for removing natural gas or oil from
                  underground and bringing it up to ground level, or any
                  activities, the purpose of which is to remove these materials
EXTRACTION:       from natural pools or reservoirs beneath the earth's surface,
                  including well drilling, injection, pumping, and including
                  ancillary activities and facilities necessary for such
                  extraction, without which the extraction could not occur.
                  Means oil or gas or both. "Oil and gas" refers to not only to
                  oil and gas in combination with each other but also generally
                  to oil, gas, casinghead gas, casinghead gasoline, gas-
OIL AND GAS:      distillate or other hydrocarbons, or any combination of
                  combinations thereof, which may be found in or produced from
                  a common source or supply of oil, oil and gas, or gas-
                  distillate.
OIL AND GAS WELL: A hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring
                  for or extracting oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances.
                  The person of record, that is responsible for and actually in
                  charge and control of drilling, maintaining, operating,
                  pumping or controlling any well including, without
                  limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as defined
OPERATOR:         herein, for any well is not the lessee of any premises
                  affected by the provisions of this chapter, then such lessee
                  shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event there is
                  no oil and gas lease relating to any premises affected by
                  this chapter, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the
                  premises shall also be deemed an operator.
STATE:            The State of Idaho.
                  An oil and gas well or an injection well, including but not
WELL:             limited to directional drilling wells (for example, any well
                  hole drilled into the ground).
WELLHEAD:         The equipment installed at the surface of the well.
 
      2.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection J is to provide, through
zoning provisions, for the reasonable development of land for oil and gas
drilling while providing adequate health, safety and general welfare
protections of the City of Eagle residents.
Local governments are preempted from regulating the oil and gas well operations
or accomplishing the same purposes regulated under Idaho Code section 47-314.
Local zoning regulates surface land use as authorized under the Local Land Use
Planning Act, title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code.
      3.   Zoning Classifications: An oil or gas well site shall be considered
a permitted use by right within any zoning district(s), subject to the
standards listed herein.
      4.   Permit Requirement:
         a.   No oil or gas well site, or an addition to an existing oil or gas
well site, shall be constructed or located within City of Eagle unless an
administrative zoning permit under this subsection J has been issued by the
City of Eagle to the applicant approving the construction or preparation of the
site for oil or gas development or construction of natural gas compressor
stations or natural gas processing plants.
         b.   Each application shall be submitted with the fee established
pursuant to resolution of the City of Eagle as adopted. Such fee shall be
reasonably related to the cost of administering this by the City of Eagle.
         c.   Any modification to an existing and/or permitted oil or gas well
site that materially alters the size, location, number of wells or accessory
equipment or structures, shall require a modification of the permit under this
subsection J. Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
         d.   Wells that were permitted and constructed prior to the adoption
of this subsection J shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
subsection J. Any modification to an existing or permitted oil or gas well site
that occurs after the effective date of this subsection J and materially alters
the size, type, location, number of wells and other accessory equipment or
structures, shall require compliance with this subsection J.
         e.   Upon receiving notice from the department that an application has
been submitted, the local jurisdiction will notify all property owners within
one mile of the affected tax parcel that an application for a new oil and gas
operation has been filed with the City, County, Planning and Zoning Department.
The notice is for informational purposes only and will not solicit any public
comments on the application.
         f.   An oil or gas well permit shall not be required for exploration
for oil or gas. Exploration of oil or gas means activities related to the
various geological and geophysical methods used to detect and determine the
existence and extent of hydrocarbon deposits. The activities related to the
search for oil and gas include without limitation aerial, geological and
geophysical surveys and studies, seismic work, core drilling and the drilling
of test wells. During the exploration process, the most minimally invasive
methods shall be used.
         g.   If an applicant does not conduct said business for a period of
one year, the administrative zoning permit shall be null and void. Permits
issued under this subsection J shall not be transferable to any other
applicant, except by majority vote of the City of Eagle, and the filing of an
application by the applicant to whom such license is, or may be, transferred or
assigned.
         h.   The operator shall provide to the City a copy of any incident
reports or written complaints submitted to the department, the Idaho Oil and
Gas Conservation Commission, or any other State or Federal agency within twenty
four (24) hours after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports
or complaints.
      5.   Permit Application: The applicant shall provide to the City of Eagle
at the time of permit application:
         a.   A narrative describing an overview of the project including the
number of acres to be disturbed for development, the number of wells to be
drilled including department permit number(s) for all wells, if available, at
the time of submittal and provided when issued later, and the location, number
and description of equipment and structures to the extent known. In addition to
the narrative statement, each application shall contain the following:
            (1)   The surface owner's name, address, and phone number.
            (2)   The mineral owner's name, address, and phone number (if
different than the surface owner).
         b.   The address of the oil or gas well site and a legal description
of the parcel as determined by the City of Eagle and information needed to gain
access to the well site in the event of an emergency.
         c.   The contact information of the individual or individuals
responsible for the operation and activities at the oil or gas well site shall
be provided to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency responders as
determined by the City of Eagle. Such information shall include a phone number
where such individual or individuals can be contacted twenty four (24) hours
per day, three hundred sixty five (365) days a year. Annually, or upon any
change of relevant circumstances, the applicant shall update such information
and provide it to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency responders as
determined by City of Eagle.
         d.   A scaled site plan of the oil or gas well site showing the
drilling pad, planned access roads, the approximate location of derricks,
drilling rigs, equipment and structures and all permanent improvements to the
site and any post construction surface disturbance in relation to natural
resources. Included in this map shall be an area within the development site
for vehicles to locate while gaining access to the oil or gas well site. The
only items that may be stored and vehicles that may be parked on the operation
site are those that are necessary to the everyday operation of the well or
associated facilities and do not constitute a fire hazard.
         e.   A narrative and map describing the planned access routes to the
well sites on public roads including the transportation and delivery of
equipment, machinery, water, chemicals and other materials used in the siting,
drilling, construction, maintenance and operation of the oil or gas well site.
         f.   Comply with Idaho State Water Quality Standards pursuant to IDAPA
58.01.02.850-852 addressing procedures for Hazardous Materials Spills (850),
Petroleum Release Reporting, Investigation, and Confirmation (851) and,
Petroleum Release Response and Corrective Action (852).
Pursuant to IDAPA 20.07.02 section 310.15 (General Drilling Rules) prepare a
comprehensive emergency and spill response guidance document known as a Spill
Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan, to address key State and
Federal regulations such as 40 CFR 112.1 through 40 CFR 112.10 (SPCC
Regulation) and IDAPA 20.07.02 (Rules Governing Conservation of Oil and Natural
Gas) and IDAPA 58.01.01 sections 800-852 (Water Quality Standards). As needed,
incorporate the unique elements of a Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency
Plan and obtain approval by the applicable fire district and the Eagle Police
Department. The SPCC Plan will be prepared by a qualified registered
professional engineer (State of Idaho) and kept at each drilling/production/
workover facility. All oil-handling personnel must be trained to implement the
SPCC Plan, with emphasis upon maintaining oil storage tanks/containers,
secondary containment systems and promptly/safely handling emergency spills,
leaks and accidental discharges of any oil-based fluids and oil-laden water at
the facility. Applicant will provide the operation's SPCC Plan, to the
applicable fire district and Eagle Police Department, to the City of Eagle and
all emergency responders at least thirty (30) days prior to drilling of an oil
or gas well and at least annually thereafter while drilling activities are
taking place at the oil or gas well site. Drilling shall not commence until the
City has approved the plan. The plan shall contain the MSDS (Material Safety
Data Sheet) or similar disclosure for all chemicals used on site with no
exemption for trade secrets. Such plan shall also contain a provision that
within twenty four (24) hours of the discovery of any oil and/or gas leak,
spill, and/or emission release, the City and emergency responders shall be
notified and all operations shall cease immediately until such equipment has
been repaired and prior to operation, operator shall submit certification from
a licensed and qualified professional verifying that the equipment has been
adequately repaired and the equipment is safe to return to service. Such
certification will be reviewed by the City Engineer. Prior to any changes, City
shall be notified regarding any modifications to operations or a change in the
use of chemicals.
         g.   Conduct an appropriate site orientation of the SPCC Plan for all
applicable emergency responders, as determined by the City of Eagle. The cost
and expense of the orientation shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant. If multiple wells/well pads are in the same area (covered by the
same emergency response agencies), evidence from the appropriate emergency
response agencies that a training course was offered in the last twelve (12)
months shall be accepted.
         h.   A narrative describing the environmental impacts of the proposed
project on the site and surrounding land and measures proposed to protect or
mitigate such impacts shall be provided to the City of Eagle. A copy of any
remediation and/or mitigation plan filed with the State shall be submitted to
the City and approved prior to the commencement of operations.
         i.   The applicant, at its own expense, shall provide, prior to
drilling, documentation of baseline water testing, conducted by an independent
third-party, on a minimum of three (3) domestic wells (2 downgradient and 1
upgradient), which wells shall be located within one-fourth (1/4) of a mile of
the well site. Applicant shall provide at least one test prior to drilling and
conduct and provide test results every quarter for the first year of operation.
Thereafter, such wells shall be retested at least twice annually and the
results submitted to the City. Depending upon the depth of the domestic wells
selected for testing, the City may require an additional monitoring well(s) at
the well site. If two (2) domestic wells are not found within one-fourth (1/4)
mile, the applicant shall install a monitoring well downgradient of the well
site for such testing. The depth and location of the monitoring well(s) shall
be approved by the City and based on subsurface geology and aquifer information
provided by the applicant. All monitoring wells shall also be approved by the
Idaho Department of Water Resources. The following parameters to be tested,
include, but are not limited to, water temperature, pH, specific conductivity,
total dissolved solids, major ions (chloride, fluoride, sulfate, nitrate,
silica, calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium), trace elements (aluminum,
arsenic, barium, boron, iron, manganese, selenium, uranium, iodine),
radiochemical (gross alpha/gross beta radioactivity, in addition to uranium),
and organic constituents (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes (BTEX),
methane, methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE)), heavy metals (cadmium, chromium,
lead, mercury, strontium, vanadium), compounds (formaldehyde, hydrofluoric
acid, nitrogen oxides) and any other chemical as determined by the City
Engineer.
         j.   The applicant or permittee, at its own expense, shall provide,
prior to drilling, documentation and results of a completed baseline subsurface
testing program, conducted by a qualified independent third-party,
characterizing potential water bearing zones, utilizing non-invasive or
minimally- invasive exploration methods. The methods employed may include, for
example, geophysical techniques such as electrical resistivity,
electromagnetics, seismic refraction, gravity, electrical resistivity
tomography and ground penetrating radar, or exploratory drilling. Selection of
an approach utilizing one or more of these methods, or alternatives proposed by
the applicant or permittee, must be approved by the City Council, as advised by
the City Engineer or an independent qualified third-party as designated by the
City Council. If hydraulic fracturing or a similar process is approved by the
Idaho Department of Lands, in any proposed production drill hole, the applicant
or permittee, at its own expense, shall provide, prior to conducting hydraulic
fracturing or a similar process, documentation and results of baseline
subsurface testing, utilizing the electrical resistivity tomography technique
(ERT), to evaluate the subsurface volume within and around the drill hole,
particularly regarding the presence of any water bearing zones. If hydraulic
fracturing or similar process is carried out in any such drill hole(s),
periodic ERT monitoring shall be conducted on a schedule approved by the City
Council, to evaluate any physical or chemical changes that may be occurring
over time. Any and all of such testing and/or data collection, including the
initial instrumentation of any proposed production wells, to accommodate
subsequent ERT data collection, shall be approved by the City Council and
supervised by City staff, the City Engineer, or an independent third-party as
directed by the City Council.
         k.   Non-radioactive tracing or tagging additives, unique for each
permitted drill site must be added to all fluids used for drilling, as well as
post-drilling well treatment, including hydraulic fracturing. The City shall be
notified in writing of the formula of such additives from each well.
         l.   Automatic emergency shut off valves that can be operated remotely
shall be installed on drilling equipment with access to valves provided to the
City and the applicable fire district in case of fire or explosion.
         m.   The applicant shall comply with all State and Federal air quality
regulations. The applicant shall report the receipt of any air quality
complaints to the City within twenty four (24) hours.
         n.   The applicant shall provide proof of a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of no less than fifteen
million dollars ($15,000,000.00) per occurrence with an aggregate of thirty
million dollars ($30,000,000.00) and a company authorized to do business in the
State of Idaho shall write the policy. The policy shall not contain any
exclusions of coverage for hydraulic fracturing or mining extraction
activities. The applicant shall also provide proof of operator's extra expense
liability coverage in the event of well failures in the amount no less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The certificate shall require at least thirty
(30) days' notice to the City prior to termination of coverage for any reason.
The applicant shall secure substitute liability insurance coverage prior to
actual termination; failure to maintain comprehensive general liability
insurance shall result in immediate withdrawal of the permit by the City. At
time of application, the applicant shall provide written indemnification for
the City.
      6.   Issuance Of Permit:
         a.   Within thirty (30) business days after receipt of a permit
application, the City of Eagle will process and determine whether the
application is complete and advise the applicant accordingly.
         b.   Pursuant to Idaho Code 47-314(10)(b), if the application is
complete and fulfills the requirements of this subsection J, the City of Eagle
shall issue a permit within twenty one (21) days following the date the
complete application was submitted.
         c.   If the application is incomplete or does not fulfill the
requirements of this subsection J, the City of Eagle shall return the
application to the applicant. After necessary changes have been made City of
Eagle shall follow subsection J6b of this section.
         d.   As a condition of permit approval, applicant shall provide all
permits and plans from the department and all other appropriate regulatory
agencies within thirty (30) days of receipt of such permits and plans.
         e.   Temporary housing for well site workers is prohibited. Applicant
shall provide for adequate screening and restroom facilities for employees.
      7.   Site Design And Installation:
         a.   Access: The permit application shall be submitted to the
appropriate road agency (Ada County Highway District (ACHD) or Idaho
Transportation Department (ITD)) for comment. Any conditions provided by the
agency shall be required as part of the approval of the permit.
         b.   Height: There shall be an exception to the height restrictions
contained in this section for the temporary placement of drilling rigs, drying
tanks, pad drilling and other accessory uses necessary for the actual time
period of drilling or redrilling of an oil or gas well or pad drilling.
         c.   Setbacks/Location:
            (1)   Except as provided in Idaho Code section 47-319, oil and gas
wells, tank batteries and gas processing facilities shall not be constructed
within one-half (1/2) of a mile of the property line of an occupied structure,
place of worship/assembly, medical facility/hospital, or school, domestic water
well, canal, ditch or the natural or ordinary high-water mark of surface waters
or within one-quarter (1/4) mile of a highway.
            (2)   Oil and gas wells, tank batteries and gas processing
facilities may be constructed less than one-half (1/2) of a mile but more than
one-quarter (1/4) of a mile from an occupied structure, domestic water well, if
the operator has obtained the express written permission from the owner of the
occupied structure or domestic water well.
            (3)   Oil and gas wells shall not be constructed within the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) special flood hazard area.
            (4)   Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and
facilities is an integral part of the oil and gas development, and as part of
the planning process, operator shall strive to consider the location of its
temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to
minimize interference with City of Eagle residents' enjoyment of their property
and future development activities as authorized by the City of Eagle applicable
ordinances.
         d.   Screening And Fencing:
            (1)   Security fencing shall not be required at oil or gas well
sites during the initial drilling, or redrilling operations, as long as manned
24-hour on-site supervision and security are provided.
            (2)   Security fencing shall be at least six feet (6') in height
equipped with lockable gates at every access point and have openings no less
than twenty feet (20') wide pursuant to International Fire Code. Additional
lockable gates used to access oil and gas well sites by foot may be allowed, as
necessary. The Fire Chief shall be provided with a method to access the drill
site in the case of an emergency, preferably by use of the Knox System.
            (3)   Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the
oil or gas well site providing notice of the potential dangers and the contact
information in case of an emergency. During drilling and hydraulic fracturing,
clearly visible warning signage shall be posted on the pad site.
         e.   Lighting: Lighting at an oil or gas well site, either temporary
or permanent, shall be directed downward and inward and comply with dark sky
principles. Flaring is not permitted between sunset and sunrise.
         f.   Noise: Extraction activities shall comply with the City's Noise
Ordinance, title 4, chapter 9 of this Code.
         g.   Dust Control, Vibrations, And Odors:
            (1)   To prevent injury or nuisances to persons living and working
in the area surrounding the operation site, the operator shall conduct drilling
and production in a manner that minimizes dust, vibrations, or odors, and in
accordance with industry best practices for drilling and production of gas and
other hydrocarbons.
            (2)   The operator shall adopt proven technological improvements in
industry standards for drilling and production of reducing dust, vibration, and
odor.
            (3)   If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or odors
related to the drilling and production use present an unreasonable risk of
injury, operations shall cease until such issue is adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the City. If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or
odors related to the drilling and production have become a nuisance to persons
living and working in the area, the City shall require the operator to adopt
reasonable methods for reducing the dust, vibrations, and odors. This may
include a requirement to install a mud shaker with construction of access roads
for vehicles exiting the site.
            (4)   Operator shall control fugitive dust arising from operations
and truck traffic. Operator shall dust proof the site by applying water, road
mixture, or other means that reduce dust. Petroleum based and synthetic
polymers, and electrochemical products are prohibited.
         h.   Hours Of Operation: Site development, other than drilling shall
be conducted only between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Monday through Friday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on Saturday and at no time on Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and
materials associated with drilling and well servicing, site preparation and
other related work conducted on the site shall be limited to the above same
work hour restrictions except in cases of an emergency.
      8.   Waiver: In the case of an application for permit under this
subsection FFF, a waiver from an imposed condition(s) may be granted if the
condition(s) is in conflict with chapter 3, title 47 of the Idaho Code. The
applicant will have the burden to show there is a conflict with chapter 3,
title 47 of the Idaho Code, and that the local and State rules cannot be
implemented harmoniously.
   HHH.   Oil and Gas Post-Extraction:
      1.   Definition: Post-extraction processing activities refer to the
handling of oil and gas after it has been extracted from the earth, more
specifically defined as any and all activity relating to site construction and
maintenance for processing of, oil and natural gas which, is not a part of the
extraction process, or which occurs after the oil, natural gas, produced water,
or any other substance or material has been removed from the ground, including
and/or concerning, but not limited to: a) waste disposal, b) fencing, c)
signage, d) lighting, e) venting, f) flaring, g) vehicle traffic and access, h)
noise, i) height restrictions, j) setbacks, k) disposal wells, l) storage
tanks, m) transfer pipelines, n) compression facilities, o) settling ponds, p)
derricks, q) wastewater disposal, r) refining facilities.
"Post-extraction processing activities" include: "gathering facilities" as
defined in Idaho Code section 47-310(10), other facilities, equipment or
improvements used or installed for the gathering, treatment, refining, or other
processing of oil or natural gas or other materials or substances, "processing
facilities" as defined in Idaho Code section 47-310(26), "gas processing
facilities" as defined in IDAPA 20.07.02.23, "pits" as defined in IDAPA
20.07.02.37, and "tank batteries" as defined in IDAPA 20.07.02.51, whether or
not located on a well site (as defined in IDAPA 20.07.02.59).
"Post-extraction activities" do not include: "Tanks" as defined in IDAPA
20.07.02.50 when such tanks are: a) located on a well site as defined in IDAPA
20.07.02.59 and b) contain materials used in and necessary for extraction
activities.
All other definitions applicable to this section are found in subsection GGG of
this section.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose is to provide, through zoning provisions, for
the reasonable development of land for oil and gas drilling and post-extraction
while providing adequate health, safety and general welfare protections of the
City of Eagle residents.
Local zoning regulates surface land use as authorized under the Local Land Use
Planning Act, title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code.
      3.   Zoning Classifications: An oil or gas post-production facility shall
be considered a conditional use within the zoning district(s) expressly set
forth in the land use table, subject to the standards listed herein.
      4.   Permit Requirement:
         a.   No oil or gas post-extraction facility shall be constructed or
located within City of Eagle unless a conditional use permit has been issued by
the City of Eagle to the applicant approving the construction or preparation of
the site for oil or gas post-extraction.
         b.   Each application shall be submitted with the fee established
pursuant to resolution of the City of Eagle as adopted. Such fee shall be
reasonably related to the cost of administering this by the City of Eagle.
         c.   Any modification to an oil and gas post-extraction site that
materially alters the size, location, number of accessory equipment or
structures, shall require a modification of the permit under this subsection
GGG. Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
         d.   Upon receiving application for post-extraction the City Zoning
Administrator shall comply with section
11A-8-4-2 of this title.
      5.   Permit Application: The applicant shall provide to the City of Eagle
at the time of permit application:
         a.   A narrative describing an overview of the post-extraction project
including the number of acres to be disturbed for development, the process
proposed for post-extraction, including, compressor stations, dehydration
facilities, tanks, pits or ponds, collection lines, equipment and structures
number and description of equipment and structures to the extent known.
Injection wells for wastewater or processed water is prohibited. In addition to
the narrative statement, each application shall contain the following:
            (1)   The surface owner's name, address, and phone number.
            (2)   The mineral owner's name, address, and phone number (if
different than the surface owner).
         b.   The address of the oil or gas post-extraction site and a legal
description of the parcel as determined by the City of Eagle and information
needed to gain access to the well site in the event of an emergency.
         c.   The contact information of the individual or individuals
responsible for the operation and activities at the oil or gas post-extraction
site shall be provided to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by the City of Eagle. Such information shall include a
phone number where such individual or individuals can be contacted twenty four
(24) hours per day, three hundred sixty five (365) days a year. Annually, or
upon any change of relevant circumstances, the applicant shall update such
information and provide it to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by City of Eagle.
         d.   A scaled site plan, including elevations or visual aids, of the
oil or gas post-extraction site showing the planned access roads, compressor
stations, dehydration facilities, tanks, pits or ponds, collection lines,
equipment and structures and all permanent improvements to the site and any
post construction surface disturbance in relation to natural resources.
Included in this map shall be an area within the development site for vehicles
to locate while gaining access to the oil or gas post-extraction site.
         e.   A narrative and map describing the planned access routes to the
well sites on public roads including the transportation and delivery of
equipment, machinery, water, chemicals and other materials used in the post-
extraction operation of the oil or gas well site.
         f.   Comply with Idaho State Water Quality Standards pursuant to IDAPA
58.01.02.850-852 addressing procedures for Hazardous Materials Spills (850),
Petroleum Release Reporting, Investigation, and Confirmation (851) and,
Petroleum Release Response and Corrective Action (852).
Pursuant to IDAPA 20.07.02 section 310.15 (General Drilling Rules) prepare a
comprehensive emergency and spill response guidance document known as a Spill
Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan, to address key State and
Federal regulations such as 40 CFR 112.1 through 40 CFR 112.10 (SPCC
Regulation) and IDAPA 20.07.02 (Rules Governing Conservation of Oil and Natural
Gas) and IDAPA 58.01.01 sections 800-852 (Water Quality Standards). As needed,
incorporate the unique elements of a Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency
Plan and obtain approval by the applicable fire district and the Eagle Police
Department. The SPCC Plan will be prepared by a qualified registered
professional engineer (State of Idaho) and kept at each drilling/production/
workover facility. All oil-handling personnel must be trained to implement the
SPCC Plan, with emphasis upon maintaining oil storage tanks/containers,
secondary containment systems and promptly/safely handling emergency spills,
leaks and accidental discharges of any oil-based fluids and oil-laden water at
the facility. Applicant shall provide the SPCC Plan to the City of Eagle and
all emergency responders at least thirty (30) days prior to drilling of an oil
or gas well and at least annually thereafter while drilling activities are
taking place at the oil or gas well site. Drilling shall not commence until the
City has approved the plan. The plan shall contain the MSDS (material safety
data sheet) or similar disclosure for all chemicals used on site with no
exemption for trade secrets. Such plan shall also contain a provision that
within twenty four (24) hours of the discovery of any oil and/or gas leak,
spill, and/or emission release, the City shall be notified and all operations
shall cease immediately until such equipment has been repaired and prior to
operation, operator shall submit certification from a licensed and qualified
professional verifying that the equipment has been adequately repaired and the
equipment is safe to return to service. Such certification will be reviewed by
the City Engineer. Prior to any changes, the City shall be notified regarding
any modifications to operations or a change in the use of chemicals.
         g.   Conduct an appropriate site orientation of the SPCC Plan for all
applicable emergency responders, as determined by the City of Eagle. The
orientation shall be conducted prior to the commencement of post-extraction
activities. The cost and expense of the orientation shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
         h.   A narrative describing the environmental impacts of the proposed
project on the site and surrounding land and measures proposed to protect or
mitigate such impacts shall be provided to the City of Eagle. A copy of any
remediation and/or mitigation plan filed with the State shall be submitted to
the City and approved prior to the commencement of operations. The City
reserves the right to provide additional requirements to a remediation and/or
mitigation plan.
         i.   The applicant, at its own expense, shall provide, prior to post-
extraction, current documentation of baseline water testing, conducted by an
independent third-party, on a minimum of three (3) domestic wells (2
downgradient and 1 upgradient), which wells shall be located within one-fourth
(1/4) of a mile of the well site. Applicant shall provide at least one test
prior to post-extraction and conduct and provide test results every quarter for
the first year of operation. Thereafter, such wells shall be retested at least
twice annually and the results submitted to the City. Depending upon the depth
of the domestic wells selected for testing, the City may require an additional
monitoring well(s) at the well site. If two (2) domestic wells are not found
within one-fourth (1/4) mile, the applicant shall install a monitoring well
downgradient of the post-extraction site for such testing. The depth and
location of the monitoring well(s) shall be approved by the City and based on
subsurface geology and aquifer information provided by the applicant. All
monitoring wells shall also be approved by the Idaho Department of Water
Resources. The following parameters to be tested, include, but are not limited
to, water temperature, pH, specific conductivity, total dissolved solids, major
ions, (chloride, fluoride, sulfate, nitrate, silica, calcium, sodium,
potassium, magnesium), trace elements (aluminum, arsenic, barium, boron, iron,
manganese, selenium, uranium, iodine), radiochemical (gross alpha/gross beta
radioactivity, in addition to uranium), and organic constituents (benzene,
toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes (BTEX), methane, methyl tertiary butyl ether
(MTBE)), heavy metals (cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, strontium, vanadium),
compounds (formaldehyde, hydrofluoric acid, nitrogen oxides) and anything else
as determined by the City Engineer.
         j.   Automatic emergency shut off valves that can be operated remotely
shall be installed on post-extraction facilities with access to valves provided
to the City and the applicable fire district in case of fire or explosion.
         k.   The applicant shall comply with all State and Federal air and
water quality regulations. The applicant shall report the receipt of any air or
water quality complaints to the City within twenty four (24) hours of receipt.
         l.   The applicant shall submit proof of a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of no less than fifteen
million dollars ($15,000,000.00) per occurrence with an aggregate of thirty
million dollars ($30,000,000.00) and a company authorized to do business in the
State of Idaho shall write the policy. The policy shall not contain any
exclusions of coverage for hydraulic fracturing or mining extraction
activities. The certificate shall require at least thirty (30) days' notice to
the City prior to termination of coverage for any reason. The applicant shall
secure substitute liability insurance coverage prior to actual termination;
failure to maintain comprehensive general liability insurance shall result in
immediate withdrawal of the permit by the City. At time of application, the
applicant shall provide written indemnification for the City.
      6.   Site Design And Installation:
         a.   Access: The permit application shall be submitted to the
appropriate road agency (ACHD or ITD) for comment. Any conditions provided by
the agency shall be required.
         b.   Height: No post-extraction facility shall exceed thirty five feet
(35').
         c.   Setbacks/Location:
            (1)   Post-extraction facilities shall not be constructed within:
                  One-quarter (1/4) of a mile from a highway;
                  One-half (1/2) mile from the property line of an occupied
structure, a water well, ditches or canals, an occupied school, hospital/
medical facility, or place of worship/assembly;
                  Otherwise comply with IDAPA 20.07.02.430.01, as may be
amended.
            (2)   Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and
facilities is an integral part of the oil and gas development, and as part of
the planning process, operator shall strive to consider the location of its
temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to
minimize interference with City of Eagle residents' enjoyment of their property
and future development activities as authorized by the City of Eagle applicable
ordinances.
         d.   Screening And Fencing:
            (1)   Security fencing with materials approved by the City, shall
be installed around post-extraction structures and ponds or pits prior to the
commencement of post-extraction.
            (2)   Security fencing shall be at least six feet (6') in height
equipped with lockable gates at every access point and have openings no less
than twenty feet (20') wide pursuant to International Fire Code. Additional
lockable gates used to access oil and gas post-extraction sites by foot may be
allowed, as necessary. The Fire Chief shall be provided with a method to access
the drill site in the case of an emergency, preferably by use of the Knox
System.
            (3)   Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the
oil or gas post-extraction site providing notice of the potential dangers and
the contact information in case of an emergency.
            (4)   In construction of post-extraction facilities, the natural
surrounding shall be considered to preserve existing trees and other native
vegetation. Existing trees and respective root systems should not be disturbed
whenever possible. Re- forestation/re-vegetation of the post-extraction site
will be provided by the owner/operator as required by rules governing oil and
gas conservation.
         e.   Lighting: Lighting at an oil or gas post-extraction site, either
temporary or permanent, shall be directed downward and inward and comply with
dark sky principles. Flaring is not permitted between sunset and sunrise.
         f.   Noise: Post-extraction activities shall comply with the City's
Noise Ordinance, title 4, chapter 9 of this Code.
         g.   Dust Control, Vibrations, And Odors:
            (1)   To prevent injury or nuisances to persons living and working
in the area surrounding the operation site, the operator shall conduct drilling
and production in a manner that minimizes dust, vibrations, or odors, and in
accordance with industry best practices for drilling and production of gas and
other hydrocarbons.
            (2)   The operator shall adopt proven technological improvements in
industry standards for drilling and production of reducing dust, vibration, and
odor.
            (3)   If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or odors
related to the post-extraction use present an unreasonable risk of injury,
operations shall cease until such issue is adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the City. If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or
odors related to the post-extraction have become a nuisance to persons living
and working in the area, the City shall require the operator to adopt
reasonable methods for reducing the dust, vibrations, and odors. This may
include a requirement to install a mud shaker with construction of access roads
for vehicles exiting the site.
            (4)   Operator shall control fugitive dust arising from operations
and truck traffic. Operator shall dust proof the site by applying water, road
mixture, or other means that reduce dust. Petroleum based and synthetic
polymers, brine water, sulfur water, water in mixture with any hydrocarbon,
including used motor oil, and electrochemical products are prohibited.
            (5)   Temporary housing is prohibited. Applicant shall provide for
adequate screening and restroom facilities.
         h.   Hours Of Operation: Site development, other than drilling shall
be conducted only between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Monday through Friday and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on Saturday and at no time on Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and
materials associated with drilling and well servicing, site preparation and
other related work conducted on the site shall be limited to the above same
work hour restrictions except in cases of an emergency. (Ord. 792, 6-26-2018)
      7.   Waiver: In the case of an application for permit under this
subsection GGG, a waiver from an imposed condition(s) may be granted if the
condition(s) is in conflict with chapter 3, title 47 of the Idaho Code.
The applicant will have the burden to show there is a conflict with chapter 3,
title 47 of the Idaho Code, and that the local and State rules cannot be
implemented harmoniously. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 794, 2-12-2019; Ord.
884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
   III.   Reserved:
   JJJ.   Clubs Or Lodges, Public Or Private:
      1.   Clubs or lodges (public or private) located within the Community
Open Space (COS) district, the required land use standards for any structure
are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
2.0-acres        30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   KKK.   Community Association Buildings and Facilities:
      1.   For any community association buildings and facilities located
within the Community Open Space (COS) district, the required land use standards
for any structure are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
0.5-acres        25'    25'   25'            25'          35'
 
   LLL.   Community Gardens:
      1.   For any structure requiring a building permit associated community
gardens located within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space
(ROS) districts, the required land use standards for any structure(s) are as
follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area    Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                    Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
11,000- square feet 15'    15'   15'            15'          35'
 
   MMM.   Farm:
      1.   For any property designated as a farm located within the Community
Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required land use
standards for any structure(s) requiring a building permit are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acre         30'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   NNN.   Fiberoptic Internet Hut:
      1.   When fiberoptic internet huts are proposed to be located within a
building whose primary use is something other than a fiberoptic internet hut
(i.e. a community center building, library, museum, etc.) then a fiberoptic
internet hut shall be a permitted use in all land use districts and the
required land use standards shall comply with the standards of the primary use
within that district.
      2.   When fiberoptic internet huts are proposed as a standalone building
or a building in which the primary function is to house the fiberoptic internet
equipment, then the fiberoptic internet hut shall require the approval of a
conditional use permit.
      3.   For any fiberoptic huts that require a conditional use permit and
are located within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS)
districts, the required land use standards for any structure(s) are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
0.050-acre       20'    20'   20'            20'          15'
 
   OOO.   Government Buildings/Offices:
      1.   For any government buildings/offices located within the Community
Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required land use
standards for any structure(s) are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
0.050-acre       20'    25'   20'            20'          35'
 
   PPP.   Heliports:
      1.   For any property designated as a heliport located within the
Community Open Space (COS) district, the required land use standards for any
structure(s) are as follows, unless Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or
other requirements are more restrictive:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
5.0-acres        50'    50'   50'            50'          35'
 
   QQQ.   Live Entertainment Events:
      1.   For any properties designated for live entertainment events located
within the Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts,
the required land use standards for any structure(s) are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
5.0-acres        40'    30'   30'            30'          35'
 
   RRR.   Public Service Facility:
      1.   For any public service facility, except for electric substations
(refer to Item S. of this section), located within the Community Open Space
(COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required land use standards
for any structure are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
0.50-acre        15'    15'   15'            15'          35'
 
   SSS.   Maintenance Facilities Related to Open Space Uses:
      1.   Maintenance facilities related to open space uses are an accessory
use within the Community Open Space (COS) and Regional Open Space (ROS) land
use districts, pursuant to
11A-2-3: Land Use Standards. The setbacks and general lot development
regulations of any maintenance facilities related to open space uses shall
adhere to the requirements of the primary use to which it is accessory to.
   TTT.   Outdoor storage is an accessory use within the Community Open Space
(COS) and Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, pursuant to
11A-2-3: Land Use Standards.
   UUU.   Museums:
      1.   For any museum located within the Community Open Space (COS) or
Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required land use standards for any
structure(s) are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
2.0-acres        15'    25'   20'            20'          35'
 
   VVV.   Pump Stations:
      1.   For any pump station located within the Community Open Space (COS))
or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required land use standards for any
structure are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area    Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                    Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
11,000- square feet 25'    25'   25'            25'          25'
 
   WWW.   Recreation/Community Centers:
      1.   For any recreation or community center located within the Community
Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required land use
standards for any structure(s) are as follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
0.50-acre        15'    25'   25'            25'          35'
 
   XXX.   Vineyards:
      1.   For any property designated as a vineyard located within the
Community Open Space (COS) or Regional Open Space (ROS) districts, the required
land use standards for any structure(s) that require a building permit are as
follows:
 
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Setbacks                         Maximum Height
                 Front: Rear: Interior Side: Street Side:
1.0-acre         25'    25'   25'            25'          35'
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 794, 2-12-2019; Ord. 884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 889,
1-10-2022; Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 5
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
11A-5-1: Purpose And Interpretation Of Provisions
11A-5-2: Application Of Provisions
11A-5-3: Design And Maintenance
11A-5-4: Additional Parking Regulations And Requirements
11A-5-4-1: Location Of Parking Spaces
11A-5-4-2: Additional Design And Maintenance Regulations And Requirements
11A-5-4-3: Joint And Off Site Parking
11A-5-4-4: Parking Disabled Vehicles
11A-5-4-5: Bicycle Parking
11A-5-5: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
11A-5-6: Loading Space Requirements
11A-5-1 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter provides standards for parking and loading facilities to
ensure adequate parking areas for various uses, minimize traffic hazards and
congestion, promote vehicular and pedestrian safety and efficient land use, and
mitigate impacts on surrounding properties.
Parking is a key element of any development. An oversupply can result in excess
environmental and physical impacts while an undersupply can result in vehicles
intruding onto adjoining properties and neighborhoods. The goal is to find the
balance between providing adequate parking to support approved uses while
minimizing the negative effects of excessive land area or resources devoted to
parking. A well planned and executed parking program is essential to
establishing and maintaining a human scale environment that emphasizes parking
efficiency over parking supply.
Shared parking is encouraged and is a critical factor in the design and success
of a mixed use project such as Spring Valley. A shared parking program versus
traditional parking standards reduces parking requirements, enhances community
character and vitality, increases streetscape appeal, reduces impervious
surface area and decreases stormwater and pollution runoff, reduces the "urban
heat island effect", reduces conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians, and
provides better pedestrian flow and connectivity.
   B.   In the interpretation of this chapter, the following shall govern:
      1.   Parking For Uses Not Listed: Parking spaces for other permitted or
conditional uses not listed herein shall be determined by the administrator.
Among the factors for determining the number of spaces to be required for a use
not listed herein, the administrator shall compare the proposed use with a use
which has similar traffic generating characteristics as outlined in the most
recent version of the Institute Of Transportation Engineers "Trip Generation
Manual".
      2.   Fractional Numbers: Fractional numbers shall be increased to the
next whole number.
      3.   More Than One Use Conducted On A Site: When more than one use is
conducted on a site, the total number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the
requirements for each use unless shared parking is approved.
      4.   Parking Requirements Based On Square Footage: When computing parking
requirements based on the amount of square footage in buildings, all
calculations shall be on a gross floor area (gfa) basis, unless specifically
stated otherwise.
      5.   Parking Based On Seating: When the parking requirements are based on
seating and the seating consists of benches or pews, each twenty four (24)
linear inches of bench or pew shall be considered one seat.
      6.   Parking Based On Employees: For the purpose of computing parking
requirements based on the number of employees, calculations shall be for the
largest number of persons working on any single shift.
      7.   Residential Parking: Driveways may be used to satisfy minimum on
site parking requirements, beyond the covered parking requirements, for
residential dwellings, provided that sufficient length is available to satisfy
the minimum design standards. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered, or
its use changed unless permanently maintained off street parking and loading
spaces have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this title.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use,
shall not apply to any existing building or structure. Where a new use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such spaces as
may be required by this title.
   C.   Whenever a building, structure, or use, constructed or changed in use
after the effective date hereof, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number
of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise to
create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces per this
title, additional parking spaces shall be provided so that the existing
building, structure, or use, and proposed enlargement or change in use, shall
then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
   D.   The parking requirements in section
11A-5-5 of this chapter represent general parking standards for individual uses
under which all proposed development will be evaluated. Requirements for uses
not specifically listed shall be determined by the administrator based on uses
with similar traffic generation characteristics as outlined in the most recent
Institute Of Traffic Engineers (ITE) "Trip Generation Manual". Parking includes
garage and carport spaces.
   E.   Parking lots shall be screened from adjacent uses, streets and pathways
by walls, plantings, earth berms or a combination thereof pursuant to the
screening requirements in
chapter 3 of this title. Where on street parking is provided adjacent to the
use it serves, it shall count toward the parking requirement for the use.
   F.   Consideration should be given to providing spaces to accommodate
alternative forms of transportation such as, for example, motorcycles, motor
scooters and golf carts. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-3 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Surfacing And Striping: Surfacing and striping except as approved by
the administrator, or as allowed below, all parking and loading facilities
shall be surfaced (paved) with asphalt or concrete, striped and marked to
clearly define access lanes, standard, compact and handicapped parking spaces,
and internal circulation movements. The following uses may have unpaved parking
areas:
      1.   Aggregate processing plants.
      2.   Equestrian centers/riding academies.
      3.   Sports fields (overflow parking).
      4.   Agriculture.
      5.   Roadside stands.
      6.   Plant nurseries/sod farms (wholesale).
      7.   Maintenance facilities.
      8.   Carnivals and circuses.
      9.   Wineries and vineyards (depending on location to perpetuate an
agrarian character of the site).
      10.   Temporary construction offices/yards.
      11.   Temporary sales offices/trailers.
   B.   Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper
drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways. Drainage plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
city engineer and, for any site abutting a public street, such plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the Ada County highway district, or highway district
having jurisdiction.
   C.   Access: Off street parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering
room so that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction.
The backing of a motor vehicle onto a public street from a parking area shall
be restricted or prohibited, except for residential properties along local
roadways. Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be located
in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be clearly
visible by a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a
public or private street.
   D.   Maintenance: The owner of parking facilities shall be responsible to
continually maintain the parking facilities in compliance with approved site
plans and shall be free of litter and debris.
   E.   Compact Spaces: Shall be designed consistent with section
11A-5-4-2 of this chapter.
   F.   Location: Off street parking areas should be located on the sides or
rear of buildings instead of the front. When parking areas are located in the
front of buildings, they should be adequately screened pursuant to
chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-4 ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
11A-5-4-1: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   The following regulations shall govern the location of off street
parking spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on
the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve.
      2.   Parking spaces for retail or customer parking for commercial,
industrial, or public/semipublic uses shall be located not more than seven
hundred feet (700') from the principal use measured along the sidewalk, or
walkway available for public use, from the primary entrance of the principal
use to the furthest parking space within the parking lot.
      3.   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential
uses shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the
principal use measured along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use,
from the primary entrance of the principal use to the furthest parking space
within the parking lot.
      4.   Parking spaces for employee parking on a daily basis where the
vehicle is used occasionally, regardless of the nature of employment, shall be
located not more than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') from the
principal use measured along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use,
from the primary entrance of the principal use to the furthest parking space
within the parking lot.
      5.   When off site parking is provided, a directional sign shall be
erected on the premises and shall advise the public of the distance and
direction to the off site parking area. Any such sign shall conform to
applicable requirements of
chapter 3 of this title, and at a minimum shall be approved in writing by the
zoning administrator prior to installation.
   B.   No part of any parking area for more than ten (10) vehicles shall be
closer than twenty feet (20') to any dwelling unit, school, or hospital or
other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot, unless separated
by an acceptably designed screen. If on the same lot with a one-family
residence, the parking area shall be located and screened as required by the
design review board.
   C.   A reduction in parking requirements can be requested at the preliminary
plat or site plan review phase when evidence is provided to warrant a
modification of the parking requirements. The administrator may grant up to a
twenty percent (20%) reduction. A greater reduction requires approval by the
city council. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-4-2: ADDITIONAL DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site Lighting: Parking areas used during the hours of darkness shall
have lighting that provides adequate illumination for security and safety while
maintaining dark sky lighting principles. The minimum requirements are
contained in
chapter 3 of this title.
      1.   Lighting plans shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning
administrator prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit.
   B.   Screening And/Or Landscaping: Parking lot screening and landscaping
shall comply with
chapter 3 of this title.
   C.   Wheel Stops/Curbing: Concrete curbing at least six inches (6") high and
six inches (6") wide or wheel stops shall be provided to prevent vehicles from
overhanging abutting sidewalks, properties, or public rights of way, to protect
landscaped areas, and to protect adjacent properties. Such curbing or wheel
stops shall be located at least three feet (3') from any adjacent wall, fence,
property line, walkway, or structure where parking and/or drive aisles are
located. Wheel stops are not required where parking abuts a walkway with an
attached curb and the walkway provides a minimum four foot (4') pedestrian
clear area.
   D.   Off Street Parking Design And Dimension Tables: See tables 5.1 and 5.2
and exhibit 5.1 of this section for parking dimensions.
   TABLE 5.1
   PARKING DIMENSIONS FOR STANDARD CARS
 
Parking angle (A)        45°60°90°Parallel
Width of space (B)       9'  9'  9'  9'
Length of space (C)      19' 19' 19' 23'
Width of drive aisle (D) 13' 17' 24' 12'
 
   TABLE 5.2
   PARKING DIMENSIONS FOR COMPACT CARS
 
Parking angle (A)        45° 60° 90° Parallel
Width of space (B)       7'6" 7'6" 7'6" 7'6"
Length of space (C)      17'  17'  17'  19'
Width of drive aisle (D) 13'  16'  24'  12'
 
   Notes:
       1.    Length of spaces may be reduced by 2 feet with no tire stops and a
2 foot overhang into an adjacent walkway when the walkway is at least 7 feet
wide and free of impediments.
       2.    Aisles less than 20 feet in width are considered one-way.
       3.    Handicapped spaces shall comply with IBC or federal standards.
   EXHIBIT 5.1
   PARKING LAYOUT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-283.png]
 
   E.   Handicapped Parking: Handicapped spaces shall be twelve feet by
nineteen feet (12' x 19') or two (2) 8-feet by 19-feet, separated by a five
foot (5') aisle.
   F.   Reduction For Planter Overhangs: When a parking space abuts a landscape
planter, the front two feet (2') of the required length for a parking space may
overhang the planter. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-4-3: JOINT AND OFF SITE PARKING:
The parking requirements may be met by the use of joint and/or off site parking
facilities. Alternatives to the parking requirements contained herein will be
considered to:
   Avoid the visual intrusion and heat build up that results from large paved
areas.
   Ensure the efficient use of land.
   Create an incentive to provide pedestrian friendly development.
   The administrator may authorize the use of joint parking, off site parking
or a combination of the methods as described below:
   A.   Joint Parking:
      1.   The uses separately generate parking demands primarily during hours
when the other uses are not in operation and the parking spaces serve the uses
without conflict;
      2.   The peak hours of parking demand from the uses shall generally not
coincide so that the peak demand will be less than the parking required;
      3.   The applicant provides documentation showing the parking demand will
be reduced if a public or private transit system serves the use;
      4.   A shared parking analysis has been submitted describing the nature
of the uses and the times when the uses operate so as to demonstrate the lack
of potential conflict;
      5.   A shared parking facility, if located on a site other than the site
where the uses are located, shall be located no further than that permitted in
subsection B, "Off Site Parking", of this section;
      6.   The owners of the parcels or uses cooperatively establish and
operate the facilities;
      7.   The owners of the parcels execute an agreement, satisfactory to the
city attorney, which outlines the terms and conditions of the shared parking
arrangement. The agreement shall include the following:
         a.   A guarantee that there will be no substantial alteration in the
uses that will create a greater demand for parking;
         b.   A guarantee among the landowners for access to a use of the
shared parking facility;
         c.   A provision that the city may require parking facilities in
addition to those originally approved upon findings by the city council that
adequate parking to serve the uses has not been provided;
         d.   A provision stating that the city council may, for due cause and
upon notice and hearing, unilaterally modify, amend, or terminate the agreement
at any time; and
         e.   Any other information required to be documented on such agreement
by the city in an effort to assure compliance with this chapter. The agreement
must contain the legal description of both parcels and must be of sufficient
duration to ensure the continued use of the shared parking facilities. The city
may record the agreement in the office of the county recorder, or require the
applicant to do so.
   B.   Off Site Parking: The parking requirements may be met by locating the
required parking spaces on a separate parcel from the lot on which the
principal use is located. Off site parking may be approved only if:
      1.   The parcels containing the use and the off site parking are under
common ownership, or a cross parking easement agreement is provided;
      2.   The parcel to be used for parking is located as follows from the
building or use it is intended to serve (as measured along the sidewalk or
walkway available for public use from the primary entrance of the principal use
to the furthest parking space within the parcel):
         a.   Not more than three hundred feet (300') for residential uses;
         b.   Not more than seven hundred feet (700') in the community
commercial (CC), highway mixed use (HMU), and mixed use (MU) districts and for
all public/quasi-public uses;
         c.   Not more than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') in the
village center (VC) and neighborhood commercial (NC) districts;
         d.   Not more than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') for
employee parking on a daily basis where the vehicle is used occasionally,
regardless of the nature of employment;
      3.   The parcel to be used for parking is not separated or divided from
the building or use it is intended to serve by a freeway, expressway, highway,
or primary arterial;
      4.   The applicant satisfies the administrator that the use of the off
site parcel for parking will not be detrimental to public safety; and
      5.   The owner of the parcels executes an agreement or similar document,
satisfactory to the city attorney, which outlines the terms and conditions of
the off site parking use. The document must contain the legal description of
both the off site parcel and the parcel where the principal use is located and
must be of sufficient duration to ensure the continued use of the off site
parcel for parking. In order to provide record notice of the existence of the
off site parking arrangement, the applicant shall record the document in the
office of the county recorder and provide a copy of the document to the city.
   C.   Hotels And Resort Parking: The administrator may authorize a reduction
in the total number of required parking spaces for hotel/resort developments
pursuant to the joint and off street parking standards of this chapter. Such
reduction shall apply only to such uses as restaurants, retail stores,
amusements/recreational facilities and similar uses which are clearly ancillary
to the hotel. Required parking for supplementary uses shall be determined by a
shared parking analysis as described in subsection A, "Joint Parking", of this
section. In determining the parking requirement, the administrator shall
consider the following:
      1.   The characteristic of each use and the projected peak parking
demand, including hours of operation;
      2.   The potential reduction in vehicle movements afforded by
multipurpose use of spaces by employees or customers;
      3.   The potential reduction in vehicle trips afforded by multiple use of
the facilities by guests and customers; and
      4.   The extent to which the applicant can document the lack of potential
conflict among parking needs and facilities. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-4-4: PARKING DISABLED VEHICLES:
The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential or commercial district
for a period of more than two (2) weeks shall be prohibited unless such vehicle
is stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
11A-5-4-5: BICYCLE PARKING:
One bicycle parking space within an approved rack shall be required for each
thirty (30) required automobile parking spaces or fraction thereof for office
and commercial developments. Multi-family residential developments shall
provide one bicycle rack space per each ten (10) units. Bicycle parking racks
shall be in a well lit area, and shall be designed in accordance with the
parking facility criteria of the "Bicycle-Pedestrian Design Manual For Ada
County" as prepared for the Ada County highway district with the exception that
bicycle racks do not have to be covered unless required by the design review
board, or planning and zoning commission or city council. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-5 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
In accordance with subsection
11A-5-1B of this chapter, parking spaces for other permitted or conditional
uses not listed herein shall be determined by the administrator. Among the
factors for determining the number of spaces to be required for a use not
listed herein, the administrator shall compare the proposed use with a use
which has similar traffic generating characteristics as outlined in the most
recent version of the Institute Of Transportation Engineers "Trip Generation
Manual".
For the purpose of this title, the following space requirements shall apply:
   TABLE 5.3
   REQUIRED PARKING
gfa = Gross floor area
Agricultural uses:                         
 Plant nurseries/sod farms (retail and    
  wholesale):
                                          1 space per 250 square feet of gfa,
  Retail                                plus 1 space per 500 square feet of
                                          outdoor display/lathe house/
                                          greenhouse area
  Wholesale                             1 space per 2,000 square feet of gfa
 Vineyards (no winery)                   1 space per 2,000 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 1,000 square feet of gfa.
                                          Gift shops, restaurants, event
 Wineries                                facilities, etc., shall require
                                          additional parking per the standards
                                          in this section
Civic, community, and public/quasi-public  
uses:
  Community association buildings and
 facilities, including clubhouses and     
  swimming pools:
  General                               1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 4 persons' capacity, plus
  Swimming pools                        1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 30
                                          square feet of gfa used for seating
                                          purposes, whichever is greater
 Community information centers           1 space per 250 square feet
                                          1 space per 4 fixed seats or 10
 Conference centers                      spaces per 1,000 square feet of gfa,
                                          whichever is greater
 Equestrian centers/riding academies     1 space per 4 stalls
 Golf courses/clubhouses                 4 spaces per hole, plus 1 space per
                                          150 square feet of gfa of clubhouse
 Museums                                 1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
 Parks/open space/trail heads            Determined by site plan review
 Post office/annexes                     1 space per 400 square feet of gfa,
                                          but not less than 6 spaces
                                          1 space per 300 square feet of gfa
                                          for offices, plus 1 space per 100
                                          square feet of gfa for weight rooms/
                                          workout and/or dance rooms, plus 1
 Recreation/community centers            space per 100 square feet of gfa for
                                          restaurant/cafe or snack bar, plus 1
                                          space per employee for largest shift,
                                          plus additional parking for any
                                          stadiums/arenas or other uses
                                          1 space per 3 seats in spectator
 Recreation fields, courts, and sports   area; if there is no seating for
  facilities                              spectators, an interpretation by the
                                          administrator is required
 Religious facilities/houses of worship  1 space per 5 seats
                                          1 space per 4 persons' capacity, plus
 Swimming pools, outdoor (public,        1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 30
  community or club)                      square feet of gfa used for seating
                                          purposes, whichever is greater
 Utility buildings and facilities        Determined by site plan approval or
                                          CUP
 Wireless communication facilities       1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
Commercial uses:                           
 Auto body shops                         1 space per 225 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 2 gas pumps and 2 spaces
 Auto gas stations/service shops         per service bay (not counting fronts
                                          of bays/pumps)
 Auto repair and service shops (major    1 space per 225 square feet of gfa
  and minor)
                                          1 space per 400 square feet of gfa,
 Auto sales (new and used)               plus 1 space per 750 square feet of
                                          outdoor display
 Auto/truck rental agencies              1 space per 200 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 200 square feet of gfa,
 Banks/financial institutions            plus 1 lane per drive-up window and/
                                          or automatic teller machine with
                                          stacking for 4 vehicles per lane
 Bars/pubs/nightclubs                    1 space per 200 square feet of gfa
 Bed and breakfast facilities            1 space per sleeping room plus 2
                                          spaces for primary residence
                                          1 space per 400 square feet of gfa,
 Building materials/lumber yards         plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
                                          gross storage area
                                          1 space per 200 square feet of gfa of
 Car washes (full and self-service)      sales, office or lounge area, plus
                                          stacking for 3 cars per washing
                                          station
 Childcare facilities:                    
  Family/home daycare                   1 space on site (may include
                                          driveway)
  Group daycare                         2 spaces
  Daycare centers/preschools            3 spaces per classroom, but not less
                                          than 9 spaces for the building
 Clinics/urgent care facilities          1 space per 200 square feet of gfa
 Clubs, public and private               1 space per 200 square feet of gfa
 Commercial center, community            Determined by building use at site
                                          plan review
 Commercial center, neighborhood         Determined by building use at site
                                          plan review
                                          1 space per 400 square feet of gfa,
 Dry cleaners/laundries                  plus stacking for 3 cars per drive-up
                                          window
 Emergency healthcare facilities:         
                                          1 space per 500 square feet of gfa,
  Ambulance services                    plus 2 enclosed ambulance storage
                                          spaces
  Emergency healthcare                  1 space per 200 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 500 square feet of gfa,
  Emergency services                    plus 2 enclosed vehicle storage
                                          spaces
 Entertainment facilities (excluding      
  shooting ranges and gun clubs):
  General                               1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
                                          3 spaces per lane, plus 1 space per
  Bowling centers/lanes                 100 square feet of area used for
                                          restaurant, cocktail lounge, arcade
                                          area or similar use
  Golf driving ranges                   3 spaces plus 1 space per tee
  Miniature golf courses                3 spaces per hole
  Skating rinks (ice/roller)            1 space per 100 square feet of
                                          skating rink area
  Tennis/racquetball clubs              3 spaces per court
                                          1 space per 5 fixed seats or 10
  Theaters (live and movie)             spaces per 1,000 square feet of gfa,
                                          whichever is greater
 Flex space                              1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
 Food and beverage sales                 1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
 Health clubs                            1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
 Home occupations                        1 space on site (may include
                                          driveway)
 Hospitals and related facilities        1 space per patient bed
                                          1 space per guestroom, plus 1 space
                                          per 2 employees; parking requirements
                                          for hotels that contain ancillary
 Hotels and motels                       uses (retail, restaurants, conference
                                          centers, etc.) such as those found in
                                          a resort shall be determined by site
                                          plan review
 Kennels                                 1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
 Laboratories                            1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
 Laundromats                             1 space per 300 square feet of gfa
 Liquor stores                           1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
 Manufacturing, light                    used for manufacturing/processing,
                                          plus 1 space per 300 square feet of
                                          office or sales area
 Mortuaries/funeral homes                1 space per 4 seats
 Motion picture/radio/television         Determined by site plan review
  production facilities
 Nursing/convalescent homes/             1 space per 3 beds
  transitional housing
 Offices, business and professional:      
  General                               1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
  Medical/dental                        1 space per 200 square feet of gfa
 Personal improvement establishments     1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
 Personal service establishments:         
  General                               1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
  Barbershops/beauty parlors            2 spaces per barber chair or
                                          beautician station
  Repair shops (appliances and          1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
    electronics)
 Radio and TV broadcast stations         1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
 Recreational vehicle dealerships/        
  service/storage:
  Sales                                 1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
  Service                               2 spaces per service bay
                                          1 space per 1,500 square feet of
  Storage                               gross storage area, plus 1 space per
                                          750 square feet of outdoor display
 Recycling/solid waste transfer centers  1 space per 1,000 square feet of gfa
 Rental service stores/storage yards      
  (large equipment):
  Sales                                 1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
  Service                               2 spaces per service bay
                                          1 space per 500 square feet of gfa of
  Storage                               office space, plus 1 space per 500
                                          square feet of outdoor display
 Research and development facilities     1 space per 500 square feet of gfa
 Resorts                                 Determined by site plan review
 Restaurants (with and without drive-     
  throughs) and catering establishments:
                                          1 space per 200 square feet of gfa,
  With drive-through                    plus stacking for 5 cars for drive-up
                                          service
  Without drive-through                 1 space per 150 square feet of gfa
 Retail sales and services (other than    
  those listed):
  General                               1 space per 250 square feet of gfa
                                          1 space per 500 square feet of gfa of
  Furniture and large appliance stores  sale floor display area, plus 1 space
                                          per 2,500 square feet of gfa of
                                          warehouse storage
  Printing and blueprint facilities     1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
  Rental stores (small tools/           1 space per 500 square feet of gfa of
    equipment)                            structure and covered storage area
 Shooting ranges/gun clubs               1 space per target and/or shooting
                                          station
 Special care facility                   1 space per 3 beds
 Veterinary hospitals/clinics            1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
 Warehousing, wholesaling, distribution   
  and storage:
                                          1 space per 1,000 square feet of gfa
  General                               up to 20,000 square feet plus 1 space
                                          per 2,000 square feet of gfa over
                                          20,000 square feet
  Ministorage                           1 space per 20 storage units
Educational facilities:                    
 Business, technical and vocational      1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
  schools
 Colleges and universities (including    1 space per 400 square feet of gfa
  satellite campuses)
                                          2 spaces per classroom, plus 1 space
 Elementary/junior high/middle schools   per 5 seats in auditoriums or
                                          assembly halls
 High schools                            9 spaces per classroom, plus 20
                                          spaces for administrative staff
 Preschools and kindergartens (private)  3 spaces per classroom, but not less
                                          than 9 spaces for the building
Residential uses:                          
 Accessory dwelling                      1 space per unit
 Multi-family, studio and 1 bedroom      1.5 spaces per unit, including 1
                                          covered space
 Multi-family, 2 bedroom                 2 spaces per unit, including 1
                                          covered space
 Multi-family, 3 bedrooms and above      2 spaces per unit, including 1
                                          covered space
 Senior citizen apartment                1 covered space per unit, plus 1
                                          guest space for every 5 units
 Single-family attached/detached/        2 spaces per unit including 1 covered
  equestrian                              space
                                          2 spaces per unit, including 1
                                          covered space, plus 0.25 space per
 Single-family (SFSL)                    unit for guest parking (adjacent on
                                          street parking may count toward guest
                                          parking requirement)
Temporary facilities:                      
 Aggregate processing and batch plants   1 space per employee
 Carnivals and circuses                  1 space per 3 seats (circus) or as
                                          determined by a site plan or CUP
 Farmers' markets                        As determined by a site plan or CUP
 Seasonal or holiday product sales       As determined by a site plan
 Special events                          Determined by site plan
 Temporary construction offices/yards    1 space per 2 employees using the
                                          facility, plus 2 spaces
 Temporary real estate sales offices/    1 space per 2 employees using the
  trailers                                facility, plus 2 spaces
 
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-5-6 LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Every use that receives or distributes materials or merchandise by truck shall
provide and maintain on site loading spaces in accordance with the following
standards:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   The number of loading spaces shall be based upon the total gross
floor area in the building or use.
      2.   On site loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with table
5.4 of this section.
      TABLE 5.4
      ON SITE LOADING REQUIREMENTS
 
Gross Floor Area                               Quantity And Type
(Square Feet)
14,000 - 36,000                                1 type B
36,001 - 60,000                                2 type B
60,001 - 100,000                               2 type B and 1 type A
Each 75,000 (or fraction thereof) over 100,000 1 additional type A
 
   Notes:
      1.    Type B = 35 feet in length.
      2.    Type A = 65 feet in length.
 
   B.   Design Standards: Off street loading spaces shall be provided in the
following manner:
      1.   The minimum size of a loading space, exclusive of access platforms
or loading areas shall be thirty five feet long by twelve feet wide (35' x 12')
for a type B space and sixty five feet long by fifteen feet wide (65' x 15')
for:
         a.   Type A space with a fifteen foot (15') vertical clearance.
      2.   Loading spaces shall be located as follows:
         a.   Adjacent to, or as close as possible to, the main structure.
         b.   Located at the rear or side of the main structure.
         c.   Situated to provide convenient access from streets or alleyways.
         d.   Situated to ensure that all loading and unloading shall take
place on site and in no case within adjacent public rights of way or on site
traffic areas.
         e.   Situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers associated with
loading and unloading shall occur on site.
         f.   Situated to ensure that impact on adjacent residential uses is
minimized. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
11A-6-1: Nonconforming Uses
11A-6-1 NONCONFORMING USES:
Title 8, chapter 5 of the Eagle city code shall apply within Spring Valley.
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 7
PLANNING UNIT MASTER PLANS
SECTION:
11A-7-1: Purpose, Goals, And Objectives
11A-7-2: PUMP Compliance With PADA
11A-7-3: Ownership Requirements
11A-7-4: Planning Unit Master Plan (PUMP) Application Requirements
11A-7-5: Procedures For Approval
11A-7-1 PURPOSE, GOALS, AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   The purpose of the planning unit master plan is to ensure that the land
uses and densities prescribed for development are consistent with the PADA and
this title prior to development;
   B.   A planning unit master plan should reflect an area within Valnova that
the planning unit developer is proposing to develop in the future;
   C.   The planning unit master plan may address a portion of a planning area,
a complete planning area, or more than one planning area. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014;
amd. Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
11A-7-2 PUMP COMPLIANCE WITH PADA:
The PUMP process is intended to demonstrate substantial conformance with the
land use and infrastructure requirements found within the PADA. The PUMP does
not provide or constitute approval(s) to construct or develop the site. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-7-3 OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
An application for approval of a PUMP may be filed by a property owner or a
person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the PUMP.
The PUMP application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner
or owners of property included in the development. However, the application may
be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property.
Documentation showing the approval by the master developer shall be presented
at the time of application submittal. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-7-4 PLANNING UNIT MASTER PLAN (PUMP) APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A PUMP shall be prepared for each planning area as defined in the PADA,
or a portion of a planning area, detailing substantial conformance with
exhibits D, D1, D2, D3, D4, D5 and E of the PADA which includes, but is not
limited to, the general location and size of development parcels; uses and
density ranges for each parcel compared to the maximum allowed density and
units with the planning area; circulation system by road classification and the
use of private roads; backbone water, wastewater, drainage and irrigation
facilities; locations for public facilities; amenities, trails and acres of
open space and habitat area; and landscape character.
The applicant shall meet with the administrator prior to the submission of the
PUMP. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss informally the proposed PUMP
and to inform the applicant of the applicable regulations.
A PUMP application shall be submitted to the administrator for review and
approval by the city.
   B.   The zoning administrator shall refer the PUMP application to as many
governmental agencies as deemed necessary. The zoning administrator shall
provide that any transmittal will be returned within fifteen (15) days. Such
agencies may include the following:
      1.   Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
      2.   The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or districts
and drainage districts;
      3.   The superintendent of the school district; and
      4.   Other agencies having an interest in the proposed subdivision.
   C.   A PUMP application shall include the following information, on forms or
in a format deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator:
      1.   Project Narrative:
         a.   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant,
engineer and/or planner.
         b.   Proof of ownership and, if appropriate, identification of the
contract purchaser along with vesting deed, current title insurance policy or
commitment and legal description. If the PUMP application is submitted by an
applicant other than the master developer, a letter from the master developer
approving the submission of the application.
         c.   A submittal letter including a brief description of the project
that also briefly describes a history of previous project applications.
         d.   Description of how the PUMP is consistent with the existing and
planned uses outlined in the PADA and the Spring Valley master plan. If the
PUMP is not in substantial conformance with any component of the Spring Valley
master plan, an amendment of the nonconforming component of the master plan
shall be submitted contemporaneously with the PUMP application.
         e.   A tabulation of proposed residential units and nonresidential
acres in the planning unit compared to the number of units and nonresidential
acres allowed in the Spring Valley master plan and the applicable planning area
in which the PUMP is located, including cumulative totals approved in
connection with previous PUMPs. Such tabulation shall show the trend toward
achieving the planning area requirement that fifty percent (50%) of all
dwelling units in the planning area, sixty five percent (65%) of all single-
family detached lots less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in the
planning area, and fifty percent (50%) of all single-family detached lots less
than eight thousand (8,000) square feet in the planning area, will abut some
form of open space.
         f.   A tabulation of the constrained (premitigation) and unconstrained
(postmitigation) acreage for the PUMP and the planning area.
         g.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator showing
the relationship of the PUMP to the Spring Valley master plan and Eagle
comprehensive plan.
      2.   Economic Impact Analysis: An economic impact analysis and
demographic forecast, dated October 25, 2006, and revised July 2007, by Idaho
Economics was provided to the city in connection with the 2007 approval of
Spring Valley. An update to the economic impact analysis shall be provided to
the city in connection with the first planning unit master plan application.
Thereafter, an update to the economic impact analysis shall only be required
with a PUMP application if a substantial change is proposed for the Spring
Valley master plan such as an increase in the maximum density in Spring Valley.
      3.   Planning Unit Master Land Use Plan: A land use plan on a minimum
sheet size of eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") but not greater
than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") at a scale appropriate
to the sheet and legible enough to read all details and containing the
following:
         a.   The title block should be located in the lower right hand corner
along with the date of preparation, owner's name, address and phone number, and
the name, address and phone number of the person(s) or firm(s) preparing the
land use plan.
         b.   The name of the proposed planning unit.
         c.   North arrow and the scale of the drawing.
         d.   Location and acreage for each development parcel within the
planning unit. Land use districts will be identified with different colors.
Super pads/large parcels may be identified on the land use plan.
         e.   A summary table describing the land use, number of acres and/or
units for each development parcel.
         f.   Existing and proposed arterial and collector streets.
         g.   Topography at two foot (2') or other appropriate intervals
referenced to a USGS standard. This information could be shown on a separate
exhibit.
         h.   Existing topographic characteristics showing slopes over twenty
five percent (25%) and the location and acres for development to be graded
pursuant to the grading guidelines and hillside development standards. This
information may be shown on a separate exhibit and may be combined with the
submittal listed immediately above.
      4.   Planning Unit Master Streets And Circulation Plan:
         a.   A plan showing the arterial and collector roadway network.
         b.   A street and circulation phasing plan.
         c.   A traffic impact study (TIS) of the ACHD traffic system within
the PUMP and ITD traffic system adjacent to the PUMP for compliance with the
master traffic study and the ACHD Northwest Foothills transportation study will
be provided to ACHD and/or ITD. Such TIS may be submitted prior to the rest of
the PUMP application.
         d.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master streets and circulation plan with
reference to traffic volumes associated with previously approved PUMP(s). The
narrative shall include a description of the location of private roads and the
number of residential units served by such private roads.
      5.   Planning Unit Master Potable Water Plan:
         a.   An updated Spring Valley water facility plan will be provided if
the PUMP application requires modifications to the existing Spring Valley water
facility plan. If the municipal transmission potable water system complies with
the existing Spring Valley water facility plan, an update is not necessary.
         b.   A plan showing the location and size of municipal transmission
potable water system components, including both on and off site (that is,
outside of the planning unit) municipal water mains (that is, not service
lines), municipal wells, pump stations, pressure reducing stations and storage
facilities needed to serve the planning unit.
         c.   A phasing plan for the construction of the necessary municipal
transmission potable water system.
         d.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master water facility plan and the Spring
Valley RAFN water right.
      6.   Planning Unit Master Wastewater Plan:
         a.   A plan showing the location, size, type and capacity of the
backbone wastewater collection, transmission and treatment system components,
including effluent and/or reuse storage, transmission and/or disposal
facilities needed to serve the planning unit.
         b.   A phasing plan for the construction of the necessary wastewater
collection and reuse systems.
         c.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master wastewater facility plan, including a
discussion of reuse goals and feasibility.
      7.   Planning Unit Master Drainage Plan:
         a.   A plan showing the location and estimated size of major drainage
channels and major retention/detention basins, and the location of existing
major drainageways and designated 100-year floodplains within the planning unit
including background information and/or calculations.
         b.   Location and acreage removed from the floodway pursuant to the
FEMA approved CLOMR.
         c.   A narrative describing: proposed measures necessary to comply
with the ACHD stormwater policy manual for drainage located within ACHD rights
of way; and the regional design of stormwater management systems that mitigate
flooding potential, including peak discharge reduction and storage facilities
consistent with applicable ACHD or city requirements and the basis of design
for flood protection for all structures.
         d.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master drainage plan.
      8.   Planning Unit Master Pressurized Irrigation Plan:
         a.   An updated Spring Valley master pressurized irrigation plan will
be provided if the PUMP application requires modifications to the existing
Spring Valley master pressurized irrigation plan. If the pressurized irrigation
system complies with the existing Spring Valley master pressurized irrigation
plan, an update is not necessary.
         b.   Description of the irrigation measures to be used for the PUMP
including groundwater, potable water and reuse. Evidence of sufficient means/
rights to provide irrigation.
         c.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master pressurized irrigation plan.
      9.   Planning Unit Master Public Facilities Plan:
         a.   A plan showing the locations of public facilities including
schools, fire and police stations, a library and other civic facilities, and
public utility easements and facilities.
         b.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master public facilities plan.
         c.   Evidence from public facility providers to the effect such
provider(s) will serve the planning unit.
      10.   Planning Unit Master Parks, Trails And Open Space Plan:
         a.   A plan showing the locations and sizes of public and private
common areas outside of a development parcel, which may include neighborhood,
regional and community parks, lakes and ponds, floodways, drainageways and dry
gulches, natural open space, and other open space and recreation areas,
including a description of what amenities are provided.
         b.   A tabulation of open space acreage by regional open space,
community open space (including open space within neighborhoods or parcels) and
other open space (including on lot open space) including cumulative totals in
connection with previous PUMPs.
         c.   Golf course locations.
         d.   Location of vineyards and other agricultural areas.
         e.   Location of regional and community pathway and trail facilities,
including typical pathway and trail cross sections, materials and trail
signage.
         f.   Identification of who will own and maintain the regional and
community parks, trails and open space facilities.
         g.   A phasing plan for the construction of the regional and community
parks, trails and open spaces within the planning unit.
         h.   A narrative or evidence showing how this component of the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley master parks, trails and open space plan.
         i.   Discussion of the funding mechanism proposed in connection with
the maintenance of regional open space.
         j.   A letter of recommendation from the Eagle parks and pathway
committee for all facilities to be dedicated, operated and/or maintained by and
to the city.
      11.   Environmental Design Plan:
         a.   Landscape: An exhibit or exhibits showing landscape areas that
will use upland or riparian landscape palettes included in
chapter 3 of this title. The exhibit shall also include the location of formal
versus informal street sections as defined in
chapter 3 of this title.
         b.   Signage: An exhibit showing the location of the proposed
community signs for the PUMP identified in
chapter 3 of this title. Approval of the PUMP signage plan does not waive the
requirement for all community signs to comply with the location, size and
spacing standards of
chapter 3 of this title and/or the community master sign plan once approved by
the city, and, if the community master sign plan has not been approved by the
city, then city code.
         c.   Habitat Mitigation Plan: Location of any areas of special
concern, and if present, a narrative or evidence of showing how the PUMP
complies with the Spring Valley habitat mitigation plan.
      12.   Super Pad/Large Parcel Plan:
         a.   A plan showing the conceptual locations and sizes of super pads/
large parcels for sale and transfer for further development. The plan should
include timing and phasing of platting. The conceptual location and sizes of
super pads/large parcels may be identified on the land use plan.
         b.   All platting of such super pads/large parcels shall be conducted
in compliance with
chapter 13 of this title.
         c.   Super pads/large parcels are not considered buildable lots until
replatted and reviewed for compliance with
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-7-5 PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL:
The following procedures shall be used for the review and approval of a PUMP
application:
   A.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   Within forty five (45) days after an application has been made and
following the notice requirements as set forth in section
11A-8-13 of this title, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public
hearing to consider the application and make a recommendation to the city
council. The planning and zoning commission shall either recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or continue for further review, the PUMP application.
The planning and zoning recommendation shall be made within forty (40) days of
the date of the regular meeting at which the PUMP application is first
considered by the planning and zoning commission. If the PUMP is in substantial
conformance with the PADA and applicable provisions of this title, the planning
and zoning commission shall not unreasonably withhold a recommendation of
approval. If the planning and zoning commission finds that the PUMP submitted
does not reflect proportional progress of planning area requirements (such as
density, open space, community and neighborhood centers, etc.) in comparison to
the percentage of planning area already developed, the planning and zoning
commission may still proceed with processing the PUMP if the commission finds
that adequate conditions can be imposed on future PUMP applications to ensure
reasonable progress toward completion of the planning area requirements.
      2.   Upon making a recommendation the commission shall specify in
writing:
         a.   The ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The facts submitted with the application and presented establish
that:
            (1)   The PUMP substantially conforms with: the PADA and subsequent
amendments; this title; applicable master plans approved by the city; and/or
other applicable information reasonably relied on by the city necessary to
uphold the intent of the PADA and this title;
            (2)   Streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate
to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities, if any, will not
generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network;
            (3)   The proposed commercial/nonresidential development is
justified at the locations proposed and is consistent with the PADA;
            (4)   The information provided from the agencies having
jurisdiction over public facilities needed for the site indicate that adequate
public facilities exist, or are expected to be provided, to serve any and all
uses allowed within the PUMP area. The planning unit will be served, or is
conditioned to be served, by adequate public services.
         c.   A summary of the current status of overall planning area density,
open space, community centers, neighborhood centers, reassignment of densities,
and other adjustable factors as set forth in the PADA.
      3.   The recommendation, and the reasons for such recommendation, shall
be stated in writing by the administrator and forwarded to the applicant. The
administrator shall also forward the recommendation and the reasons for such
recommendation, together with a copy of the PUMP application, to the city
council for the city council's review and action.
   B.   Action By City Council:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) days after issuing a written decision, the
planning and zoning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city
council. The city council shall follow notice and hearing requirements set
forth in section
11A-8-13 of this title. Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the
planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the city council may approve,
conditionally approve or deny a PUMP and shall specify in writing:
         a.   The PADA and subsequent amendments and this title; applicable
master plans approved by the city, and/or other applicable information
reasonably relied on by the city necessary to uphold the intent of the PADA and
this title;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
PUMP approval.
      2.   Approval shall not be construed to endorse a precise location of
uses or configuration of parcels. All conditions of the PUMP approval
established by the city council in the adopted findings of fact and conclusions
of law shall be reviewed and completed prior to or in conjunction with the
final plat approval.
      3.   Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the
administrator shall provide the applicant written notice of the action on the
request. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 8
ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11A-8-1: Zoning Administrator
11A-8-2: Zoning Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
11A-8-3: Preapplication Meetings
11A-8-4: Conditional Uses
11A-8-4-1: Purpose And Interpretation Of Conditional Use
11A-8-4-2: Conditional Use Permit
11A-8-4-3: General Standards For Conditional Uses
11A-8-4-4: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
11A-8-5: Variances
11A-8-5-1: Authority To Grant Variances
11A-8-5-2: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
11A-8-5-3: Procedure For Approval Of A Variance
11A-8-6: Design Review; Administrative
11A-8-6-1: Administrative Level Design Review Application
11A-8-6-2: Administrative Level Design Review Appeals
11A-8-7: Design Review; Board Level Review
11A-8-7-1: Board Level Design Review Application
11A-8-7-2: Board Level Design Review Appeals
11A-8-8: Appeals; Administrative Decisions
11A-8-8-1: Administrative Appeals
11A-8-9: Amendments
11A-8-10: Zoning Upon Annexation
11A-8-11: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
11A-8-12: Request For Hearing By Affected Persons
11A-8-13: Notice Requirements
11A-8-14: Violations And Penalties
11A-8-1 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Administration: The zoning administrator shall administer this title
and may be provided with the assistance from such other persons as the council
may direct.
   B.   Duties: For the purpose of this title, the zoning administrator shall
have the following duties:
      1.   To advise interested persons of the provisions of this title;
      2.   To notify the news media regarding matters of public interest;
      3.   To aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications;
      4.   To issue zoning permits, certificate of occupancy permits,
notifications and such similar administrative duties;
      5.   To investigate all violations of this title and notify in writing
the person responsible for such violation(s), ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation;
      6.   To assist the council in carrying out the provisions of this title;
      7.   To manage the day to day and long range function of this chapter
including, but not limited to, the acceptance, review, processing and approval
of all permits and applications within the zoning administrator's authority for
development within Spring Valley; and
      8.   To effectuate any minor amendments as set forth in the PADA. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-2 ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Zoning Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: No building or other structure shall be erected,
moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or
land be established or changed in use without a permit therefor issued by the
zoning administrator. Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity with
the provisions of this title.
      2.   Application For Permit: The application for zoning permit shall be
signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all
information supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state
that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun or is not
substantially completed within one year or other time frame established at the
time of zoning permit issuance. At a minimum, the application shall contain the
following information, as applicable:
         a.   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant;
         b.   Legal description of property;
         c.   Description of existing use;
         d.   Description of proposed use;
         e.   Zoning district and land use district;
         f.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape
of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings
on the lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s)
or alteration;
         g.   Building heights;
         h.   Number of off street parking spaces or loading berths;
         i.   Number of dwelling units;
         j.   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
         k.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for, the enforcement of this title.
      3.   Approval Of Permit, Issuance: Within thirty (30) days after the
receipt of an application, the zoning administrator shall either approve or
disapprove the application in conformance with the provisions of this title.
All zoning permits shall, however, be conditional upon the commencement of work
within one year. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by
the zoning administrator after the zoning administrator shall have marked such
copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by the zoning
administrator's signature on such copy and one copy of plans, similarly marked,
shall be retained by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall
issue a placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in
question, attesting to the fact that the use or alteration is in conformance
with the provisions of this title.
      4.   Expiration Of Permit: If the work described in any zoning permit has
not begun within one year from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall
expire. It shall be revoked by the zoning administrator and written notice
thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
   B.   Certificates Of Occupancy:
      1.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: It shall be unlawful to use or
occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or
part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued therefor by the zoning administrator stating that the
proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title
and with all conditional provisions that may have been imposed.
      2.   Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the zoning administrator for a period not exceeding
six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending
its completion.
   C.   Record Of Zoning Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy: The zoning
administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permits and certificates of
occupancy and copies shall be furnished upon request to any persons.
   D.   Unlawful Acts:
      1.   Failure To Obtain Zoning Permit Or Certificate Of Occupancy: Failure
to obtain a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of
this title.
      2.   Use And Construction Contrary To Plans: Zoning permits or
certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the zoning administrator authorize only the use and arrangement set
forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no
other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction
contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-3 PREAPPLICATION MEETINGS:
Applicants shall conduct an informal preapplication meeting with staff in
connection with applications for conditional use, variance, design review and
subdivision plat. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-4 CONDITIONAL USES:
11A-8-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION OF CONDITIONAL USE:
   A.   Purpose: It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of
uses are appearing daily, and that many of these and some other more
conventional uses possess characteristics of such unique and special nature
relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public
facilities that each specific use must be considered individually.
   B.   Interpretation Of Conditional Use: Any use which is permitted as a
conditional use in a land use district under the terms of this title shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use in such land use district, but shall, without
further action, be considered a conforming one. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-4-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Application For Conditional Use Permit: An application for conditional
use permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator by at least one owner
or lessee of property for which such conditional use is proposed. At a minimum,
the application shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of existing use;
      4.   Zoning district and land use district;
      5.   Description of proposed conditional use;
      6.   A plan for the proposed site for the conditional use showing, as
applicable, the location of all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic
access and traffic circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service
areas, utilities, signs, yards and such other information as the planning and
zoning commission may require to determine if the proposed conditional use
meets the intent and requirements of this title; and
      7.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property;
the effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on
adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and
other properties in the vicinity; and the relationship of the proposed use to
the Spring Valley master plan and/or the PADA.
   B.   Supplemental Information: Prior to granting a conditional use permit,
the city council may request studies from the planning staff or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal and/or environmental effects on the
proposed conditional use.
   C.   Procedure For Approval Of Conditional Use Permit:
      1.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a conditional use permit,
the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The public hearing
before the planning and zoning commission shall be scheduled to a date within
thirty (30) days of receipt of an application. Within forty five (45) days
after receipt of the application, the planning and zoning commission shall make
its recommendation to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application.
Notice shall be provided as required by section
11A-8-13 of this chapter.
      2.   Action By The Planning And Zoning Commission And City Council:
Within fifteen (15) days after the public hearing, the planning and zoning
commission shall transmit its recommendation of approval or denial to the city
council. Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the planning and zoning
commission's recommendation, the city council shall approve or deny the
application. The city council shall follow notice and hearing requirements set
forth in section
11A-8-13 of this chapter. The city council may approve, conditionally approve
or deny a conditional use permit under the conditions as herein specified and
considering such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this title.
If the application is approved or approved with modifications, the city council
shall direct the zoning administrator to issue a conditional use permit listing
the specific conditions specified by the city council for approval.
Upon making its recommendation to the city council, and upon granting or
denying an application, the planning and zoning commission or city council, as
applicable, shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
conditional use permit.
      3.   Notice To Applicant: Within two (2) days after a written decision
has been rendered, the zoning administrator shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice shall provide
or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to
request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code.
   D.   Conditions Of Permit: Upon the granting of a conditional use permit,
conditions may be attached to said permit including, but not limited to, those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      3.   Controlling the duration of development;
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services; and/or
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this title.
   E.   Transfer Of Permit: A conditional use permit is not transferable from
one parcel of land to another. Conditional use permits are an entitlement to
the specific property on which the approval was granted and upon any transfer
of title for the property the conditional use permit transfers to the new owner
(s) without further application or approval, provided, however, the new owner
(s) shall be bound by the same conditions of approval applicable to the
conditional use permit that was transferred.
   F.   Effect Of Issuance On Other Conditional Uses: A conditional use permit
shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other
conditional use permits.
   G.   Time Limitations, Extensions:
      1.   Once a conditional use is approved and exercised, said use may
continue without further temporal constraints, provided that the use complies
with its intended purpose, or city approved modifications thereafter, and does
not violate any codes, subject to the following:
         a.   An approved conditional use permit shall be valid for a term
approved and conditioned by the city council, which term may be perpetual.
         b.   An extension of the time limit for an approved conditional use
may be granted by the city council, at its sole discretion, without further
notice and hearing, if the following findings are made:
            (1)   There are no outstanding applicable city code or conditional
use permit violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they
may be conditioned by the city council to be cured as a condition of the
extension of time;
            (2)   The conditional use, as previously approved, remains in the
best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
            (3)   There have been no significant changes to this title between
the date of conditional use approval and the date of the time extension request
that would require substantial modifications to the project;
            (4)   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or
have been discovered on the project site; and
            (5)   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-4-3: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES:
The planning and zoning commission/city council shall review the particular
facts and circumstances of each proposed conditional use in terms of the
following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at
the proposed location:
   A.   Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established in
chapter 2 of this title for the land use district involved;
   B.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives
or with any specific objective of the Spring Valley master plan and/or this
title (including any applicable specific use standards described in
chapter 4 of this title) and/or the PADA;
   C.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of
the same area;
   D.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses;
   E.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools; or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
   F.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
   G.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare or odors;
   H.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
   I.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic
or historic feature of major importance. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-4-4: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
In granting any conditional use, the city council may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title.
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-5 VARIANCES:
11A-8-5-1: AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority To Grant Variances: The city council may authorize, in
specific cases, such variance from the terms of this title as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary
hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in
the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship.
   B.   Application And Standards For Variance: A variance from the terms of
this title shall not be granted by the city council unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted to the zoning administrator and the
city council containing:
      1.   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
      4.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same land use
district;
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same land use district under the terms of this title;
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant; and
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same land use district.
A variance shall not be granted unless the city council makes specific findings
of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to the city council
which support conclusions that the above mentioned standards and conditions
have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-5-2: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
Under no circumstances shall the city council grant a variance to allow a use
not permissible under the terms of this title in the land use district
involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of
this title in said land use district. In granting any variance, the city
council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with
this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-5-3: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A VARIANCE:
   A.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a variance, the planning and
zoning commission shall hold a public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. The public hearing before the planning and
zoning commission shall be scheduled to a date within thirty (30) days of
receipt of an application. Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the
application the planning and zoning commission shall make its recommendation to
approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. Notice shall be
provided as required by section
11A-8-13 of this chapter.
   B.   Action By The Planning And Zoning Commission And City Council: Within
fifteen (15) days after the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission
shall transmit its recommendation of approval, conditional approval or denial
to the city council. Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the planning
and zoning commission's recommendation, the city council shall approve or deny
the application. The city council shall follow the notice requirements provided
by section
11A-8-13 of this chapter. The city council may approve, conditionally approve
or deny a variance request under the conditions as herein specified and
considering such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this title.
If the application is approved or approved with modifications, the city council
shall direct the zoning administrator to issue a variance listing the specific
conditions specified by the city council for approval.
Upon making its recommendation to the city council, and upon granting or
denying an application, the planning and zoning commission or city council, as
applicable, shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
variance.
   C.   Notice To Applicant: Within two (2) days after a written decision has
been rendered, the zoning administrator shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice shall provide
or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to
request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code.
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-6 DESIGN REVIEW; ADMINISTRATIVE:
The design requirements, objectives and consideration found in
chapter 3, "Design Review", of this title apply to most development in Spring
Valley and design review applications are processed as provided herein. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-6-1: ADMINISTRATIVE LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty five (35) days
prior to action by the zoning administrator, anyone required to comply with
this chapter shall submit their application, together with the required fee, to
the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may extend the thirty five
(35) day review time for design review applications that are unusually large or
complicated and may decrease review times for applications that are minor or do
not require transmittals to other agencies.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the zoning administrator shall approve the application as
presented, approve the application with supplementary conditions, continue the
application for further review, or deny the application. Within two (2) days
after the zoning administrator's decision has been rendered, the zoning
administrator shall provide the applicant written notice of the action on the
request. The decision of the zoning administrator shall be final unless the
zoning administrator's decision is appealed timely to the design review board.
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-6-2: ADMINISTRATIVE LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Of Zoning Administrator Decision To Design Review Board:
Administrative level design review decisions may be appealed to the design
review board. An appeal fee, as may be adopted by resolution of the city
council, shall be required for any appeal. Any such appeal shall be submitted
within ten (10) calendar days after the zoning administrator's written decision
by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds for the appeal. The zoning administrator shall transmit to the design
review board, all documents constituting the record upon which the appeal is
based.
   B.   Action By The Design Review Board: Within forty five (45) days after
receipt of the appeal, the design review board shall approve, approve with
conditions, continue for further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or
denying an appeal, the design review board shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   C.   Notice To Appellant: Within two (2) days after the design review
board's written decision has been rendered, the zoning administrator shall
provide the appellant written notice of the action on the request. The decision
of the design review board shall be final unless the design review board's
decision is appealed timely to the city council.
   D.   Appeal Of Design Review Board Decision To City Council: Design review
board decisions may be appealed to the city council. An appeal fee, as may be
adopted by resolution of the city council, shall be required for any appeal.
Any such appeal shall be submitted within twenty (20) calendar days after the
design review board's written decision by filing with the zoning administrator
a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The zoning
administrator shall transmit to the city council, all documents constituting
the record upon which the appeal is based. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action taken unless the zoning administrator certifies to
the city council after the notice of appeal is filed with the zoning
administrator that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would,
in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the city council or by a court based
upon an application, with notice to the zoning administrator showing due cause.
   E.   Action By The City Council: Within forty five (45) days after receipt
of the appeal, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions,
continue for further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an
appeal, the city council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   F.   Notice To Appellant: Within two (2) days after the city council's
written decision has been rendered, the zoning administrator shall provide the
appellant written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice
shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the
applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section
67-8003, Idaho Code. The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014)
11A-8-7 DESIGN REVIEW; BOARD LEVEL REVIEW:
11A-8-7-1: BOARD LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty five (35) days
prior to action by the design review board, anyone required to comply with this
chapter shall submit their application, together with the required fee, to the
zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may extend the thirty five (35)
day review time for design review applications that are unusually large or
complicated and may decrease review times for applications that are minor or do
not require transmittals to other agencies. At least seven (7) days prior to
any scheduled design review board meeting, all applications to be considered at
that meeting shall be made available to each member of the design review board.
The zoning administrator shall direct mail notice of the design review board
meeting to the applicant at least seven (7) days prior to the design review
board meeting.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the design review board shall approve the application as
presented, approve the application with supplementary conditions, continue the
application for further review, or deny the application.
      1.   City Findings: The City shall make findings which address the
following:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for the approval or denial;
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
      2.   General Standards For Design Review: The Zoning Administrator,
Design Review Board, or City Council, whichever is applicable, shall review the
particular facts and circumstances of each proposed design review in terms of
the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such
design review at the proposed location:
         a.   Will function in conformance with the applicable strategies of
the Eagle Comprehensive Plan and is in accordance with the regulations of this
Code;
         b.   Is of a scale, intensity, and character that is in harmony with
existing conforming and planned development in the vicinity of the site;
         c.   Is designed with adequate off street parking facilities in such a
way as to not interfere with ingress/egress to the site and will serve the
intended use so as to not cause conflict with adjacent uses as anticipated
within the zoning district;
         d.   Will not interfere with the visual character, quality, or
appearance of the surrounding area and City, and where possible, enhance the
continuity of thematically common architectural features;
         e.   Will have facades, features, and other physical improvements that
are designed as a whole, when viewed alone as well as in relationship to
surrounding buildings and settings;
         f.   Will not obstruct views and vistas as they pertain to the urban
environment and in relation to artistic considerations;
         g.   Will provide safe and convenient access to the property for both
vehicles and pedestrians through patterned traffic circulation and connectivity
to abutting development;
         h.   Is in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare
promoting a pedestrian friendly and walkable environment in balance with
protecting a viable commercial center in the area; and
         i.   Will have signs, if proposed, that are harmonious with the
architectural design of the building and adjacent buildings, and will not cover
or detract from desirable architectural features.
   C.   Action By The City Council: Upon receipt of the recommendation by the
Design Review Board, the City Council shall either approve, approve with
supplementary conditions, remand to the Design Review Board for further
consideration, or deny the design review application as presented. In lieu of
adopting findings as outlined within subsection B of this section, the City
Council may adopt the Design Review Board's findings. Within seven (7) calendar
days after a decision has been rendered by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on
the request. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017; amd. Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
11A-8-7-2: BOARD LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Of Design Review Board Decision To City Council: Design review
board decisions may be appealed to the city council. An appeal fee, as may be
adopted by resolution of the city council, shall be required for any appeal.
Any such appeal shall be submitted within twenty (20) calendar days after the
design review board's written decision by filing with the zoning administrator
a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The zoning
administrator shall transmit to the city council, all documents constituting
the record upon which the appeal is based. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action taken unless the zoning administrator certifies to
the city council after the notice of appeal is filed with the zoning
administrator that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would,
in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the city council or by a court based
upon an application, with notice to the zoning administrator showing due cause.
   B.   Action By The City Council: Within forty five (45) days after receipt
of the appeal, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions,
continue for further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an
appeal, the city council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   C.   Notice To Appellant: Within two (2) days after the city council's
written decision has been rendered, the zoning administrator shall provide the
appellant written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice
shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the
applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section
67-8003, Idaho Code. The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014)
11A-8-8 APPEALS; ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
The city council shall consider administrative appeals where it is alleged that
an error has been made by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-8-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Of Zoning Administrator Decision To City Council: Appeals to the
city council concerning interpretation or administration of this title may be
taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the legislative
authority affected by any decision of the zoning administrator.
   B.   Appeal Fee: An appeal fee, as may be adopted by resolution of the city
council, shall be required for any appeal. Any such appeal shall be submitted
within twenty (20) calendar days after the zoning administrator's written
decision by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds for the appeal. The zoning administrator shall transmit to the city
council, all documents constituting the record upon which the appeal is based.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless the
zoning administrator certifies to the city council after the notice of appeal
is filed with the zoning administrator that by reason of facts stated in the
application, a stay would, in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause
imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the city
council or by a court based upon an application, with notice to the zoning
administrator showing due cause.
   C.   Action By The City Council: Within forty five (45) days after receipt
of the appeal, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions,
continue for further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an
appeal, the city council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   D.   Notice To Appellant: Within two (2) days after the city council's
written decision has been rendered, the zoning administrator shall provide the
appellant written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice
shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the
applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section
67-8003, Idaho Code. The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014)
11A-8-9 AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare
or good zoning practices require, and in accordance with the provisions for
amendments to this title contained in the PADA, the city council may, by
ordinance after receipt of recommendation thereon from the planning and zoning
commission, and subject to procedures provided by law, amend, supplement,
change or repeal the regulations of this title. Provided, however, any
amendment, supplement, change or repeal in connection with
chapter 3 of this title, must first be reviewed by the design review board and
a recommendation of the design review board made to the planning and zoning
commission.
   B.   Initiation Of Zoning Amendments: Amendments to this title may be
initiated in one of the following ways:
      1.   By adoption of a motion by the planning and zoning commission;
      2.   By adoption of a motion by the city council; or
      3.   By the filing of an application by a property owner, or a person who
has existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment.
   C.   Application For Amendment: Applications for amendments to this title
shall contain at least the following information:
      1.   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant;
      2.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the zoning administrator
showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such
other items as the zoning administrator may require;
      3.   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered;
      4.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the Spring
Valley master plan and/or the PADA, availability of public facilities and
compatibility with the surrounding area;
      5.   A fee as established by the city council; and
      6.   Letter from the master developer signifying the master developer's
concurrence, conditional concurrence or opposition of the application.
   D.   General Procedure For Amendments: Land use districts shall be amended
in the following manner:
      1.   Request for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
planning and zoning commission, which shall evaluate the request to determine
the extent and nature of the amendment requested. Request for an amendment to
chapter 3 of this title shall be submitted first to the design review board,
which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature of the
amendment requested and make its recommendation to the planning and zoning
commission.
      2.   Request shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and
shall be evaluated to determine if such action shall create a demand for public
infrastructure that is not currently available for the site including, but not
limited to, municipal sewer and water services.
      3.   If the request is in accordance with the adopted Spring Valley
master plan and/or the PADA, the planning and zoning commission may recommend
and the city council may adopt or reject the amendment under the notice and
hearing procedures provided in section
11A-8-13 of this chapter.
      4.   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted Spring Valley
master plan and/or the PADA, the request shall be submitted, along with a
proposed amendment to the Spring Valley master plan and/or the PADA, to the
planning and zoning commission, which shall recommend, and the city council may
adopt or reject an amendment to the Spring Valley master plan and/or the PADA,
under the notice and hearing procedures provided in section
11A-8-13 of this chapter. After the Spring Valley master plan and/or the PADA
has been amended, this title may then be amended as herein provided.
   E.   Public Hearings, Notice: The planning and zoning commission, prior to
recommending an amendment to this title to the city council, shall conduct at
least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity
to be heard. The planning and zoning commission shall follow the notice
requirements provided in section
11A-8-13 of this chapter. Following the planning and zoning commission's
hearing, if the planning and zoning commission makes a material change from
what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the planning and zoning commission forwards the amendment with
its recommendation to the city council.
   F.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   Recommendation By The Planning And Zoning Commission: Within forty
five (45) days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the planning and
zoning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council. The
planning and zoning commission may recommend that the amendment be granted as
requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment requested, or it
may recommend that the amendment be denied. The planning and zoning commission
shall ensure that any recommendations for amendments are in accordance with the
following findings:
         a.   The proposed amendment is in accordance with the Spring Valley
master plan and/or the PADA;
         b.   The information provided from the agencies having jurisdiction
over Spring Valley indicates that adequate public facilities exist, or are
expected to be provided, to serve any and all uses allowed on property affected
by the proposed amendment; and
         c.   No nonconforming uses will be created with the amendment.
   G.   Action By City Council:
      1.   The city council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the
amendment to this title as recommended by the planning and zoning commission,
shall conduct at least one public hearing using the same notice and hearing
procedures as the planning and zoning commission. Following the city council
hearing, if the city council makes a material change from what was presented at
the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
city council adopts the amendment.
      2.   Upon granting or denying an application to amend this title, the
city council shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
amendment.
   H.   Effect Of Amendment Approved: In the event the city council shall
approve an amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made part of this
title upon the preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-10 ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
The initial Spring Valley property was annexed on December 21, 2009, and
rezoned to R-1-DA (ordinance 634). All additional annexations, including that
certain annexation dated October 1, 2012 (ordinance 681), shall be subject to
the provisions of this title and the terms of the PADA.
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the city council shall request
and receive a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission on the
proposed changes to the Spring Valley master plan and/or the PADA and/or this
title for the unincorporated area. The planning and zoning commission and the
city council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures for this title map
amendments set forth in subsection
11A-8-13D of this chapter. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption
of an ordinance of annexation, the city council shall amend the Spring Valley
master plan and/or the PADA and/or this title to reflect the annexation. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-11 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a
collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals, variances,
conditional use permits, plat approvals and other matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this title requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning administrator and may be
altered or amended only by the city council. Until all applicable fees, charges
and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
All Spring Valley applications that have not been identified on the city's
schedule of fees as adopted by the city council or require the city to contract
staff specialized to review such materials, including, but not limited to,
economic analysis, habitat and engineers, shall be subject to the terms of the
reimbursement agreement between the city and the master developer, as may be
amended from time to time. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-12 REQUEST FOR HEARING BY AFFECTED PERSONS:
   A.   Definition: An "affected person" shall mean one having a bona fide
interest in real property which may be adversely affected by: 1) the approval,
denial or failure to act upon an application for a subdivision, variance,
conditional permit and such other similar applications required or authorized
pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq.; 2) the approval of an ordinance
first establishing a zoning district upon annexation or the approval or denial
of an application to change the zoning district applicable to specific parcels
or sites pursuant to section 67-6511, Idaho Code; or 3) an approval or denial
of an application for conditional rezoning pursuant to section 67-6511, Idaho
Code.
   B.   Right To Request Hearing: Any affected person may, at any time prior to
final action on an application required or authorized pursuant to Idaho Code
section 67-6501 et seq., if no hearing has been held on the application,
petition the city council in writing to hold a hearing pursuant to section 67-
6512, Idaho Code; provided however, that if twenty (20) affected persons
petition for a hearing, the hearing shall be held.
   C.   Action By City Council: After a hearing the city council may:
      1.   Grant or deny an application; or
      2.   Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for further
study or hearing.
   D.   Appeals: An affected person aggrieved by a final decision may, after
all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances, seek judicial review
under the procedures provided by Idaho Code. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-8-13 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Hearings: On every land use action for which notice is provided
below, both the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall hold
a public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. No notice of a city council hearing shall be given prior to receiving a
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission or an appeal from the
design review board. Following any hearing, if a material change from what was
advertised in the notice and presented at the public hearing is proposed,
further notice and hearing shall be provided before the final decision is made.
   B.   Neighborhood Meetings: Applicants shall conduct a neighborhood meeting
within six (6) months of the application submittal date for annexations,
variances, conditional uses, and subdivisions. A neighborhood meeting shall not
be required for City initiated applications.
      1.   Meeting Requirements:
         a.   It shall be the sole duty of the applicant to provide mailed
written notice, in a form deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator, to
all property owners of record owning property within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the exterior boundary of the application property, and to
contiguous homeowners' associations and any neighborhood associations deemed
appropriate by the zoning administrator. Notice of a neighborhood meeting shall
be in addition to, and not in lieu of, mailed radius notices already required
by this title, except when notice of a neighborhood meeting is required of two
hundred (200) or more property owners of record, alternate forms of notice may
be provided as deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator. The neighborhood
meeting written notice shall be provided by mail a minimum of fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the scheduled neighborhood meeting.
         b.   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is for the applicant to
provide project information to the property owners of record.
            (1)   Meetings shall be on a Saturday between ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., or on a weekday between six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and shall be a minimum of one (1) hour in
length. The meeting shall not be on a federal holiday, a federal holiday
weekend or the day before or after a federal holiday or federal holiday
weekend.
            (2)   The meeting shall be held either on the application property,
at the nearest public meeting place, or at an office space with suitable
meeting facilities if such facilities are within the city of Eagle area of
impact boundary.
         c.   The neighborhood meeting shall be conducted prior to the
submittal of the application.
         d.   Application materials shall include a written verification of the
neighborhood meeting, including a copy of the list of meeting attendees, and a
dated copy of notice provided to property owners of record.
   C.   Published And Mailed Notice For Spring Valley Master Plan And This
Title Text Enactments, Amendments, And Repeals: At least fifteen (15) days
prior to each hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing and a
summary of the proposed action shall be published in the official newspaper or
paper of general circulation within the city. Notice shall also be made
available to other papers, radio, and television stations serving the city for
use as a public service announcement. Notice shall be sent to all political
subdivisions providing services within the city, including school districts, at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
   D.   Published And Mailed Notice For Spring Valley Master Plan Land Use Map
Amendment, This Title Map Amendment, Development Agreement, Conditional Use
Permit, Variance, Planning Unit Master Plan And Subdivision: At least fifteen
(15) days prior to each hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing
and a summary of the request and proposed action shall be published in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the city. Notice may
also be made available to other papers, radio, and television stations serving
the city for use as a public service announcement.
      At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, additional notice shall
be provided by mail to political subdivisions providing services, including
school districts, and to property owners of record of the land being
considered, of land within a three hundred foot (300') perimeter of the
exterior boundary of the application property, and of any additional area that
may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the zoning
administrator or planning and zoning commission. When notice is required to two
hundred (200) or more property owners of record, in lieu of the mail
notification, three (3) notices in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation is sufficient; provided, that the third notice appears ten (10)
days prior to the public hearing.
   E.   Posted Notice: Except as noted within this subsection, anytime notice
is required under subsection D of this section, the land being considered shall
be posted in a manner as determined by the zoning administrator, not less than
ten (10) days prior to the planning and zoning commission hearing and again not
less than ten (10) days prior to the city council hearing. For Spring Valley
master plan title amendments consisting of changes to more than ten (10)
parcels of land posted notice shall not be required unless all parcels under
request for amendment are contiguous and if the parcels abut a public right of
way. In such cases a minimum of one four foot by eight foot (4' x 8') plywood
sign shall be placed adjacent to the right of way. Otherwise, three (3) notices
in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation, with the third
notice appearing a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, shall
be published. The notice shall include a six inch by six inch (6" x 6") minimum
size graphic representation showing the proposed Spring Valley master plan land
use map or this title map amendments. Posted notice shall not be required for
City initiated applications. Except as noted herein, posting of the property
must be in substantial compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Signage Requirements:
         a.   The sign(s) shall consist of a minimum of four foot by four foot
(4' x 4') plywood or other hard surface mounted on two (2) four by four inch
(4" x 4") posts in such a manner that it is perpendicular to the roadway along
which the sign is posted.
         b.   Centered at the top of the four foot by four foot (4' x 4') sign
board(s) in six inch (6") letters shall be the words "Public Hearing Notice".
In addition, each sign will inform the public of the name of the applicant, and
if applicable, the proposed development, the date, time, place, and nature of
the public hearing and a summary of the proposal to be considered. Each sign
shall be painted white and the letters shall be painted black and shall appear
on both sides. An example of this sign is listed below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-313.png]
 
      2.   Location Of Signs: The sign(s) shall be posted on the land being
considered along each roadway that is adjacent to it, or as determined by the
zoning administrator. The signs shall be located on the property outside of the
public right of way, if they can be so located and remain clearly visible from
the roadway; otherwise, the consent of the owner of the right of way must be
obtained and the sign(s) located therein. The zoning administrator, upon
finding that adequate notice will be provided, may not require all signs to
comply with the size requirements of subsection E1 of this section. In the
event that the land being considered includes properties with five hundred feet
(500') or more of road frontage, a sign shall be placed on each end of the
property roadway frontage. If this property includes a corner lot, three (3)
signs shall be posted, one on the corner and one on each end of the property
roadway frontages.
      3.   Certification: The applicant shall submit a certification to the
city clerk no later than seven (7) days prior to the hearing as to what, where,
and when sign(s) were posted. Unless the certification is received by such
date, the hearing will be canceled.
      4.   Sign Removal; Penalty: No later than three (3) days after the
noticed hearing and any continuation thereof, sign(s) must be removed. A
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day shall be imposed against each
applicant for late removal of the signs. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884,
9-27-2022; Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
11A-8-14 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Complaints Regarding Violations: Whenever a violation of this title
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be
filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall properly
record such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as
provided by this title.
   B.   Penalties: The city attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever
criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of
this title. Penalties for failure to comply with or violations of the
provisions of this title shall be as follows:
Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any
of its requirements shall constitute an infraction, and be punishable as
provided below. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or
any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the city council or any other public official or private citizen
from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any
violation of this title or of the Idaho Code.
      1.   Misdemeanor Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any
section or provision of this title, without regard to the form of the judgment,
shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to but not exceeding the
maximum penalties set forth in sections 18-113 and 50-302, Idaho Code, as may
from time to time be amended and/or retitled. Either or both such fine and
imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so convicted
shall pay costs as the court may assess.
      2.   Infraction Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any
chapter or provision of this title when such offense is specifically designated
as an infraction, and where no other penalty is set forth therein, shall be
subject to fine as set forth in section 18-113A, Idaho Code, as may from time
to time be amended and/or retitled. Failure to satisfy judgment as ordered by
the court shall be deemed contempt of court punishable as a misdemeanor
pursuant to Idaho Code 18-1801.
      3.   Federally Mandated Programs: When this city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses as set forth in section 50-302, Idaho Code,
as may from time to time be amended and/or retitled.
      4.   License: When a person is convicted or found guilty of a violation
of any chapter or provision of this title or any ordinance of the city, any
license previously issued to him/her by the city, and directly related to the
conviction, may be revoked by the court or by the city council. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014)
CHAPTER 9
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
11A-9-1: Area Of City Impact
11A-9-1 AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
Title 8, chapter 8 of the Eagle city code in effect on December 21, 2012, shall
apply within Spring Valley as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014)
CHAPTER 10
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
11A-10-1: Historic Preservation
11A-10-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
Title 8, chapter 9 of the Eagle city code in effect on December 21, 2012, shall
apply within Spring Valley. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 11
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
SECTION:
11A-11-1: M3/Spring Valley Development Agreement
11A-11-1: M3/SPRING VALLEY DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
On December 27, 2007, the city and M3 entered into a development agreement,
instrument no. 107170114. On January 14, 2014, the Eagle city council approved
the "M3/Spring Valley development agreement" superseding the previous
development agreement (instrument no. 107170114).
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 12
MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
11A-12-1: Minimal Property Maintenance
11A-12-1 MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
Title 8, chapter 11 of the Eagle city code in effect on December 21, 2012,
shall apply within the Spring Valley development. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 13
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11A-13A-1: Short Title
11A-13A-2: Authority
11A-13A-3: Purpose
11A-13A-4: Jurisdiction
11A-13A-5: Interpretation
11A-13A-6: Rules And Definitions
11A-13A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF
SPRING VALLEY. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13A-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are authorized by title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter
65 of the Idaho Code; and title 12, chapter 2 of the Idaho constitution, as
amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13A-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to provide for:
   A.   The harmonious development of Spring Valley;
   B.   The coordination of streets and roads within a subdivision with other
existing or planned streets and roads;
   C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
   D.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
   E.   The avoidance of the scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services; or
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services;
   F.   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created, improved and maintained; and
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connection, or other
facilities shall be installed;
   G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any plats; and
   H.   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approving authorities. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13A-4: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall apply to the subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the city commonly known as Spring Valley. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13A-5: INTERPRETATION:
All subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval by the
council and shall comply with the provisions of these regulations and the PADA.
The regulations contained herein take precedence over those found elsewhere in
this title. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and this
title, these regulations shall prevail. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13A-6: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
Refer to
11A-1-5: Definitions. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 924,
8-27-2024)
ARTICLE B. SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11A-13B-1: Application For Subdivision Approval Generally
11A-13B-2: Preapplication Procedure
11A-13B-3: Preliminary Plat
11A-13B-4: Final Plat
11A-13B-5: Fees
11A-13B-6: Record Of Lot; Plat Approval
11A-13B-7: Sale Of Lot; Plat To Be Recorded
11A-13B-8: Parcel Division
11A-13B-1: APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL GENERALLY:
Any person desiring to create a "subdivision" as herein defined shall submit
all necessary applications to the administrator. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13B-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Submission Of Preapplication: The subdivider shall submit a
preapplication to enable the administrator to review and comment on the
proposed subdivision.
   B.   Sketch Plan: The preapplication shall include at least one copy of a
sketch plan. The sketch plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of
the proposed subdivision, in schematic form, and including the following:
      1.   The general layout and approximate dimension of streets, blocks and
lots in sketch form;
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
      3.   The areas set aside for open space, schools, parks and/or other
public facilities.
   C.   Action By Administrator: The administrator shall notify the subdivider
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of an acceptable
preapplication as to the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal
with this chapter, shall provide the necessary forms and checklists and shall
comment on the following:
      1.   Compliance of the proposed development with existing local or state
governmental goals and objectives or Spring Valley master plans and the PADA.
      2.   Determination if additional special permits or ordinance conflicts
such as rezone, special development permit or variance, are needed and the
manner of coordinating such permits.
      3.   Consideration of any unique environmental features or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property such as areas that have been designated by the state of Idaho as areas
of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like.
      4.   Consideration of other local and state governmental agencies that
the subdivider should contact before preparing a preliminary plat. (Ord. 710,
1-14-2014)
11A-13B-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Application Required:
      1.   Filing Of Preliminary Plat Application And Data: The subdivider
shall file with the administrator a complete subdivision application form and
preliminary plat data as required in this title.
   B.   Combining Preliminary And Final Plat In Minor Subdivisions: The
applicant may request that the subdivision application be processed as both a
preliminary and final plat if all the following exist:
      1.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots which may
include super pad(s)/large lot(s);
      2.   No new street dedication or street widening is involved;
      3.   No major special development considerations are involved such as
development in a floodplain, hillside development or the like;
      4.   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form; and
      5.   The proposed subdivision is not in conflict with the applicable PUMP
or any provision of this title.
A request to combine both preliminary plat and final plat into one application
shall be acted upon by the commission upon recommendation of the zoning
administrator.
   C.   Required Information And Data:
      1.   The contents of the preliminary plat and related information shall
be in such a form as stipulated by the city council; however, any additional
maps or data deemed necessary by the administrator may also be required.
      2.   The subdivider shall submit to the administrator at least the
following:
         a.   Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated. Each
copy of the preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall have the
dimensions of not less than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36"), shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet
(1" = 100'), shall show the drafting date, and shall indicate thereon, by
arrow, the generally northerly direction;
         b.   Six (6) sets of preliminary engineering plans (not meant to be
cross chapters or detailed designs) for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and
other required public improvements; however, such engineering plans shall
contain sufficient information and detail to make a determination as to
conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable regulations, ordinances
and standards;
         c.   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary
plan; and
         d.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, hazardous and unique areas of development.
      3.   The following shall be submitted separately:
         a.   The name of the proposed subdivision;
         b.   The name, address and telephone numbers of the subdivider or
subdividers and the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat;
         c.   The name and address of all adjoining owners of property and
residents within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the
land being considered, whether or not bisected by a public right of way as
shown on record in the county assessor's office;
         d.   The legal description of the subdivision;
         e.   The statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision,
such as residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing, commercial,
office, recreational or agricultural and a designation of any sites proposed
for super pad(s)/large lot(s) or for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or
other public uses;
         f.   A map of the entire PUMP if the proposed subdivision is a portion
of the PUMP. A map shall be submitted showing the location of existing
buildings, water bodies or courses and the location of currently dedicated
streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent;
provided, that actual measured distances shall not be required;
         g.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to
Spring Valley and the surrounding area;
         h.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and
the adjacent land;
         i.   Streets, street names, rights of way and roadway widths,
including adjoining streets or roadways;
         j.   Lot lines and blocks showing the dimensions and numbers of each
including super pad(s)/large lot(s);
         k.   Contour lines, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope
is greater than ten percent (10%) and at two foot (2') intervals where land
slope is ten percent (10%) or less, referenced to an established bench mark,
including location and elevation;
         l.   A site report as required by the appropriate health district
where individual wells or septic tanks are proposed;
         m.   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited
to, storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages,
bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants and their respective profiles;
         n.   Any dedications to the public and/or easements, together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such; and
         o.   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in article E of this chapter.
         p.   A copy of any transportation studies or analysis that has been
provided and/or required by another agency, having jurisdiction over the
project, in support or review of this application.
   D.   Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Administrative Review:
         a.   Certification By Administrator, Public Hearing: Upon receipt of
the preliminary plat and all other required data as provided for herein, the
administrator shall certify the application as complete and shall affix the
date of application acceptance thereon. The administrator shall schedule a
public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, which hearing shall
be held within forty five (45) days of the date of certification of a complete
application.
         b.   Review By Other Agencies: The administrator shall refer the
preliminary plat and application to as many governmental agencies as deemed
necessary. Such agencies may include the following:
            (1)   Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
            (2)   The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or
districts and drainage districts;
            (3)   The superintendent of the school district; and
            (4)   Other agencies having an interest in the proposed
subdivision.
         c.   Recommendation By Administrator: The zoning administrator shall
provide that any transmittal as provided in subsection D1b of this section will
be returned within fifteen (15) days. At the end of the fifteen (15) day
period, the administrator shall prepare a recommendation to the commission. All
agency responses shall be supplied by the zoning administrator to the planning
and zoning commission.
      2.   Public Notice: The administrator shall provide notice in accordance
with the requirements of section
11A-8-13 of this title.
      3.   Action By Commission:
         a.   Commission's Findings: In determining the acceptance of a
proposed subdivision, the commission shall consider the objectives of this
chapter and at least the following:
            (1)   The conformance of the subdivision with the applicable PUMP;
            (2)   The availability of or an approved plan to complete public
services to accommodate the proposed development including, but not limited to,
compliance with title 6, chapter 5 of the Eagle city code;
            (3)   The other health, safety and environmental problems that may
be brought to the commission's attention.
         b.   Action On Preliminary Plat: The commission may recommend
approval, conditional approval, disapproval or tabling for a period not to
exceed thirty five (35) days. Such action shall occur within thirty five (35)
days of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first considered
by the commission. The action, and the reasons for such action shall be stated
in writing by the administrator and forwarded to the applicant. The
administrator shall also forward a statement of the action taken and the
reasons for such action together with a copy of the preliminary plat to the
council for its action. Upon granting or denying a preliminary plat, the
commission shall specify:
            (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the
application;
            (2)   The reasons for recommending approval or denial; and
            (3)   The actions if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval of the preliminary plat.
         c.   Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the
commission's conclusion is favorable to the subdivider's request for the
subdivision to be considered as both a preliminary plat and final plat, then a
recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council in the same manner as
herein specified for a final plat. The commission may recommend that the
combined application be approved, approved conditionally or disapproved.
      4.   Action By Council: Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the
commission's recommendation and following the notice requirements as set forth
in section
11A-8-13 of this title, the city council shall make findings as required in
subsection D3a of this section. The city council shall approve, approve
conditionally or disapprove the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days of the
public hearing conducted to consider the commission's recommendation.
   E.   Approval Period:
      1.   Failure to file an application with and obtain the certification of
the acceptance of the final plat by the zoning administrator within three (3)
years after the date on which action was taken by the city council shall cause
all approvals of said preliminary plat to be null and void.
A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit on the approved
preliminary plat may be granted by the city council, at its sole discretion, if
the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding city code, this title or plat approval
violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be
conditioned by the city council to be cured as a condition of the extension of
time;
         b.   The preliminary plat, as previously approved, remains in the best
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this chapter between
the date of preliminary plat approval and the application date of the time
extension request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates that the final plat application will be filed within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated timing for the filing of the final plat application within the
year.
      2.   The city council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This chapter does not limit the number of extensions the city
council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in
subsection E1 of this section are met. Nothing in this chapter requires the
city council to grant any extension of an approval period.
      4.   Projects with approved phasing plans do not need time extensions, so
long as the construction of improvements do not cease for more than one year in
any given phase.
      5.   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in
successive, contiguous segments through an approved phasing plan in an orderly
and reasonable manner, and conforms to such segments, if submitted within
successive intervals for one year, it may be considered for final approval
without resubmission for preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13B-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Filing Of Final Plat: After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the total parcel or any part thereof
to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the approved
preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the administrator the
following:
      1.   Three (3) copies of the final plat; and
      2.   Three (3) copies of the final engineering construction drawings for
streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other public improvements.
   B.   Contents: The final plat shall include and be in compliance with all
items required under title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code and shall be prepared in
accordance with the specifications set forth in chapter 50-1304, Idaho Code.
The final plat shall include at least the following:
      1.   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated
by the city council;
      2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat;
      3.   Such other information as the administrator or city council may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat;
      4.   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof;
      5.   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of this chapter;
      6.   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards;
      7.   The plat shall show building sites on each lot (except super pad(s)/
large lot(s)) adjusted to setback requirements; and
      8.   The plat shall identify super pad(s)/large lot(s) and note that such
super pad(s)/large lot(s) are not buildable until replatted.
   C.   Procedure For Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   Review By Administrator:
         a.   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the final plat, and compliance with
all other requirements as provided for herein, the administrator shall certify
the application as complete and shall affix the date of acceptance thereon.
         b.   Resubmission Of Final Plat: The administrator shall review the
final plat for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved
preliminary plat. If the administrator determines that there is substantial
difference in the final plat than that which was approved as a preliminary plat
or conditions which have not been met, the administrator may require that the
final plat be submitted to the commission and city council in the same manner
as required in the preliminary plat process.
         c.   Submission To The City Council: Upon the determination that the
final plat is in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional
requirements have been met, the administrator shall place the final plat on the
city council agenda within forty five (45) days from the date that an
acceptable final plat application was received and acknowledged by the
administrator.
      2.   Agency Review: The administrator may transmit one copy of the final
plat, or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to the
departments and agencies as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with the
preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review shall also include the construction standards of improvements,
compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all improvements and
the legal review of the performance bond.
      3.   City Council Action: The city council, at its next meeting following
receipt of the administrator's report, shall consider comments from concerned
persons and agencies to arrive at a decision on the final plat. The city
council shall approve, approve conditionally, disapprove or table the final
plat for additional information within thirty (30) days of the date of the
first regular meeting at which the plat is considered. A copy of the approved
plat shall be filed with the administrator. Upon granting or denying the final
plat, the city council shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   D.   Conditional Approval Of Final Plat: With respect to financial assurance
to be provided to the city, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall
be conditioned on the accomplishment of one of the following:
      1.   The construction of improvements required by this chapter shall have
been completed by the subdivider (except for super pad(s)/large lot(s)) and
approved by the city council; or
      2.   Financial assurance acceptable to the city council shall have been
filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank
letter of credit.
   E.   Approval Period: The final plat shall be filed with the county recorder
within two years after the date of written approval by the city council.
Otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless the subdivider, prior
to said expiration date, applies for an extension of time and such extension is
granted by the city council.
      1.   A minimum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of the
approved final plat may be granted by the city council, at its sole discretion,
if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding this title or plat approval violations
on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be conditioned by
the city council to be cured as a condition of the extension of time;
         b.   The final plat, as previously approved, remains in the best
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this chapter between
the date of final plat approval and the application date of the time extension
request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates how recordation of the final plat will occur within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress for completion of the final plat within the year.
      2.   The city council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This chapter does not limit the number of extensions the city
council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in
subsection E1 of this section are met. Nothing in this chapter requires the
city council to grant any extension of an approval period.
   F.   Required Certificates: The following certifications and signatures
shall be included on the final plat prior to recording by the county recorder:
      1.   Certification and signature of the city council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
      2.   Certification and signature of the city clerk and the city engineer
verifying that the subdivision meets the requirements of the city and has been
approved by the city council; and
      3.   Certification of the sanitation restriction on the face of the plat
in accordance with the provisions of chapter 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   G.   Record Of Final Plat: Upon approval of the final plat by the city
council, the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, posting of financial
assurance with the city pursuant to subsection D of this section, and the
inclusion of those certifications and signatures on the final plat as set forth
in subsection F of this section, the subdivider shall furnish proof to the
administrator that the final plat has been recorded. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd.
Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
11A-13B-5: FEES:
At the time of submission of an application for a preliminary plat, planned
unit development preliminary development plan, and final plat, a fee, as
established in the official fee schedule of the city, shall be paid. There
shall be no additional fee for the combining of the preliminary and final plats
and there shall be no fee for a preapplication. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13B-6: RECORD OF LOT; PLAT APPROVAL:
No final plat shall be filed with the county recorder or improvements made on
the property except for grading pursuant to the grading guidelines and hillside
development standards until the plat has been acted upon and approved by the
city council. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13B-7: SALE OF LOT; PLAT TO BE RECORDED:
No lots shall be sold using a lot and block legal description until the plat
has been recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13B-8: PARCEL DIVISION:
Any time that an original parcel of land is divided or partitioned into not
more than two (2) parcels, thereby creating an additional parcel for the
transfer of ownership or development, the following application process and
procedures shall be followed:
   A.   Application: An application for parcel division on a form provided by
the zoning administrator shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      1.   Name, address, telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property and proof of ownership or agency.
      3.   Description of existing use.
      4.   Zoning district.
      5.   Description of parcels after proposed division.
      6.   Description of proposed use.
      7.   Documentation of the permission of the owner of the parcel to be
divided.
   B.   Procedure: Prior to approving an application under this chapter, the
city council shall make the following findings:
      1.   The minimum requirements under this title for acreage, density, lot
area and setback lines have been complied with;
      2.   The proposed parcel division is in conformity with the applicable
PUMP; and
      3.   The proposed parcel division is in the public interest and will not
adversely impact adjoining property interests.
   C.   Notice: Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the
administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on
the request. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
ARTICLE C. DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11A-13C-1: Minimum Standards Required
11A-13C-2: Streets And Alleys
11A-13C-2-1: Location And Design
11A-13C-2-2: Street Widths
11A-13C-2-3: Intersections
11A-13C-2-4: Street Names
11A-13C-2-5: Private Streets And Private Alleys
11A-13C-3: Pedestrian Walkways
11A-13C-4: Easements
11A-13C-5: Planting Strips And Reserve Strips
11A-13C-6: Public Sites And Open Spaces
11A-13C-7: Water System
11A-13C-8: Fences
11A-13C-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth in this article; provided, however, that any higher standards adopted
by any highway district, the Idaho transportation department or health agency
shall prevail over those set forth herein. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
11A-13C-2-1: LOCATION AND DESIGN:
Street and road location and design shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Street Location And Arrangements: When an official street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, streets within a subdivision
shall conform to such approved plans including ACHD, PUMP or Spring Valley
master streets and circulation plan.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
   C.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas within Valnova have not yet been
subdivided but are planned to be in the future, the arrangement of streets in
new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to the boundary line of
the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said streets into
adjacent areas, and shall install a turnaround, either permanent or temporary
(with a temporary easement over the turnaround), as approved by the fire
district with jurisdiction if the stub street is longer than one hundred fifty
feet (150') in length. A reserve street may be required and held in public
ownership.
   D.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to
topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
   E.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in commercial subdivisions unless
other provisions are made for service access and off-street loading and
parking. Alleys may be provided in single family and multifamily subdivisions.
Public alleys shall be approved by the Ada County Highway District and the Fire
District with jurisdiction. Private alleys shall be approved by the Fire
District with jurisdiction and shall be in compliance with private alley
regulations provided for within this Title.
   F.   Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial
street, it shall be required that there be frontage roads approximately
parallel to and on each side of such arterial street; or, such other treatment
as is necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties and to
separate through traffic from local traffic.
   G.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than five
thousand feet (5,000') in length and shall terminate with an adequate circular
turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') of right of way
including a landscape island with a minimum radius of ten feet (10'). A minimum
of forty feet (40') of pavement shall be provided between the landscape island
and the outside edge of the street as measured from the face of vertical curb
of the island to the face of vertical curb located on the outside edge of the
street. Where flush ribbon curbs or rolled curbs are used, the forty feet (40')
of dimension may be taken from the back of curb of the island to the back of
curb located on the outside edge of the street. All cul-de-sac streets shall
include bulb outs every seven hundred fifty feet (750') to allow for emergency
vehicles to turn around. No more than forty (40) lots shall be located on any
cul-de-sac street between bulb outs or beyond the final bulb out. Exceptions to
the requirements set forth in this subsection may be considered by the city
council if approved by the fire district with jurisdiction and the highway
district having jurisdiction.
   H.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with this chapter and where satisfactory assurance for dedication
of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be
subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the
street shall be dedicated within such tract.
   I.   Driveways: Driveways shall provide access to no more than three (3)
dwellings. Driveways providing access to a maximum of eight (8) single-family
special lot units,
chapter 2 of this title, may be permitted providing that the total driveway
length does not exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') and review and approval
has been received from emergency service providers for the specific location
and configuration. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 924, 8-
27-2024)
11A-13C-2-2: STREET WIDTHS:
   A.   Street and road right of way widths, grade, alignment, and so forth,
shall conform to the adopted major street plan or applicable PUMP and shall be
approved by the Ada County highway district and/or other agency having
jurisdiction.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, access from a frontage
road onto an arterial street shall be limited to one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') between points. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-2-3: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Angle Of Intersection: Angles of street and driveway intersections
shall be approved by the highway district having jurisdiction.
   B.   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all street and
driveway intersections shall be approved by the highway district having
jurisdiction.
   C.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-2-4: STREET NAMES:
The naming of streets shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   A street name shall not duplicate any existing street name within the
county except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street.
Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing
street names shall not be used.
   B.   All new streets shall be named as follows:
      1.   Streets having a predominately north-south direction shall be named
"avenue", except for chapter line streets which shall be named "road".
      2.   Streets having a predominately east-west direction shall be named
"street", except for chapter line streets which shall be named "road".
      3.   Meandering streets having a predominately north-south direction
shall be named "way".
      4.   Meandering streets having a predominately east-west direction shall
be named "drive".
      5.   Cul-de-sacs having a predominately north-south direction shall be
named "place".
      6.   Cul-de-sacs having a predominately east-west direction shall be
named "court". (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-2-5: PRIVATE STREETS:
Private streets and private alleys may be permitted, subject to the following:
   A.   Compliance: The city council must find that all proposed private
streets or private alleys are in compliance with each of the following
criteria:
      1.   Unique or special circumstances exist with respect to the proposed
use, design, location, topography, or other features of the development or its
surroundings such that private streets and or private alleys will serve to
enhance the overall development.
      2.   Safe and effective movement of both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, sidewalks, and parking is provided.
      3.   Adequate access for service and emergency vehicles is provided where
needed.
      4.   Access and good transportation planning to adjacent property and to
the area travel networks is not adversely affected.
      5.   Adjacent property will not be landlocked by the site layout.
      6.   Other than to provide emergency access, the private streets and
private alleys do not connect one public street to another, thereby encouraging
travel through the development served by the private street; provided, however,
that in order to provide secondary access, a private street may have more than
one connection to a public street and/or may be connected to more than one
public street if access thereto is controlled by automatic gates or other
control devices approved by the council.
      7.   The use or alignment of the private streets or alleys do not
interfere with the continuity of public streets.
      8.   An appropriate mechanism has been established for the repair and
maintenance of the private streets and alleys, including provisions for the
funding thereof.
      9.   Private streets shall provide access to no more than twenty percent
(20%) of the lots within Spring Valley.
   B.   Construction And Design Standards: Private streets and private alleys
shall conform to the following construction and design requirements:
      1.   All private streets and private alleys shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Ada County Highway District's standards for
streets and alleys unless modified within this section or approved by the city
council.
      2.   Sidewalks shall be required in accordance with subsection
11A-13D-1-6F of this chapter. However, alternative sidewalk and landscape strip
designs may be approved by the city council based upon a finding made by the
council that characteristics and qualities of the development justify the
alternate design. Sidewalks and planter strips, as referenced within subsection
11A-13D-1-6F of this title, shall not be required along alleys.
      3.   All private streets shall contain paved travel lanes a minimum of
twelve feet (12') in width and private alleys shall contain paved travel lanes
a minimum of ten feet (10') in width. Private streets shall provide for the
safe, convenient, and effective movement of both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. Private alleys shall provide for the safe, convenient, and effective
movement of vehicular traffic. Vertical curbing shall be provided for private
streets that are less than thirty-four feet (34') in width and on all arterial
streets and on all collector streets that do not have front on housing. Alleys
may utilize other curb types in accordance with subsection
11A-13D-1-3 of this chapter.
      4.   The design engineer shall identify on the construction drawings for
the review and approval by the city engineer, all traffic signs needed for the
project, including, but not limited to, designated parking and "no parking"
areas, speed, stop, and such other signs as are required for safe pedestrian
and vehicle travel.
      5.   All private streets and private alleys shall, during the progress of
construction, be inspected and tested, at the expense of the owner or
developer, by a qualified inspector in order to ensure compliance with the
construction and design standards set forth in this chapter, the construction
drawings as prepared by the registered professional engineer, and good
engineering and construction practices. Reports of such inspections and tests
shall be submitted, together with a certification of such compliance, for the
review and approval by the city engineer.
      6.   All dead end private streets and private alleys shall terminate at
one of the following approved turnaround areas:
         a.   A cul-de-sac designed in accordance with the provisions of
subsection
11A-13C-2-1G of this article and subject to the approval of the fire district
with jurisdiction and city engineer and provided further that proper
maintenance of the island is provided for;
         b.   A hammerhead/tee type turnaround or as may be otherwise approved
by the fire district with jurisdiction and the city engineer; or
         c.   Such other turnaround area as may be approved by the fire
district with jurisdiction, city engineer, and city council.
         d.   Private streets and private alleys not exceeding one hundred
fifty feet (150') may terminate with no turn-around if approved by the fire
district with jurisdiction.
         e.   For private alleys, emergency access/connections may be made
beyond the one hundred fifty feet (150') maximum length allowing the connection
of a dead end private alley to an adjacent dead end private street or private
alley utilizing materials such as concrete, pavers, grass pavers, or other like
materials deemed acceptable to support emergency vehicles and as approved by
city council and the fire district with jurisdiction. Any emergency access/
connections that direct emergency vehicles through a pedestrian space such as a
courtyard, plaza, pathway, or sidewalk shall be clearly signed to identify
through traffic access patterns for use by emergency vehicles only. Any private
alley exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150') shall provide an adequate
turnaround for service vehicles without the use of the emergency access/
connection.
      7.   The design of all private streets and private alleys and related
storm drainage facilities shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer
in the state in substantial conformance with engineering and design standards
in effect at the time of preparation of the design. Construction drawings,
together with a certification of such conformity, shall be submitted for the
review and approval by the city engineer. No part of this chapter shall be
construed as allowing a private street or private alley that is not in
conformance with current engineering and design standards.
      8.   If any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any
other applicable provision of this chapter, the provision which establishes the
higher and/or more restrictive standard shall prevail, unless specifically
determined otherwise by the city council.
      9.   Curb and gutter shall be required in accordance with subsection
11A-13D-1-3 of this chapter.
      10.   For all private alleys providing fire apparatus access, the minimum
centerline radius and the interior radii shall be approved by the fire district
with jurisdiction. For all other private alleys, the minimum centerline radius
and interior radii shall follow good engineering practice and shall consider
access for service vehicles.
      11.   Driveways connecting to alleys shall be three to five feet (3'-5')
or nineteen feet (19') or more to discourage parking parallel to the alley
travel way and end-in parking that encroaches into the travel way. In all
cases, a backout distance of twenty-six feet (26'), as measured from garage
door from one side of the alley to the garage door on the opposite side of the
alley, shall be maintained. Designated parking outside of the travel lanes
shall also be allowed in alleys where space and proper design allow and in
accordance with
11A-5-4-2 of this title.
      12.   Private alleys may be allowed to serve as the sole means of
vehicular access to a residential dwelling in instances where a pedestrian
pathway within a common lot or an easement is designed to provide secondary
access to the front of the residential dwelling.
      13.   Where private alleys provide the sole means of vehicular access to
a residential dwelling, clear address wayfinding signage shall be located
throughout the subdivision for use by emergency services and individual
building addresses shall be included adjacent to each garage door within the
alley or as approved by the fire district with jurisdiction.
   C.   Access And Maintenance Requirements: Provisions shall be made for the
future maintenance of and access to private streets and private alleys as
follows:
      1.   A plan and schedule for the future repair and maintenance of the
private street, private alley, and drainage facilities for the period of the
expected lifetime thereof and a cost estimate therefor prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in the state, together with a proposed method for funding
the same, including, but not limited to, the creation and maintenance of a
reserve fund for that purpose, shall be submitted with the final plat
application for review and approval by the city engineer and city council.
      2.   The location of private streets and private alleys shall be clearly
depicted on the face of the plat and notes shall be included on the face of the
plat which shall:
         a.   Act to convey to each lot owner within the subdivision to be
served by the private streets or private alleys the perpetual right of ingress
and egress over the described private streets or private alleys;
         b.   Provide that such perpetual easement shall run with the land; and
         c.   Provide that the restrictive covenant for maintenance of the
private streets or private alleys cannot be modified and the homeowners'/
property owners' association or other entity cannot be dissolved without the
express consent of the city.
      3.   A restrictive covenant for repair and maintenance of the private
streets or private alleys shall be recorded at the time of recording the plat
which said covenant shall create a homeowners'/property owners' association or
substantially similar entity and make provision for the perpetual maintenance
of the private streets or private alleys in accordance with the approved plan
as provided for in subsection C1 of this section. Said restrictive covenant
shall also provide that the said covenant shall run with the land and that the
said covenant cannot be modified and that the homeowners'/property owners'
association or other entity cannot be dissolved without the express consent of
the city. The said restrictive covenant shall be reviewed and approved by the
city attorney prior to certification and signing of the final plat by the city
engineer.
      4.   The council may, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion, order
the owners or the entity responsible for the maintenance of any private streets
or private alleys approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to
undertake such repair and maintenance activities as it may determine is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and make such
expenditures from the funds reserved therefor as may be required thereby; and
the owner or responsible entity shall, as a condition of approval of any such
private street, be deemed to have agreed to comply with any such order and to
reimburse the city all of its costs, including attorney fees, incurred in
obtaining or enforcing any such order. Any order entered by the council
pursuant to this subsection may be enforced by a court of competent
jurisdiction and the city shall be entitled to recover its costs and attorney
fees incurred in connection therewith.
   D.   Conformity to Applicable PUMP: All private streets and private alleys
shall, in all respects, conform to all applicable PUMPs.
   E.   Waiver: The city council may waive or modify any of the standards or
requirements of this section when the private streets or private alleys have
been determined to be an integral element of the overall plan and scheme of the
development or will serve to enhance the overall development; provided,
however, that any such waiver shall not be injurious to public health or
safety. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022; Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
11A-13C-3: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Right of way for pedestrian walkways in the middle of long blocks may be
required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to
schools, parks or shopping areas. The pedestrian easement shall be at least ten
feet (10') wide. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Unobstructed utility easements, where required, shall be provided along
front lot lines, rear lot lines and/or side lot lines. Easement widths shall be
a minimum of ten feet (10') along rear and front lot lines and five feet (5')
along each side lot line, except that lesser easement widths shall be
permitted, where required, so as to not exceed the required building setbacks.
Where the setback widths require reduced easement widths, the easement width
shall not be less than the setback.
   B.   A minimum five-foot (5') wide unobstructed drainageway easement shall
be provided in conjunction with the utility easement alongside each side lot
line or as required by the city council except that lesser easement widths
shall be permitted, where required, so as to not exceed the required building
setbacks. Where the setback widths require reduced easement widths, the
easement width shall not be less than the setback.
   C.   All natural drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or be improved
in a manner which will improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the
channel. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022)
11A-13C-5: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Planting Strips/Buffer Areas: Planting strips/buffer areas shall be
required to be placed next to incompatible features such as highways,
commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties
and to provide noise mitigation for those residents. Such planting strips/
buffer areas shall be as required by
chapter 3 of this title. The landscape strip/buffer area shall not be a part of
the normal street right of way and shall comply with all landscape/buffer area
requirements within
chapter 3 of this title.
   B.   Reserve Strips:
      1.   Private Reserve Strips: Privately held reserve strip access to
streets shall be prohibited.
      2.   Public Reserve Strips: A one foot (1') reserve may be required to be
placed along half streets which are within the subdivision boundaries and shall
be deeded in fee simple to the applicable highway authority for future street
widening. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-6: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
   B.   Open Space: The minimum amount of open space that must be set aside for
open space within Spring Valley shall comply with
chapter 3 of this title. The minimum amount of open space in all single-family
residential subdivisions (except for the RR and ER land use districts) shall be
six hundred (600) square feet per lot.
The minimum amount of open space within any PUMP shall be fifteen percent (15%)
of the total gross acres of the PUMP. No plat shall be approved within any
planning area if, with the approval of such plat, the platted and unplatted
open space in the PUMP would fall below fifteen percent (15%) of the total
gross acres of the PUMP.
Plats may be denied if the city finds the applicant is unable to show that
fifty percent (50%) of all dwelling units in the planning area, sixty five
percent (65%) of all single-family detached lots less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet in the planning area, and fifty percent (50%) of all
single-family detached lots less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet in the
planning area, will abut some form of open space. The term "direct access"
means all building lots are to be located a maximum of two hundred fifty feet
(250') away from a pathway connecting to a common area open space lot. Building
lots separated from a common area open space lot by a local roadway shall be
deemed to have achieved direct access. The required planter strip located
between the sidewalk and the street will not be permitted to fulfill this
requirement.
If a plat contains community park(s), as defined in the PADA, any community
park shall contain a minimum of eight (8) acres of active and passive open
space. If a plat contains neighborhood park(s), as defined in the PADA, any
neighborhood park shall contain a minimum of three (3) acres of active and
passive open space.
   C.   Ownership And Management Of Open Space:
         a.   Ownership Of Open Space: The applicant must identify the owner of
the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities
located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the
association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the
subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner,
the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection
of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and
any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner.
         b.   Management Plan: Applicant shall submit a plan for management of
open space and common facilities (plan) that:
            (1)   Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance
and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including
provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long term capital improvements;
            (2)   Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for
maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines
the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided;
            (3)   Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the city
council; and
            (4)   Provides for enforcement of the plan.
         c.   Temporary Maintenance By City; Corrective Action: In the event
the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all
or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city of Eagle may assume
temporary responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and
take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The
costs of such maintenance shall be charged to the owner, homeowners'
association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners'
association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs
shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. The exercise by the city of
Eagle of its right to assume temporary maintenance responsibility to take
corrective action shall not relieve the property owner of their maintenance
responsibility nor should it be construed as the city assuming permanent
responsibility for such maintenance. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-
2022)
11A-13C-7: WATER SYSTEM:
The provision of a public water system shall conform to the following
standards:
   A.   All subdivisions within the Eagle city water service area shall comply
with title 6, chapter 5 of the Eagle city code. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13C-8: FENCES:
Any fencing located adjacent to open spaces and on the street side of all
corner lots shall be an open fencing style such as wrought iron or other
similar decorative style, durable fencing material. Refer to
11A-3-6(B)(3)(e) for specific fencing requirements. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd.
Ord. 889, 1-10-2022)
ARTICLE D. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11A-13D-1: Improvements Required
11A-13D-1-1: Monuments
11A-13D-1-2: Streets And Alleys
11A-13D-1-3: Curbs And Gutters
11A-13D-1-4: Street Signs
11A-13D-1-5: Streetlights
11A-13D-1-6: Pedestrian/Bicycle Pathway And Sidewalk Regulations
11A-13D-1-7: Bicycle Pathways
11A-13D-1-8: Underground Utilities
11A-13D-1-9: Water Supply And Sewer Systems
11A-13D-1-10: Storm Drainage; Flood Controls
11A-13D-1-11: Fire Hydrants And Water Mains
11A-13D-1-12: Landscape Buffer Areas
11A-13D-2: Construction Of Improvements
11A-13D-2-1: Construction Plans
11A-13D-2-2: Guarantee Of Improvements
11A-13D-2-3: Inspections
11A-13D-2-4: Failure To Complete Public Improvement Construction
11A-13D-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with the following conditions and specifications.
(Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-1: MONUMENTS:
Monuments shall be set in accordance with chapter 50-1303, Idaho Code. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
All public streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications adopted by the Ada County highway district or the
Idaho transportation department, whichever the case may be. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
11A-13D-1-3: CURBS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Vertical curbs and gutters shall be constructed on collector and
arterial streets.
      2.   Rolled curbs and gutters, or other treatments acceptable to ACHD,
may be required on minor streets.
      3.   Rolled curbs, ribbon curbs, banding, or other treatments acceptable
to the Ada County Highway District, may be used in alleys.
      4.   All construction shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Ada County Highway District.
   B.   Driveways, Curb Cuts: All driveway openings and curbs shall be as
specified by the Ada County highway district or the Idaho transportation
department. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014; amd. Ord. 884, 9-27-2022)
11A-13D-1-4: STREET SIGNS:
Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations at each
street in accordance with the local standards. A per street sign fee shall be
paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-5: STREETLIGHTS:
The developer or subdividers within Spring Valley shall be required to install,
at the developer's or subdivider's expense, streetlights that are not the
obligation of ACHD in accordance with specifications and standards set by
chapter 3 of this title and at locations designated by the administrator. After
installation and acceptance by the administrator, the homeowners' association
shall pay the cost of maintenance and power and assume ownership of the
streetlights that are not the obligation of ACHD. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-6: PEDESTRIAN/BICYCLE PATHWAY AND SIDEWALK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: The placement of pathways is intended to encourage nonmotorized
forms of travel, and to provide safe, convenient and aesthetic alternative
travel routes to common destinations such as schools, parks, shopping centers,
etc. The following factors will be considered in the placement of any pathway:
the utility and need for a given pathway, impacts to existing neighborhoods,
compliance with the transportation/pathway network maps within the Spring
Valley master parks, trails and open space plan, pathway design as it relates
to both crime prevention and function, and the responsibilities of ownership,
maintenance, and liability.
   B.   Location:
      1.   The city shall require the creation and maintenance of pathways
(except in cases where it is shown to be inappropriate), that provide access to
adjacent:
         a.   Schools;
         b.   Public parks;
         c.   Adopted pathway elements within the Spring Valley master parks,
trails and open space plan;
         d.   Neighborhoods;
         e.   Shopping areas;
         f.   Public lands;
         g.   Transportation or other community facilities, and vacant parcels,
held either publicly or privately which could provide future neighborhood
connection(s) to the above noted sites; and
         h.   In similar cases where deemed appropriate.
In addition, pathways may be required to connect sites other than those noted
above when there is evidence that a pedestrian/cyclist would otherwise be
forced to travel alongside a designated arterial roadway, or other roadway that
may be hazardous for nonmotorized forms of travel, in order to reach the
desired destination, or
   C.   Existing Neighborhoods: The placement of a path will be based upon
consideration of current residents of a neighborhood as well as future
residents. Based upon the following, the city may choose to acquire a pathway
in existing neighborhoods when:
      1.   The pathway would provide access to a major pathway element such as
the Boise River greenbelt.
      2.   The pathway would provide access to a nearby school or park.
      3.   A substantial lack of motorized access exists in the given area.
      4.   No alternative pathway is provided.
      5.   The pathway connects to adjacent subdivision pathways.
   D.   Pathway Design: While the city may exercise considerable discretion in
determining the design of pathways, the following minimum standards shall be
followed:
      1.   Paved Pathways: Neighborhood pathways within subdivisions which are
designed for primary use by the residents of the subdivision shall be a minimum
four feet (4') wide and shall be located within a minimum sixteen foot (16')
wide pedestrian access easement. Community pathways within Spring Valley that
are designed for primary use by residents, workers and visitors in Spring
Valley shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and shall be located within a
minimum of sixteen foot (16') wide pedestrian access easement. Regional
pathways such as within the Big Gulch Regional Park and pathways located
adjacent to major roadways shall be a minimum eight feet to ten feet (8' - 10')
wide and shall be located within a minimum twenty foot (20') wide pedestrian
access easement.
      2.   Unpaved Or Soft Pathways: Neighborhood pathway widths within
subdivisions may range from four feet (4') to six feet (6') and be located
within a minimum sixteen foot (16') wide access easement. Community pathways
within the community at large may range from five feet to six feet (5' - 6')
and be located within a minimum sixteen foot (16') wide access easement.
Regional trails are those trails along highly trafficked corridors or with
access to or from major trailheads and shall be a minimum six feet (6') to
eight feet (8') wide and shall be located within a minimum twenty foot (20')
wide pedestrian access easement.
      3.   Barriers: Barriers may be placed at the terminal ends of paths to
restrict use by motor vehicles while allowing use by bicycles, wheelchairs and
other modes of travel.
      4.   Setback: A minimum five foot (5') wide landscaped area/building and
fence setback, as measured from both edges of the path, shall be required, and
will be owned by either the abutting property owner(s) or a homeowners'
association unless accepted by a public entity. The five foot (5') wide
landscaped area on either side of the pathway may be decreased to a minimum of
two feet (2') wide (as measured from the edge of asphalt to the easement line)
when used in conjunction with a meandering pathway, however, the total width of
the landscape area shall not be less than ten feet (10') (i.e., 2 feet on 1
side of the path and 8 feet on the other). For safety purposes, planting
material in this area is limited to three feet (3') in height. The landscape,
fence and building regulations for this area shall be indicated by a note on
the plat.
      5.   Guides: The official design standards for pathways set forth in the
following manuals are to be used as guides: the "Bicycle Pedestrian Design
Manual" for Ada County, the "Design Guide For Accessible Outdoor Recreation",
and the "Guide For The Development Of Bicycle Facilities", or other nationally
recognized design standards.
      6.   Root Barrier: A root barrier shall be placed along the side of the
paved pathways when trees are planted within five feet (5') for class I and III
trees and four feet (4') for class II trees of a paved pathway to prohibit tree
roots from damaging the pathway surface. The root barrier shall consist of
black injection molded panels with a minimum of 0.085 inch wall thickness in
modules a minimum of twenty four inches long by twenty four inches deep (24" x
24"). Each panel shall have no less than four (4) vertical deflecting ribs of a
minimum 0.085 inch thickness protruding one-half inch (1/2") at ninety degrees
(90°) from the interior of the panel, spaced six inches (6") apart. A minimum
of nine (9) antilift tabs, three (3) each between the vertical ribs, shall be
integrated into each panel, measuring a minimum of 0.085 inch thickness and
protruding three- eighths inch (3/8") from the panel wall. An integrated
joining system shall be employed for instant assembly by sliding one panel into
the other. An alternative type barrier system of equal root penetrative
resistance may be considered on a case by case basis, subject to the approval
of the zoning administrator.
      7.   Crime Prevention Design Standards: In order to design for crime
prevention, the following design standards will be followed:
         a.   The use of "see through", open fencing, such as wrought iron, is
preferred, as it provides better visibility from adjacent homes or buildings.
View walls consisting of part wall (1/2 the height or less of the barrier) and
part fence are also acceptable. Solid fencing is discouraged.
         b.   Adequate lighting along regional trails may be provided per
chapter 3 of this title, as determined by Eagle city council and may be owned
and maintained by the city of Eagle once the path is turned over to the city
for maintenance.
         c.   The use of sharp corners and curves in the design of the paved
paths is discouraged.
      8.   Parking: Consideration shall be given to off street parking where
paths connect to popular destination points and nearby streets may become
congested with vehicles parked by pathway users. Where pathway links connect to
major public open space that require vehicular parking, the council may request
the developer to designate land to be purchased and maintained by the
appropriate public authority for public parking. Buffering of surrounding
residential uses shall be considered in the area for purchase.
   E.   Responsibility: The following provisions are intended to provide
guidance to those entities that are responsible for construction, maintenance
and/or liability for a pathway. Installation costs, which may include
construction of the pathways, are the responsibility of the developer. Regional
pathway construction costs are eligible for park impact fee credit.
      1.   Homeowners' Association:
         a.   Pathway systems, such as neighborhood and community pathways,
within a proposed subdivision providing access to private common space and/or
other amenities that are used solely by the residents of a subdivision shall be
the responsibility of the homeowners' association.
         b.   Where the residents of a subdivision will be the primary
beneficiaries of a pathway, and travel from adjoining neighborhoods will be
minimal, a homeowners' association may be required to take responsibility for
that path.
      2.   City Of Eagle: When location, length and design of a path have been
agreed upon by the city of Eagle and the developer, the city may accept
maintenance and liability for the pathway as designated in the Spring Valley
master parks, trails and open space plan, so long as the pathway is in good
condition and repair.
   F.   Sidewalk Design:
      1.   Sidewalks: An attached or detached sidewalk, a minimum five feet
(5') wide, shall be required on both sides of the street, except as provided
herein. Sidewalks may be eliminated on one or both sides of the street in
hillside areas to minimize topographic impacts and grading. Sidewalks on only
one side of the street may also be allowed in the following conditions:
         a.   The average width of lots, as measured at the street frontage
line or at the building setback line, is over one hundred fifty feet (150').
         b.   Within ER and RR neighborhoods.
         c.   On single loaded streets (that is, streets with lot access on
only 1 side of the street).
         d.   Sidewalks may be eliminated on both sides of a local street under
the following conditions and in compliance with Ada County highway district
standards. The applicant shall show a means of alternative pedestrian movement
in the area:
            (1)   When the existing slope of the hillside exceeds eighteen
percent (18%).
            (2)   When lots exceed an average of five (5) acres in size within
a plat. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-7: BICYCLE PATHWAYS:
A bicycle pathway system shall be provided within all subdivisions as part of
the public right of way, within open space, or separate easement, as may be
specified by the city council. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-8: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Underground utilities are required. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-9: WATER SUPPLY AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Construction; Extension: All public water supply or sewer systems
(serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be constructed in
accordance with any adopted local plans and specifications. The developer is
constructing a new city owned public water supply system and a new sewer system
in Spring Valley. The city shall be the exclusive municipal supplier of water
to the lands within the Spring Valley development. The city may allow
connection to the city owned water system in Spring Valley if it is deemed to
be in the best interest of the city.
   B.   Approval Of Plans: All water and sewer plans shall be submitted to the
Idaho department of health and welfare or its authorized agent for approval in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   C.   Pressurized Irrigation Facilities:
      1.   Irrigation water for all residential dwelling units shall be
provided with water from the municipal system or from available surface water,
as outlined herein.
Plans and documents completed in accordance to the required standards and
regulations shall be submitted with the application for a preliminary plat in
accordance with the Spring Valley irrigation and reuse master plan and in
accordance with the adopted supplemental standards and regulations (titled
"Pressure Irrigation Standards", incorporated herein by reference).
The following design requirements and the requirements provided within the
supplemental "Pressure Irrigation Standards" shall apply to the pressurized
irrigation system. These standards shall supplement all other regulations, and
where at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the
more restrictive requirements shall apply. The city council may determine that
revisions to the supplemental standards are warranted and make such revisions
by act of a resolution.
         a.   When surface water is available, the developer shall install a
separate pressure irrigation system in accordance with the "Pressure Irrigation
Standards" and the "Spring Valley Irrigation And Reuse Master Plan". If no
surface water is available, the developer may be granted a waiver to install
individual irrigation connections to the municipal system.
         b.   A separate pressurized irrigation system that utilizes surface or
reuse waters shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer registered
in the state of Idaho, and the construction plans for the system shall be
reviewed and approved by the city engineer. The design shall conform to the
"Pressurized Irrigation Standards" for the city of Eagle.
         c.   Development areas that are not provided with a separate pressured
irrigation system shall be provided with a connection to the potable water
system with the approval of the city, city engineer, and the potable water
purveyor. The following standards shall apply to individual irrigation
connections to the potable water system:
            (1)   The installation of a DEQ approved reduced pressure backflow
(RPB) prevention assembly or an air gap separating the irrigation system and
the potable water system will be required on the property side of the domestic
water meter.
            (2)   The RPB prevention assembly shall be installed, owned, and
maintained by the property owner. Failure to properly maintain the RPB will
result in a shutoff of municipal water supply to the property until fully
mitigated in accordance with city shutoff policy.
            (3)   The RPB shall be installed within five feet (5') of the city
water meter and shall be accessible to city staff.
            (4)   The property owner shall have the RPB inspected by an
appropriately licensed inspector and in accordance with state requirements
annually and shall provide the results of a passing inspection to the city.
Failure to complete the required inspection will result in a shutoff of water
service until completed.
            (5)   The city may assess a monthly service fee as part of the
water bill to cover costs associated with the testing and monitoring of the RPB
prevention assembly and administration of the city's cross connection control
policy.
         d.   Irrigation water may consist of a combination of surface water,
treated effluent, and groundwater as identified within the Spring Valley
irrigation and reuse master plan.
      2.   All development which is required to be served by a separate
pressurized irrigation system must be constructed, operated, and maintained in
accordance with this chapter and in accordance with the approved Spring Valley
irrigation and reuse master plan that may be amended from time to time. The
Spring Valley irrigation system shall be served by a permit to appropriate
water issued by the state of Idaho department of water resources (permit no.
63-32573) or other acquired water rights, surface water, or treated effluent in
accordance with the Spring Valley irrigation and reuse master plan that may be
amended from time to time. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-10: STORM DRAINAGE; FLOOD CONTROLS:
   A.   Adequate Storm Drainage System: An adequate storm drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff from the public rights of way shall be required
in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision shall be
established by the Ada County highway district and/or the Idaho transportation
department, and construction shall follow the specifications and procedures
established by said Ada County highway district or Idaho transportation
department.
   B.   Interceptor Ditches: Interceptor ditches shall be established above all
cut/fill slopes, and the intercepted water conveyed to a stable channel or
natural drainageway with adequate capacity.
   C.   Curb, Gutter And Pavement Design: Curb, gutter and pavement design
shall be such that water on roadways is prevented from flowing off the roadway.
   D.   Natural Drainageway Treatment: Natural drainageways shall be riprapped
or otherwise stabilized below drainage and culvert discharge points for a
distance sufficient to convey the discharge without channel erosion.
   E.   Runoff From Impervious Cover: Runoff from areas of concentrated
impervious cover (for example, roofs, driveways and roads) shall be collected
and transported to a natural drainageway with sufficient capacity to accept the
discharge without undue erosion.
   F.   Deposit Of Waste Material Prohibited: Waste material from construction,
including soil and other solid materials, shall not be deposited within the
100-year floodplain.
   G.   Drainageways Or Hydraulic Structures In Major Waterways: Drainageways
or hydraulic structures in major waterways (defined as draining a basin area of
10 acres or more) shall be designed for the 100-year flood or to accommodate
the runoff projected in the soil conservation service hydrology guide for
residential development of the Boise front, whichever is greater. In minor
waterways (defined as draining a basin area of less than 10 acres), such
structures shall be designed for the 50-year flood or to accommodate the runoff
projected in the soil conservation service hydrology guide for residential
development of the Boise front, whichever is greater.
   H.   Storm Drainage Retention Facilities: Storm drainage retention
facilities consistent with the Spring Valley master drainage plan and the
conditional letter of map revision issued by FEMA, as may be amended from time
to time, shall be designed in connection with the final plat and implemented
with a flow control system that achieves the following objectives: 1) minimize
downstream impacts by not increasing predevelopment flows from land development
activities; and 2) accommodate predevelopment flows from upstream land by
providing adequate conveyance facilities through the project site; 3) designed
in accordance with the Eagle drainage standards and consistent with the Spring
Valley master drainage plan as approved by the city; and 4) provide a mechanism
to ensure that all facilities shall be maintained on an ongoing basis in order
to perform as designed. As part of construction drawings, a stormwater drainage
plan shall be developed and approved by the city engineer that promotes each of
these objectives.
   I.   Sediment Retention Facilities: These facilities shall be constructed
and maintained downstream from development consistent with best management
practices. Any such facility used shall provide for the removal of surface
debris and contaminants, as well as sediment retention.
   J.   Completion And Operation Deadline: The overall drainage system shall be
completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during
construction.
   K.   Alterations Of Major Drainageways: Alterations of major drainageways
shall be prohibited except for approved road crossings and drainage structures
or as provided for in title 10 of the Eagle city code.
   L.   Natural Or Improved Open Channel Drainageways: Natural or improved open
channel drainageways shall be preserved or provided for in major waterways;
except, that at road crossings, conduits may be permitted. Minor waterways
shall be permitted to be enclosed in conduits.
   M.   Reservation Of Right To Require: The city reserves the right to require
installation of hydrologic measuring devices in drainageways within any
development at public expense.
   N.   Drainage System Plans: Drainage system plans shall show how lots will
be graded so that all runoff runs either over the curb, or to a drainage
easement, and that no runoff shall cross any lot line onto another lot except
within a drainage easement. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-11: FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATER MAINS:
Adequate fire protection shall be required in accordance with the appropriate
fire district standards. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-1-12: LANDSCAPE BUFFER AREAS:
Landscape buffer areas, in accordance with
chapter 3 of this title, shall be required for the protection of residential
properties from streets classified as collectors, arterials, freeways/
expressways, waterways, or other features. Subdivision plats shall show the
location of all buffer areas. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-2: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Required improvements are those improvements subject to city regulation and
approvals as required in this chapter. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-2-1: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision
to have prepared by a registered engineer a complete set of construction plans,
including profiles, cross chapter, specifications and other supporting data,
for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved
with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final
plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public
agencies and all construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
public agencies' standards or specifications. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-2-2: GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
In lieu of the actual installation of the "required improvements" prior to the
city clerk signing the final plat, the city council may permit the subdivider
to provide a surety/financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination
of the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond
the requirements of any other agency responsible for the administration,
operation and maintenance of the applicable public improvement:
   A.   Cash Deposit, Certified Check, Certificate Of Deposit, Surety Bond, Or
Other Method Accepted By The City Of Eagle: A cash deposit, certified check,
certificate of deposit, surety bond, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit,
in the amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated
construction costs of the "required improvements" contained within the final
plat or public right of way shall be provided by the owner/developer and held
by the city until said construction is complete. Construction cost estimates
for the "required improvements" contained within a final plat or public right
of way shall be reviewed and approved by the city zoning administrator prior to
city acceptance of said surety. The surety initiation and extension fees shall
be established by resolution of the city council.
      In the case of cash deposits or certified checks, the subdivider may
provide for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the
certified check, to the extent of the cost of the completed portion of the
"required improvement", in accordance with a previously entered into agreement.
In the case of a certificate of deposit or an irrevocable bank letter of
credit, the surety shall be reduced accordingly as construction of the
"requirement improvements" subject to such surety is completed. Within thirty
(30) days from the city's approval of any such "required improvement", the city
shall release such surety, in whole or part, as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
   B.   Completion Time: All "required improvements" shall be completed within
one year from the date of acceptance of the surety/financial guarantee of
performance by the city for a plat. The zoning administrator may authorize a
delay in the completion of "required improvements" during the months of
November, December, January, February, and March due to weather conditions, if
at a minimum, the surety is extended for an amount of time equal to the delay
imposed by the zoning administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no final
occupancy permit will be issued for any residence or business, whichever is
applicable, until the sidewalk, sod, automatic irrigation, and street trees
required in section
11A-13D-1-6 of this article have been installed along the frontage of the lot
that said residence/business is located upon, unless an acceptable form of
financial assurance has been tendered and approved by the city. (Ord. 710, 1-
14-2014; amd. Ord. 924, 8-27-2024)
11A-13D-2-3: INSPECTIONS:
Before approving a final plat and construction plans and specifications for
"required improvements", the city may require an agreement between the
subdivider and the city council to provide for checking or inspecting the
construction and its conformity to the submitted plans. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13D-2-4: FAILURE TO COMPLETE PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION:
In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work
within the period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for
the completion of "required improvements", it shall be the responsibility of
the city council to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish
this, the city council shall appropriate the cash deposit, certified check, or
irrevocable bank letter of credit, or may take such steps as may be necessary
to require performance by the surety company, and as may be included in a
written agreement between the city council and the subdivider. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
ARTICLE E. SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11A-13E-1: Purpose And Summary Of Provisions
11A-13E-2: Supplementary Provisions
11A-13E-3: Hillside Subdivisions
11A-13E-4: Subdivision Within A Floodplain
11A-13E-5: Condominium Subdivisions
11A-13E-1: PURPOSE AND SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this article is to identify various types of developments that
normally pose special concerns to the elected officials when reviewing and
acting upon subdivision requests. This article outlines the plan submittal
requirements and design standards that shall be taken into consideration when
acting on special developments. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13E-2: SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article are in addition to the plan requirements, design
standards and improvement standards that are required by articles B, C and D of
this chapter. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13E-3: HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS:
All development in Spring Valley shall proceed in accordance with the grading
guidelines and hillside development standards, dated June 25, 2009, and
approved by city council on November 24, 2009, as the same may be amended from
time to time. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13E-4: SUBDIVISION WITHIN A FLOODPLAIN:
In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any subdivision within the
designated floodplain of the city shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the floodplain regulations of the city as now in effect or as may hereafter
be amended. Provided, notwithstanding any provision in the applicable
floodplain regulations, an alternate means of compliance in connection with
fill requirements will include the use of detention basin(s) and channelization
to offset the impacts of fill placed within an existing floodplain. Such
detention basin(s) shall provide a sufficient amount of storage of stormwater
runoff such that the postdevelopment flow rate will be no greater than the
predevelopment rate. In addition, the result of the development and drainage
improvements shall include a reduction in the existing flood hazard boundaries
through the CLOMR/LOMR approval process from FEMA and the city of Eagle. (Ord.
710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13E-5: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
Any person desiring to create a condominium subdivision as herein defined and
in accordance with title 55, chapter 15, Idaho Code shall submit all necessary
applications to the administrator for review and approval. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
ARTICLE F. SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11A-13F-1: Administration
11A-13F-2: Vacations And Dedications
11A-13F-3: Variances
11A-13F-4: Amendments
11A-13F-5: Enforcement And Penalties
11A-13F-6: Appeals
11A-13F-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The council shall appoint an administrator to carry out the provisions as
herein specified and to serve at the pleasure of the council. The administrator
shall receive and process all subdivision applications. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13F-2: VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Application For Vacation Or Dedication: Any property owner desiring to
vacate an existing subdivision, public right of way or easement shall complete
and file an application with the administrator. These provisions shall not
apply to the widening of any street which is shown in the comprehensive plan,
or the dedication of streets, rights of way or easements to be shown on a
recorded subdivision.
   B.   Administrative Action:
      1.   Action By Administrator: Upon receipt of the completed application,
the administrator shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon, shall
place the application on the agenda for consideration at the next regular
meeting of the commission which is held not less than fifteen (15) days after
the date of acceptance.
      2.   Recommendation By Commission: The commission shall review the
request and all agency responses and within thirty (30) days of the meeting at
which the issue was on the agenda, shall make a recommendation to the city
council for either approval, conditional approval or denial.
      3.   Action By Council:
         a.   Vacations: When considering an application for vacation
procedures, the city council shall establish a date for a public hearing and
give such public notice as required by law. The city council may approve, deny
or modify the application. Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated,
the city council shall provide adjacent property owners with a quitclaim deed
for the vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
         b.   Dedications: When considering an application for dedication
procedures, the city council may approve, deny or modify the application. When
a dedication is approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed
or a bond furnished assuring the construction prior to acceptance of the
dedication. To complete the acceptance of any dedication of land, the owner
shall furnish to the city council a deed describing and conveying such lands to
be recorded with the county recorder.
         c.   Decision: The council shall review the request and all agency
responses and commission recommendation, and within thirty (30) days of the
meeting at which the issue was on the agenda either approve, conditionally
approve or deny the request.
   C.   Dedication Of Streets: Within a proposed subdivision, arterial and
collector streets, as shown on the applicable PUMP, shall be dedicated to the
public in all cases. In general all other streets also shall be dedicated to
public use. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13F-3: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The commission may recommend to the city council a variance
from the provisions of this chapter on a finding that undue hardship results
from the strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements hereof or
that application of such provisions or requirements is impracticable.
   B.   Standards For Variances: No variance shall be favorably acted upon by
the city council unless there is a finding, upon recommendation by the
commission, as a result of a public hearing, that all of the following exist:
      1.   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
clearly be impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases, the subdivider shall
first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provision or requirement
involved.
      2.   Strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result
in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography,
other physical conditions or other such conditions which are not self-
inflicted, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement
of the objectives of this chapter.
      3.   The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the
property is situated.
      4.   Such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code.
      5.   Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of this chapter and the Spring Valley master plan. (Ord. 710, 1-14-
2014)
11A-13F-4: AMENDMENTS:
See section
11A-8-9 of this title. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13F-5: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement:
      1.   No subdivision plat required by this chapter or the Idaho Code shall
be admitted to the public land records of Ada County or recorded by the county
recorder until such subdivision plat has received final approval of the city
council.
      2.   No public board, agency, commission, official or other authority
shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the construction of any of
the public improvements required by this chapter until the final plat has
received the approval by the city council.
      3.   No permits for construction of any structure shall be issued on any
parcel or lot until it has been determined such parcel or lot meets the
requirements of this chapter.
      4.   The city attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal
action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this
chapter.
   B.   Violations And Penalties: Violations of any of the provisions of this
title or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
misdemeanor, and be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of the Eagle city
code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person
who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each
be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city council or any other public official or private citizen from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this
chapter or of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
11A-13F-6: APPEALS:
   A.   Final Decision Appeal: Any final decision by the zoning administrator
may be appealed to the city council. Within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the zoning administrator's written decision the appealing party shall
file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk before five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. or close of business, whichever occurs later, specifically identifying
which requirements are appealed to the city council including all reasons,
factual and legal, why the decision of the zoning administrator should be
overturned or modified.
   B.   Action By The City Council: Within twenty five (25) calendar days from
receipt of the written notice of appeal, the zoning administrator shall set a
hearing date for the appeal to be heard by the city council. The zoning
administrator and the city attorney shall provide the appellant and the city
council with a written response to the notice of appeal, including any other
documents filed by the appellant, at least three (3) calendar days prior to the
appeal hearing. After hearing the appeal, the city council may approve, approve
with supplementary conditions, or deny the appeal as presented. Within fourteen
(14) calendar days after a written decision has been rendered by the city
council, the zoning administrator shall provide the appellant with written
notice of the decision. (Ord. 710, 1-14-2014)
TITLE 11B
AVIMOR DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1
ZONING INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11B-1-1: Short Title
11B-1-2: Avimor Planned Development Zoning District Established, Purposes
11B-1-3: Applicability
11B-1-4: Interpretation, Scope Of Regulations
11B-1-5: Definitions
11B-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title 11B shall be known, cited and referred to as the Avimor Zoning
Ordinance. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-1-2: AVIMOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT ESTABLISHED, PURPOSES:
The Avimor Planned Development Zoning District (APD) is hereby established. The
Avimor Planned Development Zoning District is a separate and distinct zoning
district and is in addition to the City's zoning districts set forth in Chapter
2, Title 8 of the City Code. The purpose of this Title is to establish the
Avimor Planned Development Zoning District and to set forth the specific
development standards and administrative procedures that apply within the
Avimor Planned Development Zoning District. Furthermore, it is the purpose of
this Title and the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District to:
   A.   Provide for a mix of land uses;
   B.   Encourage flexibility in design and development to respond to market
demand and site-specific conditions while enhancing the economic viability and
quality;
   C.   Encourage creative and innovative land planning and design processes
that are sensitive to existing environmental conditions;
   D.   Provide for a phased and orderly development utilizing consistent
criteria;
   E.   Establish the permitted uses and minimum standards for each category of
residential and nonresidential use;
   F.   Establish responsibility for the development of essential public
services and the specific mechanisms by which they will be provided, created
and financed; and
   G.   Provide significant planning and economic benefits to the City
including, without limitation, by: i) creating quality housing, employment,
recreation and other land uses; and ii) providing for the design, construction,
acquisition, and/or installation of public infrastructure to support
anticipated development and benefitting surrounding areas. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Scope And Content: This Title governs the development and
administration of the land within the Avimor Planned Development Zoning
District.
   B.   Flexibility: This Title is intended to depict the general nature and
relative intensity of residential and nonresidential development allowed in the
Avimor Planned Development Zoning District, while allowing flexibility at the
time of detailed planning and platting so that the overall goals, policies,
purpose, and intent of the Eagle Comprehensive Plan can be achieved with this
Title.
   C.   Conflict Of Laws: The provisions of City Code shall govern all
standards or processes that are not specifically addressed or modified by this
Title. Any contradiction, inconsistency or ambiguity between the requirements
of this Title and any other provision of the City Code shall be governed and
controlled by this Title. The provisions of City Code Titles 8 and 9 do not
apply to land in the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District, as these
standards and processes are replaced and controlled by this Title. All
references within any applicable City Code Sections to City Code Titles 8 and 9
or generally to "this Title" shall be interpreted to mean the applicable
standards or regulations in this Title.
   D.   Applicable Highway Authority: All references in this Title or in other
applicable City Code sections to Ada County Highway District (ACHD) or Idaho
Transportation Department (ITD) shall mean the applicable transportation agency
or Local Highway Department having jurisdiction over the roadway at issue.
   E.   Development Plans: All development within the Avimor Planned
Development Zoning District shall be consistent with the Development Plans as
defined in this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-1-4: INTERPRETATION, SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations for the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District, as set
forth by this Title, shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to
each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
   A.   No Building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
Building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the Land Use District in which it is
located.
   B.   No Building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
      1.   To provide for greater height or bulk;
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of Lot Area; and
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other Open Spaces than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to
the provisions of this Title.
   C.   No yard or Lot existing at the effective date hereof shall be reduced
in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or
Lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum
requirements set forth herein.
   D.   No Building or structure, on a Lot under 2 acres in size, or part
thereof shall be erected or constructed except where the following conditions
have been satisfied:
      1.   Applicable streets may be dedicated to the Local Highway Department
as public streets and constructed as required by the Local Highway Department.
      2.   Sanitary restrictions are removed pursuant to Idaho Code Section 50-
1326.
      3.   Fire hydrants and water mains are provided, and operable, pursuant
to Section
11B-11D-11 of this Title.
      4.   Required street Signs are installed that adequately identify the
location of such Building for Emergency purposes.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023; amd. Ord. 895A, 7-25-2023)
11B-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this Title, certain terms or words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
      1.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
      2.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
      3.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
      4.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended",
"designed" or "arranged" to be used or occupied.
      5.   The word "day" as it relates to the computation of time means
calendar days and if time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required
date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Holiday observed by the city,
the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday or Holiday observed by the City. References to days are
calendar days unless otherwise stated.
   B.   The following words and terms, when used in this Title, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
                     A dwelling located on the same Lot as, and is subordinate to, the principal
                     residential dwelling, and which may be attached or detached from the principal
                     dwelling, and which provides Living Quarters with provisions for cooking (220v
                     wiring), eating, sanitation, and sleeping for occupants or guests of occupants of
                     the principal dwelling, their tenants or caregivers. An accessory dwelling may
ACCESSORY DWELLING   include a guesthouse, casita, or caretaker/domestic Unit and may be located in
UNIT:                the front, side or rear yard of the Lot or may be above a garage. Direct access
                     from the principal dwelling is not required. Accessory dwellings require a zoning
                     permit and approval by the Avimor Design Review Committee when modified or
                     developed separately from the principal dwelling. Accessory dwellings shall not
                     count towards the maximum densities as specified in this Title and the Avimor
                     Development Agreement.
                     A use or structure on the same Lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental
                     and subordinate to, the Principal Use or structure. Accessory Uses/structures
                     include, but are not limited to, detached carports and garages, covered parking
ACCESSORY USE OR     structures, trash enclosures, pool houses and cabanas, barns, corrals, stables,
STRUCTURE:           guard houses, storage sheds, Outdoor Storage structures, workshops, greenhouses,
                     microwave and satellite dish Antennas, and similar uses and structures, but do
                     not include Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory Uses shall require a zoning
                     permit and approval by the Avimor Design Review Committee when modified or
                     developed separately from the Principal Use.
                     An official having knowledge in the principles and practices of zoning who is
ADMINISTRATOR:       appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the Council, to administer this
                     Title. Duties and obligations of the Administrator may be delegated by the
                     Administrator to a qualified designee.
ADULT BUSINESS:      Establishments based primarily on materials or performances that depict,
                     describe, or relate to specified sexual activities.
AGGREGATE
PROCESSING, ASPHALT, A temporary facility or area for processing aggregate or batching concrete or
AND CONCRETE BATCH   asphalt.
PLANT:
                     The use of land for crop production, pasturage, animal and poultry husbandry and
                     the necessary Accessory Uses for parking, treating or storing of produce.
                     Agriculture does not include dairying or the maintenance of a commercial feedlot
AGRICULTURE:         or stockyard where large numbers of livestock are fed concentrated feeds,
                     particularly for the purpose of fattening for market, or uses defined as
                     feedlots, stockyards, dairy farms or CAFO's as defined by City Code or Idaho
                     State law.
                     A public right of way or private common Lot inclusive of an easement which
ALLEY:               provides vehicular access to the rear or side of a property and is primarily
                     intended to provide access for Alley loaded garages.
ALL-WEATHER          Hard Surface or Natural Surface as defined in this Chapter.
MATERIAL:
                     A Lot or Building where five or more dogs, cats, and other household domestic
ANIMAL DAYCARE:      animals are maintained, harbored, or cared for on a daily basis, not to include
                     overnight stays.
                     Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
ANTENNA:             electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional Antennas, such
                     as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional Antennas,
                     such as whip Antennas.
ART GALLERY:         An establishment for the display and/or retail sale of artwork and may include
                     studio facilities for creation of artistic works.
AUTO BODY SHOP:      A facility for automobile collision service, repair and painting.
                     Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor
AUTO GAS STATION:    vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail. Incidental minor
                     automotive repair and maintenance and an automatic Car Wash facility are also
                     permitted.
AUTO AND             The sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, motor homes, and travel
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE trailers, but not including repair work, except incidental warranty repair of
SALES:               same, to be displayed and sold on the premises.
AUTO REPAIR AND      A facility for the repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or
SERVICE SHOP         parts thereof, but excluding collision service, painting and steam cleaning of
(MAJOR):             vehicles. The term includes a facility which performs any repairs to vehicles of
                     any size, include those with a gross vehicle weight over 10,000 pounds.
                     A facility for the performance of minor repairs and service on vehicles of 10,000
                     pounds gross vehicle weight or less; such repairs and service are limited to
AUTO REPAIR AND      electronic tune ups, brake repairs (including drum turning), air conditioning
SERVICE SHOP         repairs, generator and starter repairs, tire repairs, front end alignments,
(MINOR):             battery recharging, lubrication, selling/installing minor parts and accessories,
                     other similar activities and repairing and installing other minor elements of an
                     automobile such as windshield wipers, hoses, windows, etc., but excluding engine,
                     transmission and differential repair or installation.
AUTO RENTAL AGENCY:  A facility for the rental of new or used automobiles and/or trucks. Vehicles kept
                     on the Lot for rental purposes are not considered to be outside storage.
                     A planned development that will contain a mix of residential, commercial,
AVIMOR:              employment, institutional, civic, service, recreational, and Open Space uses
                     within the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District and subject to this Title.
AVIMOR CONSERVATION  The individual responsible for the management of the Avimor Habitat Management
DIRECTOR:            Plan.
AVIMOR DESIGN REVIEW A committee established by the Master Developer to review and approve all
COMMITTEE:           development, Building and site improvement proposals consistent with the Avimor
                     Design Guidelines incorporated in Chapter 3 of this Title.
                     A document that shows, through the use of figures, photographs, and text,
AVIMOR DESIGN        specific period architectural styles, themes, and elements envisioned within
GUIDELINES:          Avimor and as may be amended from time to time pursuant to the Avimor Development
                     Agreement.
AVIMOR DEVELOPMENT   That certain Development Agreement between the City and Owner, as may be amended
AGREEMENT:           from time to time.
AVIMOR GRADING       That certain Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside Development Standards on file
GUIDELINES AND       with the City, as approved by the City and as may be amended from time to time
HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT pursuant to the Avimor Development Agreement.
STANDARDS:
AVIMOR HABITAT       That certain "Habitat Management Plan" on file with the City, as approved by the
MANAGEMENT PLAN:     City and as may be amended from time to time pursuant to the Avimor Development
                     Agreement.
AVIMOR MASTER        That certain "Master Drainage Report" on file with the City, as approved by the
DRAINAGE PLAN:       City and as may be amended from time to time pursuant to the Avimor Development
                     Agreement.
AVIMOR MASTER        That certain "Master Wastewater Report" on file with the City, as approved by the
WASTEWATER PLAN:     City and as may be amended from time to time pursuant to the Avimor Development
                     Agreement.
AVIMOR MASTER WATER  That certain "Municipal Water and Pressurized Irrigation System Master Plan-
AND PRESSURE         Avimor Development" on file with the City, as approved by the City and as may be
IRRIGATION SYSTEM    amended from time to time pursuant to the Avimor Development Agreement.
PLAN:
AVIMOR WATER         The entity that owns and operates the sewer treatment, irrigation and reuse water
RECLAMATION COMPANY: facilities that serve Avimor.
BANK / FINANCIAL     An establishment that provides retail banking services to individuals and
INSTITUTION:         businesses and may include Drive-Thru services. This classification does not
                     include businesses offering Check-Cashing facilities.
                     An establishment for which a license under Title 3, Chapter 2, Article A, B, and/
BAR / PUB /          or C of City Code is required and the principal business of which is the sale and
NIGHTCLUB:           consumption of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises and where food
                     may be available for consumption.
                     An owner-occupied facility providing overnight accommodations and breakfast food
BED AND BREAKFAST    service to guests for compensation, with no more than twelve (12) guests at any
FACILITY:            one time. No cooking shall be allowed in guestrooms and only breakfast food shall
                     be provided to guests. Bath facilities shall be shared by no more than two (2)
                     guestrooms.
                     An establishment for the manufacture of lager and ale; the use includes
BREWERY:             microbreweries. A brewery may include, but is not limited to, the following:
                     tasting rooms, barrel rooms, bottling rooms, tank rooms, laboratories, processing
                     structures, and offices.
BOISE COUNTY PHASE 1 An area within the Master Land Use Map that is already approved for subdivision
AREA:                platting by Boise County, Idaho, which area is depicted on the Boise County Phase
                     1 Subdivision Land Use Map in Chapter 3B of this Title.
BOISE COUNTY PHASE 1 The Subdivision Land Use Map for the Boise County Phase 1 Area in Chapter 3B of
SUBDIVISION LAND USE this Title, which designates the approved Sub-Use Districts within the Boise
MAP:                 County Phase 1 Area.
BUILDING:            Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or
                     protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
                     The portion of each property or Lot within which all improvements are built
BUILDING ENVELOPE:   including, but not limited to, structures, fences, flatwork, and swimming pools,
                     but excluding landscaping and driveways. On Lots over one (1) acre, fencing may
                     be located outside of the Building Envelope to contain animals, such as horses.
BUILDING MATERIALS / A facility for the storage, distribution, and sale of home, lawn and garden
LUMBER YARD:         supplies and construction materials such as brick, block, masonry, lumber and
                     other similar materials.
                     An establishment that provides washing and cleaning of passenger or recreational
CAR WASH:            vehicles by hand, by use of automated equipment operated by one or more
                     attendants, or by self-service facilities.
                     Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains and dedicated
CEMETERY:            for Cemetery purposes. Cemetery purposes include columbaria, crematoriums,
                     mausoleums, and mortuaries operated in conjunction with the Cemetery.
                     Cashing a check for consideration or extending a deferred deposit loan but does
                     not restrict the activities of depository institutions or persons who cash a
CHECK-CASHING:       check in a transaction that is incidental to the retail sale of goods or services
                     for consideration that does not exceed the greater of one percent of the amount
                     of the check or one dollar.
                     Any facility where children regularly receive care and supervision, usually
                     unaccompanied by the children's parents, guardians or custodians, and regardless
                     of whether the facility does or does not provide any instruction. This use
                     excludes the case of: a) the operator's children or legal wards or children
                     related by blood or marriage, b) occasional personal guests, and c) children aged
                     twelve (12) years and over. Any home, place, or facility providing overnight
CHILDCARE FACILITY:  custodial services for lodging or boarding for the occupants therein shall not be
                     considered a Childcare Facility.There are three (3) types of childcare
                     facilities:1.   Family daycare home: A Childcare Facility for six (6) or fewer
                     children. Babysitting services are an Accessory Use to residential
                     uses;2.   Group daycare facility: A Childcare Facility for seven (7) to twelve
                     (12) children; and3.   Daycare center: A Childcare Facility for thirteen (13) or
                     more children.
                     An establishment that by design and construction is primarily intended for
CHURCH / PLACE OF    conducting organized religious services, meetings, and associated activities and
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY:  that is recognized as a religious corporation or society of the state of Idaho
                     with a state tax exempt status in accord with Idaho Code Section 63-602B.
                     Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal
CIRCUS AND CARNIVAL: exhibitions, or similar activities, which may be conducted outdoors, or in a tent
                     or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven (7) days. This classification
                     excludes events conducted in a permanent Entertainment Facility.
CITY:                The City of Eagle, Idaho.
CITY CODE:           The municipal code of the City of Eagle.
                     A Building used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or
CLINIC:              injured persons or those who are in need of medical and surgical attention, but
                     which Building does not provide board, room or regular Hospital care. A Clinic
                     includes urgent care facilities.
                     Publicly or privately owned and managed facilities for meetings, conventions and
CIVIC USES:          other community, public safety, and multi-purpose uses. Typical uses include
                     Community Centers, governmental offices and public safety facilities.
                     A Building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by an organized
                     association of persons for a social, literary, political, educational or
CLUB OR LODGE:       recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests,
                     but not including any organization, group or association the principal activity
                     of which is to render a service usually and ordinarily carried on as a business.
                     The use of a single Tower to support more than one wireless telecommunication
COLLOCATION:         service provider's equipment, or the mounting of an Antenna to a preexisting
                     structure.
COMMISSION:          The zoning, planning and zoning, joint zoning or joint planning and zoning
                     commission with individuals appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Council.
                     Land within a development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public
                     use but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the
COMMON AREA:         residents of the development. The Common Area may include complementary
                     structures and improvements such as a Community Center, play ground area,
                     community mail boxes, and tennis courts.
COMMUNITY            A community room, clubhouse, recreation center or similar area for use by
ASSOCIATION          residents or a residential development.
BUILDING/FACILITY:
COMMUNITY GARDEN:    A piece of land gardened or cultivated by a group of people individually or
                     collectively.
COMMUNITY            A facility that provides information about Avimor to the public and prospective
INFORMATION CENTER:  residents or buyers and may include a Sales Office.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:  The City of Eagle 2017 Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to Resolution No. 17-
                     24 in accordance with Idaho Code Section 67-6508.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICE, A mobile home, travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or other structure used as a
TEMPORARY:           temporary office in conjunction with a construction project.
CONSTRUCTION YARD,   Any area used on a temporary basis for the storage or processing of materials and
TEMPORARY:           supplies used in the actual construction of a project.
                     An establishment providing Retail Sales of food, beverages and small convenience
                     items typically found in a store with long or late hours of operation and may
                     include twenty-four (24) hour facilities. A Convenience Store operation may also
                     include fuel sales, but shall then be regulated as an auto gas station. Such
CONVENIENCE STORE:   establishment is typically open between six (6) a.m. and eleven (11) p.m. An
                     establishment that is open before six (6) a.m. or after eleven (11) p.m. is
                     subject to a conditional use permit. If the establishment is located in a Highway
                     Mixed Use Zone, then no permits are required to operate outside of the before-
                     mentioned times.
COUNCIL:             The City Council of the City of Eagle.
DARK SKY:            Denoting or located in a place where the darkness of the night sky is relatively
                     free of interference from artificial light.
                     The number of Dwelling Units per acre of total land to be developed including
DENSITY, GROSS:      public right of way, private streets, and Common Area Open Space; excluding
                     Floodway.
                     The number of Dwelling Units per acre of land to be developed including only the
DENSITY, NET:        land devoted to residential uses, excluding public right of way, private streets,
                     Common Area Open Space, and Floodway.
DENSITY, PROJECT:    The total maximum gross residential density for Avimor (residential Units per
                     gross acre) is 0.5 Dwelling Units per gross acre.
                     Collectively, the Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside Development Standards,
                     the Avimor Habitat Management Plan, the Avimor Master Wastewater Plan, the Avimor
DEVELOPMENT PLANS:   Master Drainage Report, the Avimor Master Water and Pressurized Irrigation System
                     Plan, the Avimor Design Guidelines, the Master Land Use Map, and the Open Space
                     Plan.
                     An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or method of sale
                     encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while
DRIVE-THRU:          remaining in their vehicles. The term "Drive-Thru" also includes automated
                     tellers, banks, cleaners, pharmacies, Restaurants and other establishments
                     providing food or beverages, Car Washes, gasoline service stations, and quick
                     lubrication.
DRY CLEANER /        A business that provides laundry or dry-cleaning services or facilities for
LAUNDROMAT:          clothing and other fabric articles and may include Drive-Thru service. Dry
                     cleaning and Laundromat plant operations shall be located off-site.
DWELLING, MULTI-     A Building consisting of two (2) or more attached Dwelling Units where all such
FAMILY:              Units are located on the same Lot with varying arrangements of entrances and
                     party walls, including Units that are located one over the other.
                     A Building consisting of two (2) or more Dwelling Units attached to one another
DWELLING, SINGLE-    by a party wall, with each dwelling located on a separate Lot and having its own
FAMILY ATTACHED:     address and water meter. An Accessory Dwelling Unit attached to a single-family
                     detached dwelling does not create a single-family attached dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-    A Building on a single Lot consisting of one Dwelling Unit, which is not attached
FAMILY DETACHED:     to any other Dwelling Unit, other than an Accessory Dwelling Unit.
                     A principal (not accessory) structure, Building or portion thereof that is used
DWELLING UNIT:       exclusively for human habitation including living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
                     sanitation.
                     Occurrence or imminent threat of a disaster or condition threatening life of
EMERGENCY:           property that requires immediate action to save lives and protect property or to
                     avert or lessen the threat of a disaster.
                     Provisions of Emergency medical care transportation, fire protection and police
EMERGENCY SERVICES:  protection, including incidental storage and maintenance and parking of Emergency
                     and Emergency related vehicles.
                     An indoor or outdoor commercial facility or area for sport, entertainment, games
ENTERTAINMENT        of skill, or recreation to the general public for a fee. Examples include, but
FACILITY:            are not limited to, bowling alleys, roller- and ice-skating rinks, miniature Golf
                     Courses, golf driving ranges (not associated with a Golf Course), game courts,
                     movie theaters, concert halls, amphitheaters, video game arcades.
                     A facility for the care, training, riding or boarding of horses and may include
                     one or more barns, riding arenas, corrals, show rings, exercise areas, tack
EQUESTRIAN CENTER:   rooms, pastures, meeting rooms, staff lodging and other accessory structures or
                     facilities associated with such use. Such facility may be public or private and
                     may provide for resident or private boarding for a fee.
                     A residential Lot designated with the preliminary plat upon which horses may be
EQUESTRIAN LOT:      kept and may contain a barn, riding area, pasture, and other ancillary facilities
                     for the sole use of the Lot owner.
                     An exhibition hall, conference center, convention center, civic center,
                     performing arts center, or other large public Building, typically offering enough
EVENT CENTER:        Floor Area to accommodate hundreds to thousands of attendees. Can also include
                     outdoor Open Space to host public social events, corporate conferences, industry
                     trade shows, entertainment spectacles, conventions, and concerts for the
                     surrounding municipal and/or metropolitan areas.
                     Buildings and premises used for the raising and processing of farm products in an
FARM:                agricultural setting by an individual or an association which operates and
                     manages the Farm either as owner or tenant at a site used for a Farm residence
                     and associated farm accessory buildings.
                     A commercial event, typically outdoors, held periodically or on a recurring
                     basis, where farmers and other vendors sell fresh agricultural products and
FARMERS' MARKET:     similar merchandise directly to the public. It may provide arts and crafts booths
                     accessory to the produce and plant life booths. Food and beverages may also be
                     sold. Such use shall require a City vendor's permit. This use does not include a
                     flea market or swap meet.
                     A kind of Emergency exit to provide escape in the event of a fire. These are
FIRE ESCAPE:         usually mounted to the exterior of a building. However, occasionally may be
                     located in the interior of the Building.
                     A conceptual plan prepared by the Master Developer pursuant to the Avimor
                     Development Agreement depicting and summarizing Master Developer's anticipated
                     development plans for the ensuing five year period that includes: (i) areas to be
FIVE-YEAR PLAN:      graded, (ii) major utility and roadway improvements, (iii) areas to be platted;
                     (iv) anticipated Land Use District and Land Use SubDistrict designations for
                     areas to be platted; (v) approximate number of residential units to be
                     constructed; and (vi) anticipated commercial development.
                     A space within a Building for uses that generally require substantial amounts of
                     storage and working area as well as office and/or showroom space. Loading docks
                     shall be at the rear of the structure, and loading ramps shall be a maximum of
                     two feet (2') high to discourage tractor trailer use. Examples include, but are
                     not limited to, supply storage, computer server area, laboratories, lighting/
FLEX SPACE:          plumbing fixture showrooms, Research and Development, small merchandise assembly,
                     and low intensity sales and distribution facilities. Buildings may be comprised
                     of several Flex Spaces. The Gross Floor Area ratio of each Building used as "Flex
                     Space" shall be a maximum of thirty thousand (30,000) s.f. Hours of operation
                     shall be limited to between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
                     This use is not intended to permit Warehousing or Manufacturing that has high
                     levels of truck activity.
                     The ratio of the total Floor Area of a Building (or Buildings) to the area of the
                     Lot or Parcel on which the building stands. The total square footage on all
                     floors of all Buildings on a certain Lot or Parcel (building area) is divided by
                     Lot or Parcel gross square footage (site area). As a formula, FAR = (building
FLOOR AREA:          area)/ (gross site area). For purposes of this definition, the total Floor Area
                     (square footage) is measured from outside wall to outside wall and includes the
                     area of all floors of the main structure and accessory structures, but excludes
                     underground garages, uncovered terraces, patios, atriums Porches or balconies,
                     covered Porches, patios and balconies enclosed on not more than two sides, and
                     chimneys.
                     Retail Sales of food and beverages for off site preparation and consumption.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE    Typical uses include grocery stores, delicatessens, and bakeries, and exclude
SALES:               Convenience Stores and catering services. Such uses may also include Liquor
                     Stores.
GOLF COURSE AND      A tract of land laid out for playing the game of golf that may include a
RELATED SERVICES:    clubhouse, dining and snack bars, pro shop, and practice facilities.
GROSS ACRES:         The total acres that are included in a preliminary plat.
                     The total amount of Floor Area within a Building, as measured from the inside
                     surface of the exterior walls, but excluding any Floor Area devoted to the
GROSS FLOOR AREA     following:1.   Mechanical, electrical, or communication equipment or uses as may
(GFA):               be required for the operation of the Building, including elevators and
                     stairwells;2.   Parking and circulation space for motor vehicles;
                     and3.   Exterior balconies.
                     Hard surfaces such as sidewalks, pavers, patios, courtyards, and planters
HARDSCAPE:           consisting of concrete, tile, stone, brick and other similar man-made materials
                     used in lieu of, or in conjunction with, landscape.
HARD SURFACE:        Refers to Tread materials such as concrete, asphalt, pavers, and rigid permeable
                     composites.
HEALTH CLUB:         An establishment offering services including, but not limited to, exercise and
                     physical conditioning, spa related services, and weight counseling.
                     The height of a Building as measured from the finished floor elevation closest to
                     the corresponding finished grade to the top of the roof. The height of the
HEIGHT, BUILDING:    Building may follow the same slope as the contour of the Lot (grade adaptive
                     architecture). Top of roof means ridgeline or the highest point of any
                     architectural element concealing roof top equipment.
HEIGHT, PERSONAL     The height of personal wireless facilities, spires, poles, Antennas, steeples,
WIRELESS FACILITIES, Towers, and similar structures shall be determined by measuring the vertical
SPIRES, POLES,       distance from the point of contact with the ground to the highest point of the
ANTENNAS, STEEPLES,  structure, including any vertical projection thereof. When mounted upon other
TOWERS, AND SIMILAR  structures, the combined height of the personal wireless facility, spire, pole,
STRUCTURES:          Antenna, steeple, Tower, and/or similar structure, including the height of the
                     structure mounted upon, shall be used to determine height.
HELIPORTS:           Pads and facilities enabling takeoffs and landings by helicopters.
                     An Accessory Use of a Dwelling Unit and property that is:1.   Used for gainful
                     employment or commercial purposes that involves the provision, assembly,
                     processing or sale of goods and/or services; and is2.   Incidental and secondary
HOME OCCUPATION:     to the residential use of the structure and land and does not change the
                     essential residential character of the Dwelling Unit/property; but3.   Excludes
                     uses that provide shelter or lodging to persons who are not members of the family
                     residing in the dwelling Unit.
                     An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities
                     for the medical or surgical care of patients for twenty-four (24) hours or more.
                     This classification includes incidental facilities for outpatient treatment, as
HOSPITAL:            well as training, research, emergency care and administrative services for
                     patients and employees. The term Hospital does not include Convalescent, Nursing
                     or boarding homes and does not include institutions devoted to the care of the
                     mentally ill or drug or alcohol addicted.
                     Establishments offering rooms as temporary lodging to guests. Hotels typically
                     have eating and drinking service and a dining room where meals are served and may
HOTEL AND MOTEL:     contain meeting/conference facilities. Hotels and Motels are considered a non-
                     residential use and are thus not considered residential Dwelling Units within the
                     context of any Density calculations or allowable densities set forth in this
                     Title and the Avimor Development Agreement.
                     An outdoor space where waste and discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
                     sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or handled, including auto
JUNKYARD:            salvage yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places where such uses
                     are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed Building, or salvaged
                     materials incidental to Manufacturing operations.
                     (For hobby, commercial or boarding purposes): Any Lot or premises or portion on
                     which five (5) or more dogs, cats and other household domestic animals are
KENNEL AND PET SHOP: maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in return for
                     compensation or kept for sale including privately or publicly owned, operated or
                     managed dog pounds.
                     An establishment providing medical or dental laboratory services, or
LABORATORY:          establishments with less than two thousand (2,000) s.f providing photographic,
                     analytical, or testing services.
                     Areas within the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District, designated with each
LAND USE DISTRICT:   preliminary plat, including: (1) Village Center; (2) Mixed Use/Commercial; (3)
                     Village Residential; (4) Foothills Residential; (5) Village One and (6) Open
                     Space. See also, Sub-Use District definition.
                     Any establishment or Building set aside for the repository or retrieval of
LIBRARY:             information available for the public or patrons to make use of for all kinds of
                     research and reading, including rooms for meetings.
                     An establishment for the retail or wholesale sales of packaged liquor and alcohol
LIQUOR STORE:        and where no consumption takes place on the premises. Such use shall be regulated
                     by City Code and Idaho Code.
LIVE/WORK:           A Dwelling Unit that contains a commercial component anywhere in the Unit that
                     may accommodate employees and walk-in-trade.
                     A structure located on the same Lot as, and is subordinate to, the principal
                     residential dwelling, and which may be attached or detached from the principal
                     dwelling, and which may provide living accommodations with provisions for eating,
                     sanitation, and sleeping for occupants, or guests of occupants of the principal
LIVING QUARTERS,     dwelling, their domestic employees, tenants or caregivers, but does not include
ACCESSORY:           cooking facilities (220v wiring). Accessory Living Quarters may include a
                     guesthouse, casita, or caretaker/domestic Unit and may be located in the front,
                     side or rear yard of the Lot or may be above a garage. Direct access from the
                     principal dwelling is not required. Accessory Living Quarters are not considered
                     Dwelling Units and do not count toward maximum Density calculations.
LOADING SPACE, OFF   Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pick ups and deliveries, scaled
STREET:              to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when
                     required Off Street Parking Spaces are filled.
LOCAL HIGHWAY        The applicable highway authority.
DEPARTMENT:
                     A Parcel, plot, Unit, tract, or other land area of sufficient size to meet
LOT:                 minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and created by
                     subdivision for sale, transfer, or lease.
                     The size of the footprint(s) of a Building(s) and/or structure(s) on a Lot
LOT COVERAGE:        divided by the size of the Parcel, expressed as a decimal number. The Lot
                     Coverage is used in calculating the intensity of use of a Parcel for a
                     development project.
                     The front of a Lot shall be construed to be the portion adjacent to the street,
                     except for Alley load homes designed to face each other with Common Area
LOT FRONTAGE:        pedestrian access between fronts. In that case the front of the Lot shall be the
                     property line opposite of the Alley and adjacent to the Common Area pedestrian
                     access.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA    The area of a Lot is computed exclusive of any portion of the right of way of any
OF:                  public or private street.
LOT WIDTH:           Lot Width shall be determined as follows: The distance between side Lot lines
                     measured at a point midway between the front and rear Lot lines.
                     Industrial uses that are usually controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet
MANUFACTURING,       and free of objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor or
LIGHT:               dust; operating and storing within enclosed structures and generating little
                     industrial traffic and no nuisances.
MASTER DEVELOPER:    Avimor Development, LLC, an Idaho limited liability company, and all its
                     successors in title and interest.
MASTER LAND USE MAP: That certain land use map for Avimor on file with the City, as approved by the
                     City and as may be amended from time to time pursuant to this Title.
MORTUARY / FUNERAL   A facility where services and/or ceremonies are held in conjunction with human
HOME:                burial or cremation. Crematories may be an Accessory Use.
MOTION PICTURE /     A facility for the making, broadcasting, and/or recording of movie, radio, or
RADIO / TELEVISION   television productions.
PRODUCTION FACILITY:
NATIVE SURFACE:      Refers to Tread materials made from soil, aggregate, and rock found within close
                     proximity of the finished path.
                     Refers to Tread materials made of stone and other natural materials that have
NATURAL SURFACE:     been engineered for specific applications such as gravel, road mix, decomposed
                     granite and a crusher fines.
NON-DWELLING UNIT:   A structure, Building or portion thereof that is not intended for human
                     habitation.
                     Land, Building or combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, and
NURSERY / SOD FARM,  transplanting of live trees, shrubs, plants or sod offered for retail sale to the
RETAIL:              general public on the premises including products used for gardening or
                     landscaping.
                     Land, Building or a combination thereof for the storage, cultivation,
NURSERY / SOD FARM,  transplanting of live trees, shrubs, plants or sod offered for commercial sale to
WHOLESALE:           professional landscape businesses and members of such businesses and not for
                     retail sale to the general public.
NURSING /            An establishment providing care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis for persons
CONVALESCENT HOME /  requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical
TRANSITIONAL         or emergency medical services. This classification also includes senior assisted
HOUSING:             living facilities with provisions for shared kitchen facilities and rooms with
                     private bathrooms.
                     An Office of a firm or organization providing professional, executive,
OFFICE, BUSINESS AND management, or administrative services. This classification includes medical/
PROFESSIONAL:        dental laboratories incidental to an Office use but excludes bank/financial
                     institution.
                     Means Oil and Gas or both. "Oil and gas" refers to not only to Oil and Gas in
                     combination with each other but also generally to oil, gas, casinghead gas, gas-
OIL AND GAS:         distillate or other hydrocarbons, or any combination of combinations thereof,
                     which may be found in or produced from a common source or supply of oil, Oil and
                     Gas, or gas-distillate.
OPEN SPACE:          Land within the development that is designated and intended for active and
                     passive recreation, for residents and/or public enjoyment.
   DEVELOPED OPEN Open Space that consists of irrigated open space. These areas mostly consist of
SPACE:               lawns, shrubs, and planted vegetation.
   NATURAL OPEN   Open Space that is undeveloped land, preserved in its natural state.
SPACE:
   REGIONAL OPEN  Open Space that consists of parks and green spaces for use by the public.
SPACE:
   COMMUNITY OPEN Open Space, including developed and Natural Open Space, for the use of Avimor
SPACE:               residents only.
OPEN SPACE PLAN:     That certain open space map for Avimor on file with the City, as approved by the
                     City and as may be amended from time to time pursuant to this Title.
OPEN VIEW FENCE:     A fence constructed of metal pickets or other approved material that allows full
                     or partial viewing through the fence.
                     The storage of goods, wares, merchandise, equipment, vehicles, materials or
OUTDOOR STORAGE:     supplies in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours in an open area.
                     The term Outdoor Storage shall include material that is kept under a pole barn
                     structure or any structure that is less than fully enclosed.
                     A legal entity created by the Master Developer for the purpose of managing and
OWNERS' ASSOCIATION: operating common areas and facilities within Avimor for the use of its members
                     through assessments of its members, which may include the Avimor Residential
                     Community Association and the Avimor Commercial Properties Association.
PARCEL:              A designated tract or area of land which is unplatted or as otherwise permitted
                     by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a Unit.
PARKING LOT /        A Parking Lot or Garage offering short-term or long-term parking to the public
PARKING GARAGE:      and which may also include a fee.
                     An area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both
PARKING SPACE:       sides, together with properly related access to a public street or Alley and
                     maneuvering room.
PARKING SPACE, OFF   A Parking Space that is located outside of any street or Alley right of way. Off
STREET:              Street Parking Spaces are allowed to count towards the parking requirements of a
                     specific use.
PARKING SPACE, ON    A Parking Space that is located along or within a street or Alley right of way.
STREET:              On Street Parking Spaces are allowed to count towards the parking requirements of
                     multi-family dwellings and commercial uses.
PATHWAYS AND TRAILS: Are areas improved to create non-motorized routes, loops and courses. For the
                     purpose of this Title these terms are, in most cases, interchangeable.
                     An establishment engaged in the buying or selling of merchandise, including
PAWN SHOP:           minimal numbers of used autos, and offering loans secured by personal property.
                     This definition does not include the sale of new autos unless the business is in
                     conjunction with and on the premises of a new auto dealership.
                     A financial guarantee by a subdivider or developer with the City in the amount of
PERFORMANCE BOND OR  the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical
SURETY BOND:         improvements, according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by
                     the agreement.
                     Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers services to the general
PERSONAL SERVICE:    public such as shoe repair, watch repair, electronics and appliance repair (no
                     Outdoor Storage), barbershops, beauty parlors, day spa, massage therapy, dog
                     groomers without a Kennel, and similar activities.
PORCH:               A covered outdoor space defined by Building walls and guardrails at the front,
                     side or rear of a residence with one or more access points into the residence.
                     Portable, non-potable, domestic water system, non-potable irrigation system,
PUMP STATION:        wastewater pumps, and sewer reuse and collection systems that are used to serve
                     the project.
RADIO AND TELEVISION A facility used to transmit television and radio signals and shows/programs.
BROADCAST STATION:
                     A facility that provides a variety of recreational facilities and programs for
                     community residents or the general public. Such facilities may include swimming
RECREATION /         pools, indoor and outdoor sports courts, exercise facilities and classes, spa
COMMUNITY CENTER:    facilities, locker rooms, meeting rooms, dance studios, game rooms, arts and
                     crafts rooms, a Restaurant and snack bar, bar, banquet facilities, lounge area
                     and other similar uses. Recreation Centers include YMCA's, teen centers, and
                     similar facilities and may also include Entertainment Facilities or Health Clubs.
RECYCLING / SOLID    A facility that is not a Junkyard and in which recoverable resource materials,
WASTE TRANSFER       such as paper products, glassware, and metal cans are collected, sorted,
CENTER:              flattened, crushed, or bundled within a completely enclosed structure prior to
                     shipment to others who use such resource materials to manufacture new products.
                     An establishment primarily engaged in the research, development, testing, and
                     production of high technology electronic, industrial or scientific products or
RESEARCH AND         commodities for sale, but prohibits uses that may be objectionable by reason of
DEVELOPMENT:         production of offensive odor, dust, noise, vibration, or storage of hazardous
                     materials. Examples of Research and Development establishments include
                     biotechnology, chemical, pharmaceutical, medical, electrical, transportation, and
                     engineering firms and computer component manufacturers.
                     A destination point for visitors that generally provides overnight accommodations
                     and recreation, fitness and spa facilities for persons on vacation including
                     timeshare and vacation clubs. A Resort is self-contained and provides Personal
                     Services customarily furnished at Hotels, including the serving of meals and
RESORT:              meeting/conference facilities. Buildings and structures in a Resort complement
                     the scenic qualities of the location in which the Resort is situated. Resorts are
                     considered non-residential uses and are thus not considered residential Dwelling
                     Units within the context of any Density calculations or allowable densities set
                     forth in this Title and the Avimor Development Agreement.
                     Any land, building or part thereof, other than a Bed And Breakfast Facility,
                     where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses as
RESTAURANT:          café, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room. Breweries are
                     allowed within restaurants, whether operated by the restaurateur or by a separate
                     entity, and shall be allowed under the same use classification as the restaurant
                     when operated within a restaurant. .
                     The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under another use
                     classification. This classification includes department stores, clothing stores,
                     drugstores, video stores, furniture stores, and businesses retailing the
                     following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras,
                     photographic supplies, printing and copy supplies and service, electronic
RETAIL SALES:        equipment, music, pets and pet supplies, sporting goods, bicycles, kitchen
                     utensils, hardware, appliances, artwork, art supplies and services, antiques,
                     collectibles, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor coverings, Office
                     supplies, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding services and
                     installation) , and other similar items, but excluding Building Material/Lumber
                     Yards. This definition also includes stores and establishments for the rental of
                     small tools and equipment.
ROADSIDE STAND:      A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural
                     and related products, the majority of which have been grown on adjacent land.
RODEO:               A public performance featuring bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling, bull
                     riding or similar activities.
SALES OFFICE/        The Temporary Use of a mobile home, travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or
TRAILER, TEMPORARY:  Dwelling Unit within a development project as a sales or rental Office for the
                     project.
                     A one-time, temporary sale that is conducted for less than thirty (30) days
SEASONAL SALE:       customarily prior to or in conjunction with a specific holiday and or seasonal
                     event.
                     A commercial or public-school providing instruction solely in professional skills
SCHOOL, BUSINESS:    including, but not limited to, business management, accounting, secretarial
                     skills, sales, marketing and merchandising.
SCHOOL, COLLEGE AND  An educational institution authorized by the State of Idaho to award associate,
UNIVERSITY:          baccalaureate or higher degrees or post high school certifications or licenses.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY/  A public or private educational institution having a curriculum comparable to
MIDDLE/HIGH:         that required in the public schools of the State of Idaho.
SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL/  A commercial or public establishment offering training in a skill or trade to be
TECHNICAL:           pursued as a career.
                     The required distance from a Building on a Lot or parcel to a property line
SETBACK:             required to be left open and unoccupied by Buildings. Improvements such as
                     sidewalks, driveways, Parking Lots, walkways, Access Roads, Hardscape and walls
                     are allowed to be located within Setbacks.
                     A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and/or managed as
                     a unit and typically containing one hundred thousand (100,000) to three hundred
SHOPPING CENTER,     thousand (300,000) s.f of gross leasable space designed to serve the needs of the
COMMUNITY:           community. A Community Shopping Center is typically anchored by supermarkets,
                     super drugstores, and discount department stores and sometimes contains big box
                     retailers selling such items as apparel, home improvement/furnishings, toys,
                     electronics or sporting goods.
                     A group of commercial establishments planned, developed, owned and/or managed as
SHOPPING CENTER,     a unit and typically containing thirty thousand (30,000) to one hundred and fifty
NEIGHBORHOOD:        (150,000) s.f of gross leasable space and designed to provide convenience
                     shopping for the day-to-day needs of consumers in the neighborhood. A
                     Neighborhood Shopping Center is typically anchored by a supermarket or drugstore.
                     A fully enclosed and secure facility designed and operated for the use of
SHOOTING RANGE/GUN   pistols, rifles, shotguns and any other similar firearm. May include ancillary
CLUB (INDOOR):       retail use for sale of merchandise, guns, ammunition, etc. This facility shall be
                     designed to contain all projectiles fired within a portion of the structure and
                     meet all applicable state and federal laws.
                     An area designed and operated for the use of rifles, shotguns, pistols,
                     silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, archery, or any other similar sport
SHOOTING RANGE/GUN   shooting. In the case of shotgun sports utilizing portable target throwers and
CLUB (OUTDOOR):      shooting positions, the range area shall be deemed to encompass the entire parcel
                     of real property whereupon shooting activities may be safely conducted, provided
                     that shortfall occurs entirely upon the property of the person owning or
                     controlling the range.
                     Any display or device consisting of attached or painted letters, symbols or
SIGN:                designs, and is intended to communicate business identification, advertisement,
                     announcement, direction or other message or attract, distract, hold, direct or
                     focus attention.
                     Facilities that are typically privately owned and maintained, do not conform with
SITE DRIVEWAY AND    public street design standards and are located on-site, serve an individual
ACCESS ROAD:         development (occasionally with separately owned Lots) and do not serve as public
                     streets either by function or appearance.
                     Utilitarian outdoor elements intended for pedestrian use such as benches, trash
SITE FURNISHINGS:    receptacles, public telephones, newspaper racks, bollards, drinking fountains,
                     bike racks, parcel delivery service and postal boxes, lighting standards, and
                     other such furnishings.
                     A facility used exclusively for one or more of the following: (a) the treatment
SPECIAL CARE         of alcohol or drug dependency; (b) the housing and care of persons with physical
FACILITY:            or mental illness that requires them to be confined in an institutional facility
                     as allowed by Idaho Code.
                     An event or happening organized by any person which will generate or invite over
                     fifty (50) participants and/or spectators, for a particular and limited purpose
SPECIAL EVENT:       and time, including, but not limited to, musical and dance performances, arts and
                     craft shows, artifact displays, holiday events, fun runs, roadway foot races,
                     fundraising/charitable events, bikeathons, parades, and fairs. Special Events may
                     occur on public or private property.
                     An event or happening organized by the Master Developer or the Owner's
                     Association that will generate or invite participants and/or spectators from
SPECIAL EVENT        Avimor or spectators from the general public, for a particular and limited
(AVIMOR):            purpose and time, including, but not limited to, musical and dance performances,
                     arts and craft shows, artifact displays, holiday events, fun runs, roadway foot
                     races, fundraising/charitable events, bikeathons, parades, and fairs. Special
                     Events may occur on public or private property.
SPORTING EVENT:      An event often held over multiple days, featuring competition in many different
                     sports among organized teams of athletes or professionals.
                     All of the plant material, walkways, walls, community monumentation and street
STREETSCAPE:         furnishing adjacent to a roadway that establish the visual character of the
                     street.
                     A conceptual land use plan for a sub-area of the Master Land Use Map to provide
                     development guidance by identifying: (i) the anticipated location and size of
                     Sub-Use Districts for future development; (ii) general development sequencing;
SUB-AREA PLAN (SAP): (iii) significant natural features and slopes greater than twenty-five percent;
                     (iv) anticipated locations for regional or community facilities; and (v) the
                     anticipated location of regional pathways and arterial street and collector
                     streets for regional planning, design, and infrastructure continuity.
SUBDIVISION LAND USE A map submitted by a subdivider in connection with a preliminary plat application
MAP:                 finally designating the specific Sub-Use Districts within the area being platted.
                     A proposed Final Plat shall be deemed to be in Substantial Conformance with an
                     approved Preliminary Plat if the number of buildable Lots proposed in the Final
SUBSTANTIAL          Plat is within twenty percent (20%), plus or minus, of the approved Preliminary
CONFORMANCE:         Plat and there is a twenty-five percent (25%) or less deviation in dimensional
                     standards as shown on the approved Preliminary Plat. This definition of
                     Substantial Conformance should be interpreted to provide flexibility in Final
                     Plat design standards.
                     One (1) or more Lots identified as "Super Pad(s)" on a plat for grading and/or
                     further development. Such Super Pad(s) will be graded and will have adequate
SUPER PAD:           roads and utilities stubbed to such Lots in preparation for replatting. Such
                     Super Pad(s) are not considered buildable Lots until replatted as provided in
                     this Title.
                     A specific use district designated within each Land Use District where certain
                     land uses are allowed, conditionally allowed, or prohibited and specific
                     development standards are provided. The Sub-Use Districts are: (1) Rural
                     Residential; (2) Estate Residential; (3) Single-Family Detached 1 (SF1); (4)
                     Single-Family Detached 2 (SF2); (5) Single-Family Detached 3 (SF3); (6) Single-
                     Family Zero Lot Line (SFZL); (7) Single-Family Special Lot (SFSL); (8) Single-
SUB-USE DISTRICT:    Family Attached (SFA); (9) Low Density Multi-Family (MF1); (10) Medium Density
                     Multi-Family (MF2); (11) High Density MultiFamily (MF3) (12) Village Commercial
                     (VCOM); (13) Mixed Use (MU); (14) Highway Mixed Use (HMU); (15) Neighborhood
                     Commercial (NC); (16) Community Commercial (CC); (17) Reserve (RE); (18) Cottage
                     (CO); (19) Phase 1 Mixed Use (P1MU); (20) Community Services (CS); (21) Community
                     Open Space (COS); and Regional Open Space (ROS). Table 2.2 of this Title
                     identifies which Sub-Use Districts are allowed in each Land Use District.
TITLE:               Title 11B of the City Code.
                     Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, similar structure, or combination
                     thereof, with a "height", as defined in this Title, in excess of fifteen feet
TOWER:               (15'), including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended
                     primarily for the purpose of mounting an Antenna, meteorological device, or
                     similar apparatus above grade.
TREAD:               The finished usable surface of a pathway or trail.
                     A residence that provides a space for occupants making up a household to live and
UNIT:                eat. Each Unit shall count towards the maximum Density as specified in this Title
                     and the Avimor Development Agreement.
                     A use or structure that is incidental and subordinate to an established Principal
                     Use of a property and is located on the same Lot as the Principal Use. Accessory
                     Uses/structures include, but are not limited to, detached carports and garages,
                     covered parking structures, trash enclosures, pool houses and cabanas, barns,
USE, ACCESSORY:      corrals, stables, caretaker's quarters, guard houses, storage sheds, Outdoor
                     Storage structures, microwave and satellite dish Antennas, and similar uses and
                     structures. Accessory Uses shall require a zoning permit when modified or
                     developed separately from the Principal Use, and shall not count towards the
                     overall Project Density.
USE, PRINCIPAL:      The primary or main use of the land, Building or structure, as distinguished from
                     an accessory or Temporary Use.
                     Any activity on a site approved by the Administrator for a limited time of
USE, TEMPORARY:      operation, as set forth in Chapter 3 of this Title. A Temporary Use is governed
                     by a zoning permit.
                     Elements of the utility system that extend above ground and can be seen. Utility
UTILITY BUILDINGS OR Appurtenances include, but are not limited to, electronic transformers, switch
APPURTENANCES:       and junction boxes, telephone switch and junction boxes, cable television boxes,
                     gas vents and valves, irrigation controllers and valve boxes, security and
                     camera, satellite dishes and Antennas of all types.
                     A place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
VETERINARY HOSPITAL  infirm or injured animals, and those who are in need of medical or surgical
/ CLINIC:            attention and may include overnight accommodations on the premises for the
                     treatment, observation and/or recuperation. It may also include boarding that is
                     incidental to the primary activity.
VIEW WALL:           A security or privacy screen that is part solid wall and part view fence.
                     The Village One District is one of the Land Use District within the Avimor
VILLAGE ONE          Planned Development Zoning District. The area within the Village One District is
DISTRICT:            specifically depicted on the Master Land Use Map. Because the Village One
                     District is largely already developed, the Sub-Use Districts within the Village
                     One District are specifically identified on the Village One Land Use Map.
VILLAGE ONE LAND USE The Village One Land Use Map is included as Figure 3A.1 in Chapter 3A of this
MAP:                 Title and designates the specific Sub-Use Districts within the Village One
                     District.
                     Land used for the growing of grapes including storage of related equipment and
VINEYARD:            Accessory Uses. It may also include a Winery, tasting room, wine cellar,
                     bottling, and any other uses related to the production of wine.
WAREHOUSING, STORAGE Provision of storage space for household or commercial goods within an enclosed
AND MINISTORAGE:     Building with direct public access to individual storage spaces. Vehicle storage
                     must be treated as Outdoor Storage.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
AND WATER STORAGE    Treatment facility owned and operated by the Avimor Water Reclamation Company.
FACILITY:
WHOLESALING,         Storage and distribution facilities without direct public access for merchandise
DISTRIBUTION AND     to retailers, industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business
STORAGE:             users, to other wholesalers and to members of such businesses.
                     A facility dedicated to producing, warehousing, distributing, and selling of wine
                     and other associated products. A Winery may include a crushing facility, bottling
WINERY:              equipment, barrel storage, agricultural equipment and storage. A tasting room,
                     Restaurant, events center, and Retail Sales associated with the Winery may be
                     included as Accessory Uses.
WIRELESS             Any facility, often unstaffed, that transmits and/or receives signals by
COMMUNICATION        electromagnetic or optical means, including, without limitation, Antennas,
FACILITY:            microwave dishes, satellite dishes or similar structures supporting such
                     equipment.
                     The location of a Building on a Lot in such a manner that one or more Building
ZERO LOT LINE:       sides have no (zero) Setback (or yard requirements) and rest directly on a side,
                     rear, or front Lot line. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
 
CHAPTER 2
LAND USE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11B-2-1: Zoning And Maximum Development Intensity
11B-2-2: Master Land Use Map And Land Use Districts
11B-2-3: Permitted Uses
11B-2-4: Setbacks And General Lot Development Regulations
11B-2-5: Single-Family Special Lot (SFSL) Development Standards
11B-2-1: ZONING AND MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT INTENSITY:
Avimor will contain a mix of residential, commercial, employment, public,
institutional, civic, service, recreational and Open Space uses. The Property
is zoned Avimor Planned Development Zoning District (APD). (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-2-2: MASTER LAND USE MAP AND LAND USE DISTRICTS:
The Master Land Use Map generally depicts the areas within the Avimor Planned
Development Zoning District where specific Land Use Districts are appropriate.
The Open Space Land Use District is appropriate anywhere within the Avimor
Planned Development Zoning District. Table 2.2 provides a comprehensive list of
each Sub-Use District allowed in each Land Use District. Table 2.1 provides
which land uses are allowed, conditionally allowed, and prohibited within each
Sub-Use District. In accordance with
11B-11B-3, a Subdivision Land Use Map shall be submitted and reviewed for
approval with each preliminary plat, which Subdivision Land Use will
specifically identify Sub-Use District(s), and the Density allocation included
in the preliminary plat area. The Land Use Districts within the Avimor Planned
Development Zoning District are:
   A.   Village Center District: The Village Center District is the heart of
the community and the main activity center where community, residential and
cultural activities occur. As described in Table 2.2, the allowed Sub-Use
Districts in the Village Center District include: Single Family Zero Lot Line
(SFZL), Single Family Special Lot (SFSL), Single-Family Attached (SFA), High
Density Multi-Family (MF3), and Village Commercial (VCOM).
   B.   Mixed Use/Commercial District: The Mixed Use/Commercial District
provides a variety of retail, commercial, residential and employment
opportunities for Avimor and area residents. As described in Table 2.2, the
allowed Sub-Use Districts in the Mixed Use/Commercial District include: Highway
Mixed Use (HMU), Medium Density Multi-Family (MF2), Mixed Use (MU), Community
Commercial (CC) and Neighborhood Commercial (NC). Mixed Use Districts will
accommodate office, Flex Space, light Manufacturing, Research and Development,
shopping, business, lodging, professional and support commercial services,
primary, secondary and higher educational facilities, parks and recreation
facilities, Vineyards and wineries, and residential uses. The HMU Sub-Use
District is designed to provide highway-oriented businesses as well as similar
and more intensive uses than the MU Sub-Use District. Commercial Sub-Use
Districts are intended to provide commercial facilities designed for use by
community or area residents that will provide most of the daily and weekly
support services that residents require on a regular basis.
   C.   Foothills Residential District: The Foothills Residential District
provides for residential neighborhood uses and supportive Accessory Uses such
as Farmers' Markets, Schools, Vineyards, Community Centers and other
complementary uses. As described in Table 2.2 allowed Sub-Use Districts in the
Foothills Residential District include Estate Residential (ER) and Rural
Residential (RR).
   D.   Village Residential District: The Village Residential District provides
residential neighborhoods with a range of Lot sizes and housing types depending
on location, site conditions, and market influences to create a community that
emphasizes housing diversity. As described in Table 2.2, the allowed Sub-Use
Districts in the Village Residential District include: Single-Family Detached
(SF1, SF2, SF3) and Low-Density Multi-Family (MF1).
   E.   Village One District: The Village One District encompasses the existing
Avimor development area as designated on the Master Land Use Map. The Village
One District is subject to the standards set forth in Chapter 3A of this Title,
which ensures the existing Lots, uses, and structures within the Village One
District are conforming uses. As described in Table 2.2, the allowed Sub-Use
Districts in the Village One District include: Reserve (RE), Cottage (CO),
Phase One Mixed-Use (P1MU), and Community Services (CS). Sub-Use Districts
within the Village One District are designated on the Village One Land Use Map.
   F.   Open Space District: Open Space Sub-Use Districts consist of Community
Open Space (COS) and Regional Open Space (ROS) districts. Community Open Space
and Regional Open Space are allowed within any Land Use District.
      1.   Community Open Space: Community Open Space is land set aside for
recreation, Agriculture, habitat, vegetation, scenic, or similar uses and is
intended to primarily serve Avimor residents. Community Open Space may include
public, semi-public, and private recreational facilities, amphitheaters, Golf
Courses, Pathways and Trails, landscape zones in and adjacent to major roadways
including areas outside of a dedicated Right-of-Way, greenbelts, cultural,
community, educational, and quasi-public facilities, Equestrian Centers, and
trailheads, as well as parks, playfields and Natural Open Spaces. Agricultural
uses, such as Vineyards, wineries and plant nurseries, are considered Community
Open Space. Facilities and tracts of land owned by the Owners' Association are
also considered Community Open Space.
      2.   Regional Open Space: Regional Open Space is intended to serve both
Avimor residents and the general public and may be adjacent to, or provide
connection to, large scale regional open space. Regional Open Space may include
many of the amenities provided in Community Open Space as well as active
regional parks, and trail corridors. Regional Open Space may be owned and
maintained by the City, the Owners' Association, private parties, a land trust,
or other conservation group or entity. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-2-3: PERMITTED USES:
This Chapter provides which uses are permitted in each Sub-Use District. Table
2.1 identifies those uses permitted by right, those uses that require approval
by conditional use permit, and those uses that are prohibited in each. The
asterisk (*) in Table 2.1's first column refers to specific standards and/or
limitations applicable to a particular use. These specific standards are found
in Chapter 4 of this Title, Specific Use Standards.
Abbreviations used in Table 2.1 are:
   P - Permitted Use
   C - Use Permitted by Conditional Use Permit, in accordance with Chapter 7
   A - Accessory Use
   Blank - Prohibited Uses
TABLE 2.1 - LAND USE TABLE
 VCOM HMU MU CC NC RR ER SF1 SF2 SF3 SFZL SFSL SFA MF1 M  M  COS ROS RE CO P1MU CS
                                                       F2 F3
TABLE 2.1 - LAND USE TABLE
               VCOM HMU MU CC NC RR ER SF1 SF2 SF3 SFZL SFSL SFA MF1 M  M  COS ROS RE CO P1MU CS
                                                                     F2 F3
COMMERCIAL
Adult Business                                                            
Auto Body          C     C                                                  
Shop*
Auto Gas       C    P   P  P  C                                           P     
Station*
Auto Repair
and Service        P   C  C                                                  
Shop (Major)*
Auto Repair
and Service    P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Shop (Minor)*
Auto Rental    C    P   C  C                                                  
Agency*
Auto and
Recreational       P   C  C                                                  
Vehicle Sales*
Animal         P    P   P  P  P  C  C                                            
Daycare*
Bank /
Financial      P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Institution
Bar/ Pub/      P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Nightclub*
Bed and
Breakfast      P    P   P      C  C  C                                 C  C  P     
Facility*
Brewery        P    P   P  P  P                                                
Building
Materials/     P    P   P  P  P                                 C               
Lumber Yard
Car Wash *     P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Cemetery                                                   P   P            
Check-Cashing  C    C   C  C                                                  
Childcare
Facility       C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C          C  P     
(Family/Home
Daycare)*
Childcare
Facility       C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C        P  P  P     
(Group
Daycare)*
Childcare
Facility       C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C            P     
(Daycare                                                                                  
Center) *
Clinic         P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Club or Lodges P    P   P  P  P                                 P          P     
Convenience    P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Store*
Dry Cleaner /  P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Laundromat
Entertainment  P    P   P  P  C                                 C   C       P     
Facility
Flex Space     P    P   P  P  P                                                
Food and       P    P   P  P  P  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  C   P       P     
Beverage Sales
Health Club    P    P   P  P  P                          C   C  C            P     
Heliports          C         C                               P        P       
Home
Occupation     P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P        P  P  P     
Class A&B*
Home
Occupation                  C  C                                            
Class C *
Hospital       P    P   P  C                                                  
Hotel and      P    P   P  P  P                          C   C  C            P     
Motel*
Junkyard                                                                  
Kennel and Pet P    P   P  P  P  C  C                                            
Shop*
Laboratory     P    P   P  P                                                  
Liquor Store*  C    C   C  C  C                                           P     
Manufacturing, P    P   P                                                    
Light*
Mortuary/          P   P  P                                                  
Funeral Home*
Motion
Picture/Radio/ P    P   P  P  C  C                               C   C       P     
Television
Production                                                                
Facility*
Nursing
Convalescent
Home/
Transitional   P    P   P  P  P                          C   C  C          C  P     
Housing/
Assisted
Living
Office,
Business &     P    P   P  P  P                          P   P  P            P     
Professional
Outdoor        P    P   P  P  P  A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   A  A  A   A            
Storage*
Parking Lot/
Parking        P    P   P  P  P                          P   P  P                 
Garages
(Commercial)
Pawn Shop /
Auto Title                                                                
Loans
Personal       P    P   P  P  P                                                
Service
Radio and
Television     P    P   P  P  C                                 C   C            
Broadcast
Station*
Recreational
Vehicle        C    P   P  P  C                                 C   C       P     
Storage*
Recycling /
Solid Waste        C   C  C                                   C   C       P     
Transfer
Center*
Rental Service
/ Storage Yard P    P   P  C                                                  
(Large
Equipment) *
Research and   P    P   P  P                                             P     
Development
Resort*        P    P   P  P  P  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  C   C            
Restaurant
without Drive-
thru) and      P    P   P  P  P                                           P     
Catering
Establishment
*
Restaurant
(with Drive-   C    C   C  C  C                                           C     
Thru) *
Retail Sales   P    P   P  P  P                                 C   C       P     
Rodeo          P    P     P                                   P   P            
Shooting Range
/ Gun Club         C   C  C                                   C   C            
(Indoor)*
Shooting Range
/ Gun Club                                                 C   C            
(Outdoor)*
Shopping
Center,        P    P   P  P  P                                                
Community
Shopping
Center,        P    P   P  P  P                                                
Neighborhood
Special Care       C   C  C                                                  
Facility*
Veterinary
Hospital/      P    P   P  P  P  C  C                                       P     
Clinic*
Warehousing,
Storage and,   C    P   P  P  P  C  C  C   C   C                     C   C            
Ministorage*
Wholesaling,
Distribution,      P   P  P                                                  
and Storage*
RESIDENTIAL
Accessory      A    A   A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   A  A        P  P  P     
Dwelling Unit*
Dwelling,      P    P   P  P  P      P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P        P  P  P     
Multi-Family
Dwelling,
Single-Family  P    P   P    P      P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P        P  P  P     
Attached
Dwelling,
Single-Family  P    P   P    P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P        P  P       
Detached
Equestrian                  P  P                                            
Lot*
Living
Quarters,      A    A   A    A  A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   P  P                 
Accessory*
CIVIC, COMMUNITY & PUBLIC/QUASI PUBLIC
Art Gallery    P    P   P  P  P                                    P       P     
Church/Place
of Religious   P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P     P  P     
Assembly
Community
Association    P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    P
Building/
Facility
Community      P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P     P  P    P
Garden
Community
Information    P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    C
Center*
Electric       P    P   P  P  P  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  P   P   C  C  C    P
Substation*
Equestrian         P   P  P  P  P  P                             P   P   C        C
Center*
Event Center   P    P   P  P  P  P  P                             P   P   P  P  P    C
Fire/Police    P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P     C  P     
Station*
Golf Course           P      P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P               
Library*       P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P     C  P     
Maintenance
Facility       A    A   A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A    A    A   A   A  A  A   A            
Related to
Open Space
Museums        P    P   P  P  P                                 P   P       P     
Park, Open
Space and Open P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    P
Space Easement
Post Office/   P    P   P  P  P      P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P            P     
Annex
Pump Station   P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   C  C  C    P
Recreation/
Community      P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    C
Center
Recreation
Field, Court,  P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P      P  P  P    P
and Sports
Facility*
Satellite and
Microwave      P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   C  C  C   C   C  C  C    P
Dishes*
Wastewater
Treatment      C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  C   C   C  C  C    P
Facility*
Water Storage  P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   C  C  C    P
Facility*
Wireless
Communication  C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  C   C   C  C  C    P
Facility*
EDUCATIONAL
Schools,       P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   C  C  P    P
Business
Schools,
Colleges and
Universities   P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P            
(including
Satellite
Campuses)
Schools,
Elementary/
Middle/High    P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   C  C  P    P
Schools
(Public &
Private)
Schools,
Vocational/    P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   C  P  P    P
Technical
AGRICULTURAL
Agriculture*   P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    P
Farm                                                       P               
Plant Nursery/
Sod Farm       P    P   P  P  P  A  A                             P   P     C  P    P
(Retail &
Wholesale)*
Vineyard       P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P            
Winery*        P    P   P  P  P  C  C  C                           P   P       P     
TEMPORARY USES
Aggregate
Processing,
Asphalt, and   C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  C   C            
Concrete Batch
Plant*
Circus and     C    C   C  C  C                                 C   C            
Carnival*
Farmers’     P    P   P  P  P  C  C                             P   P   P  P  P    P
Market*
Oil and Gas    P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    P
Extraction
Roadside       C    C   C  C  C  C  C                             P   P   P  P  P    P
Stand*
Seasonal Sales P    P   P  P  P  P  P                             P      P  P  P    P
Special Event* C    C   C  C  C  C  C  C   C   C   C    C    C   C   C  C  C   C   C  C  C    C
Special Event  P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    P
(Avimor)
Sporting       P    P   P  P  P  C  C  C   C   C                     P   P   P  P  P    P
Event*
Temporary
Construction   P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P  P    P
Office / Yard*
Temporary
Sales Office/  P    P   P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P    P    P   P   P  P  P   P   P  P       
Trailer*
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-2-4: SETBACKS AND GENERAL LOT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
These standards are designed to ensure that development within Avimor Planned
Development Zoning District will produce a built environment of stable,
desirable character that is harmonious with existing and future development and
is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Master Land Use Map.
Centralized Water and Wastewater facilities are required for all subdivision
and Lot split applications in all Land Use Districts exceeding one (1) Dwelling
Unit per two (2) acres (where facilities are available).
   A.   General Setback Standards:
      1.   Minimum Sub-Use District Setbacks are outlined in Table 2.2.
Dwelling Units located in the HMU, MU, and NC Sub-Use Districts shall use the
Setback standards for the applicable district.
      2.   Dwelling Units that are stacked above non-residential uses shall use
the Setbacks of the non-residential Sub-Use District in which located.
      3.   Dwelling Units in the RR, ER, and SF1 Sub-Use Districts shall adhere
to the Setbacks outlined in Table 2.2.
      4.   Driveway length shall be a minimum nineteen (19) feet, or three (3)
to five (5) feet. Driveway length shall be measured from the back of sidewalk,
or back of curb if no sidewalk exists, or edge of pavement if no curb exists to
the garage. Front loaded driveways between nineteen (19) and twenty-two (22)
feet length that intersect with a sidewalk shall have a flared apron as shown
in Exhibit 2.1. No more than three consecutive Dwelling Units in a row shall
have front loaded driveways between three (3) to five (5) feet in length. There
shall be no such restriction for rear loaded Dwelling Units.
Exhibit 2.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-707.png]
 
      5.   Bay windows, nooks, architectural pop-outs and appendages,
fireplaces, cabinets designed to screen utility meters and similar
architectural features shall encroach no more than two (2) feet into any
Setback, provided they remain at least three (3) feet from the side property
lines and ten (10) feet from the front property line, and do not increase the
living space within the home at the floor line. The maximum width of such
structures shall not exceed thirteen (13) feet in total for any facade.
      6.   Roof overhangs, cornices, and similar architectural features shall
encroach no more than two (2) feet into any Setback provided they remain at
least three (3) feet from the property line. Balconies must maintain the
Setback required for the structure to which they are attached and may not
extend into the required Setback area except on Lots where such balconies abut
a Golf Course, park area, common Open Space, or similar Open Space. In such
case balconies may extend into the Setback area toward the Open Space a
distance equal to fifty percent (50%) of the required Setback provided they
remain at least five (5) feet from the property line. Balconies on multi-family
Dwelling Units may also overhang a sidewalk or Common Area up to five (5) feet
so long as they are elevated in the vertical air space over and above such
sidewalk or Common Area by a minimum of ten (10) feet.
      7.   Interior Fire Escapes are encouraged. Exterior Fire Escapes shall
encroach no more than 6 feet into any Setback provided they remain at least
three (3) feet from the property line. Exterior Fire Escapes are allowed in the
side or rear yards only.
      8.   Accessory Dwelling Units, shall comply with the Setback and height
standards for the district they are located in as set forth in Tables 2.2 or as
otherwise described in Chapter 4 of this Title.
      9.   Accessory structures shall not be permitted in the addressed front
except for garages and Accessory Dwelling Units, which shall comply with the
Setback standards of the applicable residential district.
      10.   Attached patio covers, awnings, carports, trellises, and similar
structures and architectural elements within residential districts shall
encroach no more than two (2) feet into the front Setback and shall encroach no
more than fifteen (15) feet into the side and rear Setbacks provided they
remain at least five (5) feet from the property line. These Setbacks are
measured from the supporting posts; however, overhangs may extend up to three
(3) feet from a property line. Such structures must remain open without the use
of siding, screens or other enclosures. Enclosed structures must conform to the
Setback standards for the principal dwelling.
      11.   Awnings, trellises, and similar structures and architectural
elements in non-residential districts may overhang a sidewalk up to six (6)
feet so long as they are elevated in the vertical air space over and above such
sidewalk by a minimum of eight (8) feet and do not negatively impact a tree
canopy.
      12.   Swimming pools shall only be permitted in the side or rear yard
areas. Swimming pools shall maintain a minimum Setback of three (3) feet from
the water's edge to property lines and easements. Any Setback, if required,
from the dwelling or other Buildings on the same Lot shall be determined by the
City Building Department.
   B.   Building Heights:
      1.   Building heights shall be measured from the finished floor elevation
closest to the finished grade to the top of the roof. The height of the
Building may follow the slope of the contour of the Lot (grade adaptive
architecture). Top of roof means ridgeline or the highest point of any
architectural element concealing roof top equipment, excluding chimneys and
vents. Height restrictions are not intended to limit the number of stories.
Height restrictions do not apply to chimneys, which are governed by the
building code.
      2.   Themed, non-habitable structures or parts of structures, such as
Church steeples and clock towers, shall be allowed up to fifty (50) feet in
height in the VCOM, NC, and all residential Sub-Use Districts and shall be
allowed up to sixty (60) feet in height in the CC, HMU, and MU Sub-Use
Districts except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard
to the safe landing and takeoff of aircraft at an established airport.
      3.   Refer to Tables 2.2 for maximum building heights.
   C.   Residential Density:
      1.   Residential Density, as shown on Table 2.2, shall be determined on a
gross area basis. Gross area includes the entire area being developed together
with all Right-of-Way prior to any Right-of-Way dedication.
   D.   Refuse Storage/Disposal:
      1.   Every Parcel with a multi-family or commercial use shall have a
trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall be of sufficient
size to accommodate the trash generated by the use and must be a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from any single-family residential property. The receptacle
shall be screened from public view on at least three sides by a solid wall or
structure that is constructed to be a minimum of one foot (1') above the height
of the trash and/or recycling receptacle within the collection area measured
from the finished surface and on the fourth side by a solid gate not less than
the height of the trash and/or recycling receptacle. Trash enclosures and
containers shall comply with the design standards set forth in Chapter 3 of
this Title. Trash receptacles for single-family homes must be stored within the
enclosed garage or screened from the Right-of-Way behind a fence.
Notwithstanding anything herein, the following shall be exempt from the
Setbacks of this subsection: all uses within the VC district, Live/Work uses,
and any Dwelling Units that are stacked above non-residential uses. However,
the trash receptacle must be located in the rear of the property and not
encroach into any site triangle.
   E.   Hillside Development and Grade-Adaptive Housing:
      1.   Guidelines for hillside development and grade-adaptive housing are
contained in the Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside Development Standards.
   F.   Side And Rear Yards For Nonresidential Uses Abutting Residential
Districts:
      1.   Nonresidential Buildings or uses shall not be located or constructed
closer than twenty feet (20') to any Lot line of a residential Sub-Use
District, unless specifically called out in Chapter 4 of this Title; except
that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to no less than ten feet
(10') of the requirement if acceptable to the City Design Review Board.
Table 2.2 Sub-Use District Dimensional Standards
SUB-USE  MAXIMUM DENSITY MINIMUM LOT MAXIMUM LOT MINIMUM  MAXIMUM HEIGHT
DISTRICT                 AREA        COVERAGE    SETBACKS
SUB-USE       MAXIMUM      MINIMUM LOT   MAXIMUM LOT MINIMUM       MAXIMUM
DISTRICT      DENSITY      AREA          COVERAGE    SETBACKS      HEIGHT
FOOTHILLS RESIDENTIAL
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     30'
                                                     Side Garage:
(RR) Rural                                           2 0'
Residential   1 Unit per 2 1.0 Acre      35%         Living: 25'   40'
See Note 1    gross acres                            Interior
                                                     Side: 10'
                                                     Street Side:
                                                     20'
                                                     Rear: 20'
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     20'
                                                     Side Garage
(ER) Estate                                          15'
Residential   5 Units per  8,500 sq. ft. 40%         Living: 15'   40'
See Note 1    gross acre                             Interior
                                                     Side: 5'
                                                     Street Side:
                                                     15'
                                                     Rear: 20'
VILLAGE RESIDENTIAL
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     20'
                                                     Side Garage:
                                                     10'
(SF1) Single-                                        Living: 10'
Family        6 Units per  6,500 s.f.    50%         Interior      35'
Detached      gross acre                             Side: 5'
See Note 1                                           Street Side:
                                                     10'
                                                     Rear: 20'
                                                     Alley Garage:
                                                     5'
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     18'
                                                     Side Garage:
                                                     10'
(SF2) Single-                                        Living: 10'
Family        9 Units per  4,500 s.f.    60%         Interior      35'
Detached      gross acre                             Side: 5'
See Note 1                                           Street Side:
                                                     10'
                                                     Rear: 10'
                                                     Alley Garage:
                                                     5'
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     18'
                                                     Side Garage:
                                                     8'
(SF3) Single-                                        Living: 8'
Family        10 Units per 3,000 s.f.    70%         Interior      35'
Detached      gross acre                             Side: 3'
                                                     Street Side:
                                                     10'
                                                     Rear 10'
                                                     Alley Garage:
                                                     5'
(MF1) Low                                            Front: 10'
Density                                              Interior
Multi-Family  12 Units per 15% % of the  85% of the  Side: 5'      30'
See notes 4,  gross acre   site          site        Street Side:
5 & 6                                                10'
                                                     Rear: 0'
VILLAGE CENTER
                                                     Front: See
                                                     note 2
(SFZL)                                               Interior
Single-Family 10 Units per                           Side: 0'/5'
Zero Lot Line gross acre   3,000 s.f.    90%         Street Side:  35'
See Notes 2 &                                        0'
3                                                    Rear: 0'
                                                     Alley Garage:
                                                     3'-5'
(SFSL) Single 12 Units per
Family        gross acre   3,000 s.f.    90%         See Note 3    38'
Special Lot
                                                     Front: See
                                                     note 2
(SFA) Single-                                        Interior
Family        18 Units per                           Side: 0'/5'
Attached      gross acre   N/A           90%         Street Side:  38'
See Notes 2 &                                        15'
3                                                    Rear: 15'
                                                     Alley Garage:
                                                     3'-5'
(MF3) High                                           Front: 0'
Density                                              Interior
Multi-Family  20 Units per 0% of the     100% of the Side: 10'     48'
See notes 4,  gross acre   site          site        Street Side:
5 & 6                                                0'
                                                     Rear:0'
                                                     Front: 0'
(VCOM)                                               Interior Side
Village       18 Units per 4.0           N/A         0'            48'
Commercial    gross acre                             Street Side:
See Note 7                                           0'
                                                     Rear: 0'
VILLAGE ONE*
SUB-USE       MAXIMUM      MINIMUM LOT   MAXIMUM LOT MINIMUM       MAXIMUM
DISTRICT      DENSITY1     AREA          COVERA GE   SETBACKS      HEIGHT
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     20'
                                                     Side Garage:
                                                     15'
(RE) Reserve  2 Unit per   9,000 sq. ft  45%         Living: 15'   35'
              gross acre                             Interior
                                                     Side: 5'
                                                     Street Side:
                                                     15'
                                                     Rear: 20'
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     20'
                                                     Side Garage:
                                                     10'
(CO) Cottage  8 Units per  1,500 sq. ft  80%         Living: 10'   35'
              gross acres                            Interior
                                                     Side:5'1
                                                     Street Side:
                                                     10'
                                                     Rear: 5'
                                                     Front Garage:
                                                     0'
                                                     Side Garage:
(P1MU) Phase                                         0'
One Mixed -   8 Units per  N/A           N/A         Living: 0'    40'
Use           gross acre                             Interior
                                                     Side: 0'
                                                     Street Side:
                                                     0'
                                                     Rear: 0'
                                                     Front: 10'
(CS)                                                 Interior
Community     N/A          1,500 sq. ft  N/A         Side: 10'     40'
Services                                             Street Side:
                                                     10'
                                                     Rear: 10'
* Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, existing and future
development and redevelopment within the Village One District is subject
to the standards set forth in Chapter 3A of this Title.
1. Interior side should be a cumulative fifteen (15') Setback.
 
 
MIXED USE/COMMERCIAL
SUB-USE       MAXIMUM      MINIMUM LOT MAXIMUM LOT  MINIMUM
DISTRICT      DENSITY      AREA        COVERAGE     SETBACKS     MAXIMUM HEIGHT
See note 1
                                                    Front: 15'
                                                    Interior
(HMU) Highway 16 Units per 10% of the  100% of the  Side: 5'     58'
Mixed Use     gross acre   site        site         Street Side:
                                                    10'
                                                    Rear: 10'
                                                    Front: 15'
                                                    Interior
(MU) Mixed    16 Units per 10% of the  100% of site Side: 5'     58'
Use           gross acre   site                     Street Side:
                                                    10'
                                                    Rear:10'
                                                    Front: 10'
(MF2) Medium                                        Interior
Density       16 Units per 10% of the  N/A          Side: 5'     45'
Multi-Family  gross acre   site                     Street Side:
                                                    10'
                                                    Rear:0'
                                                    Front: 20'
(CC)                                                Interior
Community     16 Units per .5          N/A          Side: 0'     58'
Commercial    gross acre                            Street Side:
See Note 7                                          0'
                                                    Rear: 0'
                                                    Front: 15'
(NC)                                                Interior
Neighborhood  16 Units per .5          N/A          Side: 0'     48'
Commercial    gross acre                            Street Side:
See Note 7                                          10'
                                                    Rear: 5'
 
   Notes:
      1.   In the RR, ER and SF1 Sub-Use Districts, the rear Setback may be
reduced to fifteen (15) feet if the rear property line is adjacent to Open
Space that is a minimum of fifty (50) feet wide. In the SF2 Sub-Use District,
the rear Setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet if the same condition exists.
      2.   In the SFZL and SFA Sub-Use Districts, the front Setback, exclusive
of the garage, may be eight (8) feet. The front Setback to a side entry garage
may also be eight (8) feet. The Setback to a front entry garage shall be either
nineteen (19) feet or more or three (3) to five (5) feet. Setbacks between five
(5) feet and nineteen (19) feet are not allowed without a variance.
      3.   In the SFZL and SFA Sub-Use Districts the 0' side Setback is for the
party wall and 5' side Setback is for the non-party wall side of the dwelling.
      4.   In all multi-family Sub-Use Districts, driveway length may be either
nineteen (19) feet or more or three (3) to five (5) feet. Setbacks between five
(5) feet and nineteen (19) feet are not allowed.
      5.   Open Space that was platted with the initial plat in which the Super
Pad is located shall be sufficient for the Open Space requirements for the
Super Pad resubdivision.
      6.   Open Space requirements are waived if Lot Coverage is 80% or more of
the Lot or if the Lot abuts Natural Open Space.
      7.   The minimum on-site landscape requirement for any non-residential
Parcel is ten percent (10%) of the Lot Area. The intent of this requirement may
be satisfied by interior plazas of Building, roof top gardens and Parking Lot
landscaping consistent with Chapter 3 of this Title. This requirement is waived
if the Lot Coverage is eighty percent (80%) or above.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-2-5: SINGLE-FAMILY SPECIAL LOT (SFSL) DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The SFSL district offers alternative site planning and housing mix
opportunities from the typical single-family detached development. SFSL
projects shall conform to the following:
      1.   A Parcel may be developed using a combination of SFSL types.
         a.   Single family zero lot.
         b.   Single family 1,2 & 3.
      2.   Alternative SFSL types may be added to these Standards in the future
through a modification of these Standards (see Chapter 7 of this Title) to
reflect new housing designs and neighborhood configurations.
   B.   Parking:
      1.   Two enclosed garage spaces are required for each Dwelling Unit.
Tandem garage spaces shall satisfy this requirement.
      2.   All SFSL projects shall also provide guest Parking Spaces as
follows:
         a.   One (1) guest space shall be provided for every four (4) Units.
         b.   On Street Parking is acceptable for guest parking when sufficient
street width exists per the Local Highway Department's Road standards and there
are no conflicts with utilities or driveways. When off-street guest parking
areas are provided in lieu of On Street Parking, such parking areas shall be
distributed as evenly as possible throughout the SFSL project. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION:
11B-3-1: General Applicability
11B-3-2: Purpose And Goals
11B-3-3: Effect Of Other Provisions
11B-3-4: Definitions
11B-3-5: Avimor Design Guidelines
11B-3-6: Design Requirements, Objectives And Considerations
11B-3-7: Landscape And Buffer Area Requirements
11B-3-8: Signage
11B-3-9: Lighting
11B-3-10: Administrative And Board Level Applications
11B-3-11: Application And Permit Requirements
11B-3-12: Notification
11B-3-13: Design Review Application Process
11B-3-14: Appeals
11B-3-15: Terms Of Approval
11B-3-16: Modifications
11B-3-17: Restrictions On Other Required Documents
11B-3-18: Sureties
11B-3-19: Inspection
11B-3-1: GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter applies to all development within Avimor. The design review
process and standards set forth in this Chapter apply to all development or
redevelopment of nonresidential uses, multifamily residential, and community
signage. Including, but not limited to, commercial uses, industrial,
institutional, office, multi-family and single-family attached residential,
signs, subdivision signage, exterior remodeling or repainting with a color
different that what is existing, exterior restoration, and enlargement or
expansions of existing Buildings, Signs or site, and requires the submittal of
a design review application pursuant to this Chapter and any fees as
established by resolution of the Council. Single-family residential development
is not subject to this Chapter. Such development Design review applications for
a change in paint color are subject to review and approval by the Avimor Design
Review Committee and the City of Eagle but otherwise shall not be required to
comply in all respects to the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-3-2: PURPOSE AND GOALS:
   A.   The purpose and goals of this Chapter are to:
      1.   Promote high-quality Building design in nonresidential and mixed-use
areas through flexible standards that allow for creativity and innovation,
consider the surrounding context, foster a human scale with accessible and
attractive street fronts, and project a positive image to encourage economic
development;
      2.   Ensure that the aesthetic harmony will be maintained throughout
Avimor by the repeated use of selected design elements such as cohesive
architecture, landscaping, and signage; and
      3.   Maintain, protect, enhance, and improve the values and amenities of
Avimor and the surrounding area. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-3: EFFECT OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
If any provision of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with any other
provision of this Title, Building, fire safety or health ordinance, the
provision which establishes the higher and/or more restrictive design standard
shall prevail. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-4: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted as defined
within a particular Chapter, as defined within this Title, or as defined in
Chapter 1 of this Title, with the more specific and/or more restrictive
definition controlling. Any other words or phrases not specifically defined
shall be interpreted to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-5: AVIMOR DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The purpose of the Avimor Design Guidelines (ADG) book is to show, through the
use of figures, photographs, and text, specific period architectural styles,
themes, and elements envisioned through the requirements of this Chapter. The
ADG book, established through a resolution of the City Council, contains many
of the exhibits referenced in this Chapter and is incorporated herein by
reference. The architecture styles found in the ADG book are permitted
architecture styles. All applications made pursuant to this Chapter shall be
reviewed in accordance with the ADG and this Chapter. If any provision of the
ADG book is found to be in conflict with any other provision of this Chapter,
the provision established in this Chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-6: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS, OBJECTIVES AND CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   General Objectives And Considerations: The following, including the
provisions set forth in this Chapter contain a listing of objectives applied to
each application, and a listing of matters that shall be considered by the
Design Review Board. The objectives are separated into two (2) sections: site
design and building design. Specific aspects of design should be examined to
determine whether the proposed development will provide a desirable environment
for its occupants as well as for its neighbors, and whether, aesthetically, the
composition, materials, textures and colors meet the intent of this Chapter.
The Design Review Board shall consider the following criteria in reviewing the
application:
      1.   Site Design Objectives: The site plan design shall minimize impact
of traffic on adjacent streets, provide for the pedestrian, and provide parking
in conformity with the applicable design;
         a.   The functional relationship of the structures and the site in
relation to its surroundings;
         b.   The impact and effect of the site development plan on traffic
conditions on contiguous streets and adjoining properties or neighborhoods;
         c.   The site layout with respect to separation or integration of
vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic patterns;
         d.   The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking facilities
relative to access points, Building location and total site development to
prevent traffic conflict or congestion;
         e.   The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading ramps,
docks, and bays and vehicle service facilities;
         f.   The access, Parking Lot, and interior roadway illumination plans
and hours of operation;
         g.   The required driver, pedestrian and bicycle sight distance
requirements of the project and their relationship to adjacent streets,
driveways and properties;
         h.   The coordination of the site development with planned right of
way alignments, acquisitions and street improvements;
         i.   The graphic delineation of traffic circulation patterns to avoid
confusion, congestion and conflicts;
         j.   The continued maintenance of traffic, parking and lighting
systems;
         k.   The protection of views and vistas in relation to urban design
and aesthetic considerations; and
         l.   The provision of safe pedestrian and bicycle connections between
neighborhoods and commercial areas.
      2.   Site Landscaping: The site landscaping shall minimize impact on
adjacent properties through the proper use of screening with sound and sight
buffers, and unsightly areas shall be concealed or screened and the Design
Review Board shall consider:
         a.   The location, height, and materials of walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent development;
         b.   The location and type of new plantings, with due regard to
preservation of specimen and landmark trees, and to maintenance of all
plantings;
         c.   The providing of screen plantings or other screening methods
reasonably required to conceal Outdoor Storage areas, trash receptacles,
service areas, truck loading areas, Utility Buildings and other unsightly
developments;
         d.   The installation of sound and sight buffers, the preservation of
public views, light and air, and the consideration of those landscape aspects
of design which may have substantial effects on neighborhood development, land
uses, and amenities;
         e.   The design and use of Open Spaces and parks; and
         f.   The permanent maintenance of all landscaped areas and fencing.
      3.   Site Grading And Drainage: Improvements must include site grading
and drainage in accordance with the Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside
Development Standards.
         a.   Drainage control: Site grading should control drainage. Grading
should also be designed to screen parking areas, service areas, or other
visually unattractive areas;
         b.   Storm Water Basins: Landscaped areas may be used for Storm Water
Basins to retain and/or detain stormwater. Basins must be designed to retain
and/or detain all water resulting from a 1% annual chance, one-hour storm event
and limit discharge to pre-development discharge rates. The overall stormwater
basins must also be designed so as not to cause damage to landscaping or other
improvements. The maximum depth of a Storm Water Basin exposed to direct public
view is 4' in depth without a safety bench. For deeper ponds a 10' wide safety
bench will be required to be added with top of bench at 6" below design normal
surface elevation. Slopes above the bench shall not be steeper than 3:1. If a
wet pond is designed as the Storm Water Basin than slopes below the bench shall
not exceed 2:1. Where space is limited, retaining walls may be used. Such walls
must complement the Building architecture. Storm Water Basin design must comply
with the Local Highway Department design standards;
         c.   Runoff: Owners/occupants may not allow runoff from their Parcel
to drain onto adjacent Parcels, except through common drainage easements areas;
and
         d.   Grading and Building access: Site grading may not block access to
the site, internal vehicular circulation, and existing structures.
      4.   Signage: Signing for any project shall balance public interest and
private business needs with objectives of creating and preserving a community
that is aesthetically pleasing, livable, sustainable and connected. The Design
Review Board shall consider:
         a.   That the constitutionally guaranteed right to free speech is
protected;
         b.   Promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of
residents and visitors to the Development; by maintaining and improving
pedestrian and vehicular safety by reducing distractions, obstructions, and
hazards caused by the excessive number, excessive size or height, inappropriate
means of illumination or movement, indiscriminate placement, overconcentration,
or unsafe construction of Signs;
         c.   Encourage Signs which are clear and legible; to encourage and
enhance effective visual communications as a means of communication; to enable
people to identify destinations and locations; and to aid the public and
private sectors in identifying the location of goods and services;
         d.   Enhance the appearance and economic value of the visual
environment by regulating and controlling the type, location, and physical
dimensions of Signs and Sign structures;
         e.   Promote the use of Signs that are aesthetically pleasing, safe,
of appropriate scale, and integrated with the built environment, in order to
meet objectives related to the quality and character of the development;
         f.   Maintain and enhance the beauty, unique character, aesthetic
environment and quality, that will attract commerce, businesses, economic
development, residents and visitors; to preserve, conserve, protect, and
enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all zoning districts; to
regulate the appearance and design of Signs in a manner that promotes and
enhances the beautification and that complements the natural surroundings in
efforts in retaining economic advantage for its community; and to assure that
the benefits derived from the protection and enhancement of property values and
business opportunities by exercising reasonable controls over the physical
characteristics and structural design of Signs;
         g.   Reduce visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the
proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height,
and excessive size (area) of Signs which compete for attention of pedestrian
and vehicular traffic;
         h.   Encourage and allow Signs that are appropriate to the zoning
district in which they are located;
         i.   Establish Sign size in relationship to the scale of the Lot and
Building on which the Sign is to be placed or to which it pertains; to foster
the integration of signage with architectural and landscape designs; to provide
flexibility and encourage variety of signage, and to promote the use of Signs
that positively enhance and contribute to the aesthetics of the community, are
appropriate in scale to the surrounding Buildings and landscape and advance the
goals of quality and development and quality of place; and
         j.   To provide fair and consistent enforcement of these Sign
regulations.
      5.   Utilities: Utility service systems shall not detract from Building
or site design. The Design Review Board shall consider:
         a.   Size and location of all service systems for appropriate
appearance and maintenance accessibility;
         b.   The location and design of transformers, pad mount and roof
mounted mechanicals and electrical equipment shall be reviewed and approved by
the Design Review Board;
         c.   The location and sizes of all utility lines, manholes, poles,
underground cables, gas lines, wells, and similar installations;
         d.   The continued maintenance of these service systems;
         e.   Unless a variance is granted pursuant to Chapter 7 Section 5 of
this Title, no utility lines, Antennas, wires, or other devices for the
communication or transmission of electric current, power, or signals (including
telephone, television, micro-wave, or radio signals), shall be constructed,
placed, or maintained anywhere in or upon any Parcel other than within
Buildings or structures, unless the same shall be contained in conduits or
cables constructed, placed, or maintained underground or concealed in or under
Buildings or other structures. No Antennas or other services for the
transmission or reception of telephone, television, microwave, or radio signals
may be placed on any Building or other Improvement on any Parcel without
approval of the Administrator. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
forbid the erection or use of temporary power or telephone facilities
incidental to the construction or repair of improvements of any Parcel, subject
to the approval of the Administrator; and
         f.   The Owner/Occupant is responsible for determining the location of
existing underground utilities and for their protection during construction.
The Owner/Occupant must contact Utility Provider prior to any excavation or the
"Call Before You Dig" line.
      6.   Building Design:
         a.   Building Mass: The mass of the Building shall be reviewed for its
relationship with existing development in the immediate surrounding area and
with the allowed use proposed by the applicant;
         b.   Proportion Of Building: The height to width relationship of new
structures shall be compatible and consistent with the architectural character
of the area and proposed use;
         c.   Relationship Of Openings In The Buildings: Openings in the
Building shall provide interest through the use of such features as balconies,
bays, Porches, covered entries, overhead structures, awnings, changes in
Building facade and roofline alignment, to provide shadow relief. Avoid
monotonous flat planes;
         d.   Relationship Of Exterior Materials: The Design Review Board shall
determine the appropriateness of materials as they relate to building mass,
shadow relief, and existing area development. Use of color to provide blending
of materials with the surrounding area and Building use, and the functional
appropriateness of the proposed Building design as it relates to the proposed
use shall be considered; and
         e.   Allowed Architectural Styles: The architecture styles provided in
the ADG book are approved building design standards and examples for design
review applicants to follow.
   B.   Architectural Requirements, Building Materials, Colors, Exterior Areas
And Building Height/Mass Limitation: Unless specified as prohibited herein,
materials listed in this Chapter are allowed. If a material proposed for
construction is not listed in this Chapter it shall be upon the discretion of
the Avimor Design Review Committee, the Administrator, the Design Review Board,
and the City Council, whichever the case may be, to determine the
appropriateness of such material.
      1.   Building rears and sides:
         a.   Special attention should be given to the rears and sides of
Buildings that have reverse frontage to public streets, including an
appropriate mix of allowed colors and materials; and
         b.   Although the front facades of commercial and mixed-use Buildings
are critical elevations, these Buildings should also be designed to be seen
from all sides.
      2.   Street Facade:
         a.   Long, unbroken facades will not be permitted. Stepping, massing,
fenestration, or similar architectural treatments should be used to break up
Building masses together with an appropriate mix of approved colors and
materials;
         b.   The front elevations of new commercial or mixed-use Buildings
must contribute positively to the attractiveness of the Streetscape through the
combination of the Building height, massing color and material guidelines as
described within this Title;
         c.   All retail space must be easily accessible to the general public;
         d.   The entrances to commercial or mixed-use Buildings should be
always oriented to, and be highly visible from, the street. Entrances for
retail uses must be separated from residential entrances. Additional
residential or service entrances connected to the rear parking may be provided
from the rear or side of the Buildings;
         e.   At the street level, windows should be sufficiently larger to
expose goods within shops and encourage a retail presence; and
         f.   Retractable fabric awnings or permanent canopies for sun
protection and the creation of protected sidewalk space are encouraged. Awnings
or permanent canopies may encroach 5' into the Setback. A minimum distance of
eight feet (8') shall be required between the walkway and the bottom of the
awning or canopy. Columns supporting canopies or awnings are not allowed in the
Setback;
      3.   Design elements that add human scale:
         a.   Recessed entries and other architectural treatments should be
used to add human scale to Buildings, e.g., awnings, window, outdoor patios.
      4.   Roofs and drainage equipment:
         a.   All flat roofs must be below parapets, and no roof may drain over
a wall. Gutters, downspouts, or similar drainage alternatives, and vents should
be painted to match the surfaces to which they are attached if their appearance
is not to be pronounced. If downspouts are used for roof drainage design
attention must be given to their color and be consistent with the color scheme
of the Building.
      5.   Roof-mounted equipment:
         a.   All roof-mounted equipment and ventilators must be screened at
eye-level by a Building parapet or roofline;
         b.   No wall-mounted equipment will be permitted on the front or sides
of any Building;
         c.   Only ground-mounted Building, electrical, or mechanical equipment
will be allowed on the fronts or sides of Buildings, and such equipment must be
screened from view by walls and/or dense landscaping; and
         d.   All vents, hoods and mechanical units must be completely screened
by parapet walls.
      6.   Access ladders:
         a.   Roof top access ladders shall be located internal to the
Building;
         b.   All hand rails, hatches, etc. shall be completely screened by the
parapet wall; and
         c.   External ladders are not permitted.
      7.   Exterior Wall and Soffit:
         a.   Primary materials may include:
            (1)   Stucco;
            (2)   Cementitious siding;
            (3)   Brick;
            (4)   Integral colored, sandblasted, honed and/or split faced CMU.;
            (5)   Wood;
            (6)   Architecturally designed metal panels;
            (7)   Brick; or
            (8)   Natural cultured stone.
         b.   Accent materials may include:
            (1)   Clear or lightly tinted glass;
            (2)   Natural and simulated stone veneer;
            (3)   Rough cut wood beams;
            (4)   Columns and accent bands;
            (5)   Ceramic tile;
            (6)   Anodized aluminum stainless steel fascia; or
            (7)   Non-corrosive corrugated steel.
         c.   Prohibited Building Materials shall include:
            (1)   T-111 siding except in interior ceiling locations;
            (2)   Standard unfinished gray CMU;
            (3)   Unfinished plywood or wood trim;
            (4)   Vinyl siding;
            (5)   Mirrored glass;
            (6)   Highly reflective materials; and
            (7)   Wood shingles on roofs due to fire risk.
      8.   Roofs:
         a.   Primary and accent roof materials visible from street level shall
include:
            (1)   Concrete or clay tile;
            (2)   Architectural shingles;
            (3)   Metal standing seam (concealed fasteners are required);
            (4)   Visible roofing to have low reflectivity; or
            (5)   Concealed fasteners are required.
         b.   Primary roof materials for low slope roofs screened by parapet
walls shall include:
            (1)   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC);
            (2)   Thermoplastic Polyolefin (TPO); or
            (3)   Other associated single-ply membrane roofing.
         c.   Prohibited Materials:
            (1)   Wood shingles; and
            (2)   Flammable materials that are not firewise approved.
      9.   Colors:
         a.   Earthen tones are encouraged;
         b.   Flat or low gloss finishes are encouraged;
         c.   Roof mounted mechanicals, all vents protruding through the roof
and unscreened, and similar features shall be painted so as to match the color
of the roof;
         d.   Exposed metal flashing or trim will be anodized or painted to
blend with the exterior colors of the Building; and
         e.   Where appropriate, for historic features, other paint colors may
be appropriate to comply with approvals from the applicable historic agency or
to honor the historic structure.
      10.   Exterior Areas:
         a.   Refuse and Recycling Collections Areas:
            (1)   All refuse and recycling from any Parcel are to be
accumulated in an approved "trash enclosure," provided for such Parcel by the
refuse service provider. All refuse collection areas must be located where the
trash enclosures are concealed to the public and in accordance with this
Chapter. All exterior refuse collection areas must be screened by Building
walls or screening walls. The location of all such enclosures must allow
adequate space for ingress and egress by collection trucks. All waste and
refuse must be frequently and regularly removed from the Parcel.
            (2)   Trash enclosures shall be enclosed and screened from public
view. The sight obscuring screen shallshall comply with the design standards
set forth in Chapter 3 of this Title.
            (3)   If a trash enclosure is attached to, or within ten feet (10')
of the Building which it services, the enclosure must match the colors and
materials of that Building. If the trash enclosure is a shared unit located
centrally within the Parking Lot, then it must match the typical trash
enclosure wall and gate style, see Exhibit 3.1.
            (4)   All refuse and recycling collection areas shall be delineated
on the Parking Lot layout and design plan. Trash enclosures shall not be
located in a manner that obstructs or interferes with any designated vehicular
or pedestrian circulation routes within a Parking Lot.
            (5)   All trash enclosure gates shall be complimentary color to the
Building as determined by the Avimor Design Review Committee and the City of
Eagle.
            (6)   All trash and/or garbage collection areas for commercial,
industrial and multifamily residential uses shall be screened from public view
on at least three sides by a solid wall or structure that is constructed to be
a minimum of one foot (1') above the height of the trash and/or recycling
receptacle within the collection area measured from the finished surface and on
the fourth side by a solid gate not less than the height of the trash and/or
recycling receptacle. Trash enclosures and containers shall comply with the
design standards set forth in Chapter 3 of this Title.
            (7)   Service areas for new Buildings will be located at the rear
including loading, recycling, garbage, meters, mechanical equipment, etc.
Service areas will be screened from view to the height of the equipment with
decorative walls compatible with the Building facade if visible from the
street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-709.png]
 
         b.   Decks And Patios:
            (1)   Concrete (stamped finish and smooth finish);
            (2)   Brick pavers;
            (3)   Wood polymer composite lumber; or
            (4)   Wood (pressure treated, redwood).
         c.   Fences, Decorative Wall, Screening Elements:
            (1)   Fences and Walls: The purpose of this Section is to provide
criteria for fencing and walls that assist in distinguishing and delineating
spaces and property lines, and in providing security and safety. However,
fences and walls should not block views of riparian corridors, and should not
pose a danger, or be an impediment to movement of wildlife. Transitional slopes
between improved Lot Areas should be maintained by vegetation and natural rock
features; walls will be approved only where required or for structural
integrity.
            (2)   Fencing must adhere to an approved, consistent community
theme.
            (3)   Wrought iron fencing shall be forty-eighty inches (48'')
maximum height and picket spacing shall be no closer than four inches (4")
apart or wider than eight inches (8") apart. All wrought iron fencing must have
a solid top rail as a protection for big game; spikes and pointed finials are
prohibited. If the Avimor Conservation Director gives written approval, wrought
iron fencing height may be increased up to seventy-two inches (72").
            (4)   Lot-line fencing in the front of mixed-use product will be
limited to open fencing, or to planting hedge and must not exceed 42" in
height.
            (5)   Site walls shall be of the same character, color and finish
as the primary structure, unless otherwise approved by the Avimor Design Review
Committee and the City of Eagle.
            (6)   Site walls, fences, berms or landscaping may align with the
Building Envelope but must never delineate the entire envelope.
            (7)   The maximum uninterrupted height of any retaining wall shall
be six (6) feet, measured from grade to top of wall. Where grades require more
than one wall, additional walls must be set apart a distance of one foot
horizontally for each one foot of vertical of the second wall and the areas
between walls must be landscaped.
            (8)   All fencing must follow firewise standards and requirements.
            (9)   Screening elements shall include, but not be limited to:
deciduous trees (shade and ornamental), evergreen trees, berms, solid fences,
walls and sound walls. Cyclone shall not be deemed a screening material and is
not permitted.
            (10)   Screen walls permitted outside Setback along the side of the
property adjacent to single-family residential are to be between six feet and
eight feet (6'-8') high.
            (11)   Garden walls or parking screen walls permitted within the
Setback shall be a maximum of three feet (3').
            (12)   Where visible from streets, screen walls shall be
constructed to match the typical Parking Lot screen wall detail. Appropriate
landscaping should be used to reduce the visual impact of screen walls.
            (13)   Approved Material:
               (a)   Vinyl (if earthen tones);
               (b)   Block (with columns);
               (c)   Brick (with columns);
               (d)   Wrought iron;
               (e)   Architectural metal;
               (f)   Decorative (such as three-rail ranch fencing or stamped
concrete);
               (g)   Gabion style;
               (h)   Chain-link (rubberized) for sport-court recreation
applications;
               (i)   Chain-link for temporary Construction Yards only;
               (j)   Composite;
               (k)   Greenscreen; and
               (l)   Stone.
            (14)   Prohibited fencing:
               (a)   Cedar, fir and similar high fire combustible fencing, and
barbed wire (with the exception it is allowed for use in ranching operations
only); and
               (b)   Chain-link, except as allowed above.
         d.   Storage Areas and service yards:
            (1)   No storage is permitted between any public street and the
Setback line of any Building in Avimor. Storage areas must be located in the
least-visible area of each Parcel. All Outdoor Storage areas and service yards
must be visually screened from streets and adjoining property by a continuous
screen wall. No work in progress, stored merchandise, inventory, or racks may
extend above the height of the screen wall. Placement and/or installation of
temporary mini mobile, mini storage or cargo container units will not be
allowed. This requirement does not apply to construction equipment or supplies
needed for renovation work.
            (2)   All Outdoor Storage areas shall be completely fenced or
enclosed and screened from public view. The sight obscuring screen shall be at
least six feet (6'), but not greater than ten feet (10') in height, and shall
be comprised of the materials described in Section 11B 3-6 of this Chapter. One
side of the Outdoor Storage area shall be used for access into the storage
area.
            (3)   All motor vehicles (other than passenger vehicles and
vehicles offered for sale, if permitted by the Title) and all equipment
operated within Avimor are to be stored in a screened Outdoor Storage area in
accordance with Chapter 4 of this Title. All vehicle service repairs, cleaning,
and maintenance activities must be conducted within a Building.
         e.   Loading Areas:
            (1)   All loading and unloading are to be conducted in approved
designated loading areas. Loading areas are to be designed as integral parts of
the facility and maintained in a neat and clean manner so as to not detract
from the appearance of the property. Loading areas are to be located in the
least-visible area of a Building. Rear-building loading is preferred; however,
side building loading may be allowed, provided the loading areas are adequately
screened.
            (2)   Loading will not be permitted on the street, in parking
areas, in fire lanes, or at the front of any Building in or in any area
fronting on a public street.
            (3)   Loading areas (including, but not limited to, Loading Spaces,
loading docks, and service or maintenance areas) shall be screened from public
view pursuant Section 11B-3-6 of this Chapter. In addition, loading areas that
abut a residential district shall attenuate noise associated with such use by
providing a sound wall and/or berm with screen plantings around the loading
areas or at the property line abutting the residential district.
      11.   Building Height/Mass:
         a.   Maximum building height is set forth in Tables 2.2 in Section
11B-2-4-F of this Title. Buildings should be encouraged to vary their height to
create visual interest, but not so much to create proportional discontinuity.
Features such as a terracing parapet, multiple peaks, jogged ridge lines,
dormers and gable ends are encouraged.
         b.   Balconies are encouraged on upper floors and over entry Porches
to provide additional visual interest, protection from elements, and
opportunities for social interaction, street life and added security.
         c.   Commercial buildings should be distinguishable by special
architectural features. Clock Towers, turrets, or similar elements may be used
to create special landmark features.
         d.   Facade articulation shall be achieved by incorporating a
combination (at least 3 or more) of the following detail elements every fifty
(50) feet in wall length on each Building elevation:
            (1)   Changes in color, texture, and/or material;
            (2)   Projections, recesses, and reveals, expressing structural
bays or other aspects of the architecture with a minimum change of plane of
twelve (12) inches;
            (3)   Windows and primary entrances; and
            (4)   Projections or breaks in the vertical rise of the building
elevation.
         e.   The facades of all multi-family dwelling Buildings shall be
articulated by incorporating three or more of the following, See 3.2 below:
            (1)   Balconies;
            (2)   Bay or box windows;
            (3)   Porches or articulated entries;
            (4)   Dormers;
            (5)   Variations in materials and/or colors;
            (6)   Variations in roof forms;
            (7)   Variation in window sizes and shapes;
            (8)   Vertical elements that demarcate Building modules; and
            (9)   Building masses are to be similar in form and of strong
geometry.
Exhibit 3.2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-711.png]
 
   C.   Streetscape: Streetscape improvements are to include street trees,
streetlights, pedestrian lighting, bollards, public art, kiosks and
furnishings. In areas anticipated to have higher concentrations of pedestrian
use wider sidewalks and a further varied number of amenities are to be made
available to enhance the pedestrian experience and to further encourage the
health of the community.
      1.   Streetscape Design:
         a.   The sidewalks in the Village Center are to be designed to
accommodate many of the Streetscape elements that are found in the public
Right-of-Way. These include, but are not limited to, street trees, landscaping,
lights, street furniture, and kiosks;
         b.   Sidewalks within the Village Center should be in the range of
five to ten feet (5' - 10') in width or greater to accommodate larger volumes
of pedestrians, increased activity and pedestrian amenities such as street
furniture and lights;
         c.   Pedestrian crossings should be constructed of a contrasting
material including highly contrasting color to provide high visibility for both
motorists and pedestrians subject to the Local Highway Departments approval;
and
         d.   Site Furnishings should be located at key nodes where pedestrians
are intended to gather. This may include locations such as the forecourt of a
Building, a pedestrian node on the sidewalk (where space permits or a bump out
location is located), and public spaces for informal or spontaneous uses and
programmed uses. Furthermore, all Site Furnishings shall be approved by the
Avimor Design Review Committee and the City of Eagle.
      2.   Public Plaza/Patios:
         a.   Should provide an opportunity to accommodate a variety of
landscape elements such as a water feature, public art or an architectural
feature;
         b.   May contain intimate sitting areas adjacent to retail or
commercial Buildings and sidewalks with views to and from the street.
Opportunities to establish patios and plazas that are integral to site
development throughout the Village Center core should be encouraged;
         c.   Provide shielded down-lighting of the patio and plaza areas to
promote safety; and
         d.   Public spaces will be encouraged to include other pedestrian
amenities such as drinking fountains, bicycle racks, trash receptacles, etc.
Grass areas, low walls and steps can be used as alternate forms of seating.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-7: LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER AREA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Overview and Intent: The built landscape within Avimor will embrace the
surrounding natural landscape as the foundation for design. Preservation and
integration of native vegetation and materials is critical to preserving a
sense of place. It also provides an opportunity to enhance habitat and to
create a seamless transition to the more urban environments which bind the
development together. This transition will occur in accordance with the
following practices:
      1.   Preserve native vegetation and plants in all undisturbed areas;
      2.   Plant selection shall be from the preferred plant list, see Section
11B-3-7(W) of this Chapter, appropriate to varied site locations and land uses;
      3.   When adjacent to undisturbed natural features, blend structures with
the existing terrain through landscape design and selection of plant material;
      4.   Use plant materials to reduce Building scale and mass to help
integrate the structure into its surroundings;
      5.   Protect areas disturbed by construction from erosion by revegetation
as soon as possible after completion of such activity as seasonal conditions
allow;
      6.   Climate conditions and Building orientation shall guide the type and
location of trees and shrubbery;
      7.   Water conservation and sustainability shall guide plant location and
groupings, and mulching shall be encouraged to preserve moisture in planting
beds;
      8.   Mixed Use/Commercial planting may include deciduous trees of a
minimum of a two (2") inch caliper in size and character to provide shading for
pedestrians, roadways, and Buildings during the summer, and conversely, to
enable solar gain during winter months;
      9.   Windbreaks and buffering of noise and light will be considered in
the design and placement of trees and shrubbery;
      10.   Except for fire-defensible areas, undeveloped land and undisturbed
Lot Areas shall not be irrigated or landscaped, other than for enhancement or
restoration of drought resistant plants and grasses; and
      11.   Where appropriate, new landscaping should be less or nonpalatable
to wildlife as outlined in Section 11B 3-7 W, Plant Section Guide.
   B.   Landscape as Percent of Site:
      1.   Landscaping shall cover a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the
property on multi-family residential developments. Hardscape plaza areas, such
as decorative concrete/paver patios that are integrated into the design of the
landscaped area, may be included in the fifteen percent (15%) landscape
coverage requirement.
      2.   Landscaping shall cover a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
property on all other developments. Hardscape plaza areas, such as decorative
concrete/paver patios that are integrated into the design of the landscaped
area, may be included in the ten percent (10%) landscape coverage requirement.
      3.   All landscape improvements required in this Section shall count
toward fulfillment of the above minimum percentages.
   C.   Retention, Removal, And Replacement Of Trees:
      1.   Retention Of Existing Trees:
         a.   Existing trees shall be retained unless removal is approved in
writing by the City.
      2.   Removal And Replacement Of Existing Trees:
         a.   For each caliper inch of deciduous tree removed, an equivalent
amount of caliper inches shall be replanted. For each vertical foot of
coniferous tree removed, an equivalent amount of vertical feet shall be
replanted;
      Example: An eight-inch (8") caliper deciduous tree is removed; an
acceptable replacement would be four (4) two-inch (2") caliper deciduous trees.
A twelve foot (12') tall coniferous tree is removed, an acceptable replacement
would be two (2) six foot (6') tall coniferous trees.
         b.   When a homeowners association or its agent removes tree(s) from a
subdivision Common Area to appropriately thin an overgrown canopy, replacement
shall not be required provided the site remains in compliance with
subdivision's approved landscape plan as determined by the City:
         c.   Unless it is determined by the City that replacement is necessary
to preserve and/or restore riparian and wildlife habitat, removal of the
following trees shall not otherwise require replacement: black locust, poplar,
cottonwood, willow, tree of heaven, elm, and silver maple. Trees which are weak
wooded, weak branched, suckering, damaged, diseased, insect infested, or
containing similar maladies may be exempt from replacement if removal is first
approved by the City;
         d.   In cases where the condition of the tree(s) constitutes an
"Emergency" the tree(s) may be removed without approval provided that the City
is notified after the tree's removal and provided with documentation indicating
the tree's condition at time of removal; and
         e.   Planting within public rights of way shall be with approval from
the City and the public entity owning the property.
      3.   Damage During Construction: Existing trees or shrubs that are
retained shall be protected from damage to bark, branches, or roots during
construction. Construction or excavation occurring within the drip line of any
public or private retained tree or shrub may severely damage the tree or shrub.
Any severely damaged tree shall be replaced.
      4.   Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Grade changes and impervious
surfaces shall be allowed at a distance from the trunk of a retained tree equal
to the diameter of the tree trunk plus six feet (6'), or to the drip line,
whichever is furthest from the trunk.
      5.   Minimum Landscaping: Existing vegetation which is to be retained may
be used to satisfy the minimum required landscaping.
   D.   Prohibited Materials And Landscaping:
      1.   No required landscape areas shall include artificial trees, plants,
or any carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute. Artificial turf may be
used for nonrequired landscape areas such as sports fields and putting greens.
      2.   Clear vision triangles shall be observed in regard to all
vegetation. All shade trees planted within vision triangles shall be pruned to
a minimum seven feet (7') above the adjacent sidewalk and fourteen feet (14')
above the adjacent roadway surface whenever branches overhang such
improvements. Shrubs and ground covers planted within the vision triangle shall
not exceed three feet (3') height at maturity. The boundaries of the vision
triangle shall be shown on the landscape plans and are defined by measuring
from the intersection of the edges of two (2) adjacent roadways forty feet
(40') along each roadway and connecting the two (2) points with a straight
line. In all cases, ITD and ACHD standards shall apply also.
      3.   When the City determines that a sight obstruction exists, it shall
notify the owner of the property upon which the obstruction is located and
order that the obstruction b removed within fifteen (15) days.
   E.   Installation and Minimum Standards:
      1.   Soil and slope stabilization must result after landscape
installation. Soil and slope stabilization measures shall comply with those
contained in the Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside Development Standards.
Manufactured slopes shall be revegetated within the first planting season
following completion of construction.
      2.   Revegetation of slopes and other areas intended to reestablish
native vegetation shall use a site-specific upland revegetation seed mix.
      3.   Class I, II and III trees planted within the right of way shall meet
the applicable highway departments standards.
      4.   Only class I trees may be planted under or within ten feet (10') of
any overhead line.
      5.   Conifers are prohibited as a street tree, unless approved by the
applicable highway department, but are allowed outside the right of way and
vision triangle.
      6.   Trees of any type shall not be planted within ten feet (10') of any
streetlight, storm drain facility, drain inlet, structure of piping system,
seepage bed, fire hydrant or utility box.
      7.   The minimum acceptable size for deciduous trees shall be two-inch
(2") caliper, balled and burlapped.
      8.   The minimum acceptable size for evergreen trees shall be six feet to
seven feet (6' - 7') balled and burlapped.
      9.   A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the required shrubs in a project
shall be one gallon.
      10.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required shrubs in a
project shall be five (5) gallon or larger.
      11.   Hydroseeding of plant material may be used in conjunction with
container plants (shrubs, vines and ground covers) or by itself for
revegetating disturbed areas.
      12.   Plant material selection shall be taken from the plant list in
Section 11B-3-7 W of this Chapter.
      13.   Certification Of Completion: Upon the completion of the landscape
installation, or other improvement subject to design review approval, a written
certification of completion shall be prepared by the licensed landscape
architect responsible for the landscape plan. The certification of completion
shall state that the installation of all landscape improvements is in
substantial compliance with the City approved landscape plan. This
certification shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in lieu of, the inspections
performed and certificates issued by the City.
         a.   Report Of Deficiencies: In the event that deficiencies are
present after the landscape installation, or other improvements subject to
design review approval, the licensed landscape architect shall prepare and file
with the City a report noting the deficiencies in the improvements. The City
will not accept a certification of completion, or issue a certificate of
occupancy, until the licensed landscape architect has verified that the
deficiencies have been corrected.
         b.   Landscape Architect Designee: The licensed landscape architect
may, at his or her discretion, appoint an authorized designee to certify the
project provided that the designee is a licensed landscape architect.
   F.   Maintenance:
      1.   All required landscapes shall be permanently maintained in a healthy
growing condition by the property owner or property owner's representative.
This includes the maintenance of street trees and/or other landscape materials
within or abutting the public right of way adjacent to the subject property.
The property owner or property owner's representative shall remove, and if
required to meet the standards of these requirements, shall replace any
unhealthy or dead plant material immediately or as the planting season permits.
In all cases, maintenance and planting within public rights of way shall be
with approval from the public and/or private entities owning the property.
      2.   All plant materials shall be pruned, trimmed, watered, and otherwise
maintained to create an attractive appearance and a healthy growing condition.
No trees shall be severely pruned or topped.
      3.   Dead, diseased, stolen, or vandalized plant materials shall be
replaced by the next planting season.
      4.   Property owners shall keep landscaped areas free of weeds and trash.
      5.   Stolen, vandalized, or otherwise damaged fences and /or walls shall
be replaced immediately. Fences and/or walls shall be maintained to create an
attractive.
      6.   An initial and long-term monitoring and maintenance plan shall be
developed prior to preliminary platting by the Master Developer and implemented
by the property owner for native revegetated areas and undisturbed areas within
the Avimor Habitat Management Plan (AHMP), as identified in the habitat
mitigation plan, to gauge the success of revegetation efforts. A noxious weed
control plan was developed as part of the habitat mitigation plan and will be
implemented by the property owner to reduce and control invasive and noxious
weeds within the AHMP.
         a.   Avimor shall recognize the established populations of Idaho State
Listed Noxious Weeds within the development area.
         b.   All Noxious Weeds and Invasive Plants shall be controlled in such
a manner as outlined in the Avimor Habitat Management Plan.
   G.   Completion Time:
      1.   The Administrator may authorize a delay in the completion of
planting if a surety for one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of
installation is provided to the City. The developer may be provided progressive
payments out of the surety to the extent of the cost of the completed portion
of the required improvement is completed, inspected and deemed approved by the
City of Eagle.
   H.   Irrigation Required:
      1.   All required landscaped areas must be provided with an automatic
underground irrigation system.
      2.   The system shall be equipped with a reduced pressure backflow
prevention device, if required by any applicable agency or if irrigation is
provided by a potable water system.
      3.   The system shall be designed and constructed to provide one hundred
percent (100%) spray coverage for sod areas. Plant and tree areas shall be
required to have drip irrigation.
      4.   Wherever feasible, sprinkler heads irrigating lawn or other high-
water demand landscape areas shall be circuited so that they are on a separate
zone or zones from those irrigating trees, shrubbery or other reduced water
demand areas.
      5.   Sprinkler heads shall be placed as required to reduce direct
overthrow onto nonpervious areas (walks, drives, etc.).
      6.   The use of low trajectory spray nozzles is encouraged in order to
reduce the effect of wind velocity on the spray system.
      7.   Use of nonpotable water for use in the irrigation of lawn and plant
material is required when determined to be available.
      8.   All nonpotable water access points shall be clearly and permanently
labeled with markers indicating that the water is not safe for human
consumption.
      9.   Maintain all irrigation systems to ensure proper operation and water
conservation.
   I.   Buffer Areas/Common Lots:
      1.   Definition: A transition zone or buffer area consists of horizontal
space (land) and vertical elements (plants, berms, fences, or walls). The
purpose of such buffer space is to physically separate and visually screen
adjacent land uses which are not fully compatible due to differing facilities,
activities, or different intensities of use, such as townhouses and a
Convenience Store, or a high-volume roadway and residential dwellings;
      2.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   When a nonresidential use abuts a residential use, a ten-foot
wide by six foot high (10' x 6') landscaped buffer is required;
         b.   When a nonresidential Parking Lot abuts a residential activity, a
five foot wide by six foot high (5' x 6') landscaped buffer is required; and
         c.   To conceal Outdoor Storage areas, trash receptacles, exposed
equipment associated with any commercial or industrial activity, and Off-Street
Loading when adjacent to or in view from a residential activity or public
street right of way, a five-foot wide by six foot high (5' x 6') landscaped
buffer is required.
      3.   Materials:
         a.   All buffer areas shall be comprised of, but not limited to, a mix
of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover in which evergreen
plant materials comprise a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total plant
material used;
         b.   Height requirements of a minimum of three (3') shall be
accomplished with plant material, with a fence, or decorative wall;
         c.   The required buffer area shall result in an effective barrier
within three (3) years and be maintained such that sixty percent (60%) or more
of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of vision through
it;
         d.   All landscape buffers that are adjacent to Natural Open Space
shall be reseeded back to their natural state and shall not be required to have
irrigated landscaping; and
         e.   Cedar fencing is prohibited for screening.
   J.   General Landscaping Guidelines:
      1.   Professional landscape design: Landscaping plans must be prepared by
and stamped by Licensed landscape architect registered in the State of Idaho.
      2.   Plantings to emphasize entries: Landscaping should be used to
emphasize Building entries.
      3.   Plantings to screen unattractive areas: Landscaping such as walls,
berms, plantings, and innovative site design will be required to screen
unattractive site features or uses from public view. Areas of concern include,
but are not limited to: service areas, roll-up doors, refuse collection areas,
and vehicle storage areas.
      4.   Landscaping clearance: Landscaping shall have a seven foot (7')
minimum clearance from fire equipment in all directions to new landscaping and
a thirteen foot six inch (13'-6") vertical clearance from tree canopy.
   K.   Landscaping Materials:
      1.   Materials not listed in this Section or the preferred plant list in
Section 11B-3-7 W of this Chapter, may be considered, but are subject to
approval by the City.
      2.   Common Lots: Residential: The following are appropriate materials to
be utilized for residential Common Lot landscaping:
         a.   Lawn, either seed or sod;
         b.   A minimum of one deciduous shade tree per two thousand (2,000)
s.f.;
         c.   Artificial turf;
         d.   Rock mulch, bark or other similar materials;
         e.   Shrubs;
         f.   Ground cover; or
         g.   Plants listed in the preferred plant list.
      3.   Common Lots: Commercial:
         a.   Lawn, either seed or sod;
         b.   A minimum of one deciduous shade tree per two thousand (2,000)
s.f.;
         c.   Rock mulch, bark or other similar materials;
         d.   Shrubs;
         e.   Ground cover; or
         f.   Plants listed in the preferred plant list.
      4.   For design flexibility, half of the required shade trees may be
substituted on a two to one (2:1) basis with ornamental and evergreen trees.
      5.   Buffer areas should include a variety of species, arranged to create
varied and attractive views. Open fences, decorative walls, and berms may be
used.
Height changes, offset angles, different materials, and other design techniques
are required so as to create variety.
   L.   Streetscapes: The following standards shall apply to Avimor internal
and perimeter roadways as shown. In all cases, any planting within public
rights of way shall be with approval from the public entity owning the
property. (The rights of way widths and pavement areas in the Sections below
are shown for illustrative purposes only. Actual rights of way widths and lane
configurations will be determined by the Local Highway Department as
appropriate.)
      1.   Foothills Arterial Streets:
         a.   The landscape buffer for Foothills Principal Arterials shall be
twenty feet (20') minimum except adjacent to single family residential uses
where it shall be thirty feet (30') minimum. See Exhibit 3.3 and 3.4 for
example;
         b.   The landscape buffer for Foothills Minor Arterials shall be ten
feet (10') minimum except adjacent to single family residential uses where it
shall be fifteenfeet (15') minimum. See Exhibit 3.3 and 3.4 for example;
         c.   A detached sidewalk shall be provided on both sides of the street
at least eight feet (8') from the back of curb. The sidewalk shall be a minimum
of eight feet (8') wide and may or may not meander depending on the Streetscape
approved by the City with the preliminary plat. Sidewalks may be attached to
the curb in front of bus pullouts but shall be six feet (6') minimum width in
such locations. An eight-foot (8') wide multi-use pathway on one side of the
road, in lieu of sidewalks, may be implemented;
         d.   Landscape buffers adjacent to Natural Open Space shall not be
irrigated landscape. These areas shall be reseeded back to their natural state;
and
         e.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area along arterial streets:
            (1)   One (1) tree per eighty (80) linear feet of street frontage
on each side of the street except next to single-family residential uses where
there shall be one (1) tree per sixty (60) linear feet.
            (2)   One (1) shrub/ground cover per one hundred (100) s.f. of
buffer area (excluding sidewalks, drives and other Hardscape areas). Turf may
be used in place of shrubs/ground covers, but the amount used shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the landscape area on a plat by plat or phase by
phase basis.
Exhibit 3.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-713.png]
 
   Exhibit 3.4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-715.png]
 
      2.   Collector Streets:
         a.   The landscape buffer for collector streets shall be eight feet
(8') minimum See Exhibit 3.5 for example;
         b.   A detached sidewalk shall be provided on both sides of the street
at least five feet (5') from the back of curb. The sidewalk shall be a minimum
of five feet (5') wide and may or may not meander depending on the Streetscape
concept shown on the preliminary plat. Sidewalks may be attached to the curb in
front of bus pullouts, drop-off areas, On Street Parking areas, and similar
circumstances as approved by Local Highway Department and the City but shall be
six feet (6') minimum width in such locations. One (1) eight foot (8') wide
pathway is allowed, in lieu of sidewalks, on either side of the road;
         c.   Landscape buffers adjacent to Natural Open Space shall not be
irrigated landscape. These areas shall be reseeded back to their natural state;
and
         d.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area along collector streets:
            (1)   One (1) tree per eighty (80) linear feet of street frontage
on each side of the street, except next to single-family residential uses where
there shall be one (1) tree per sixty (60) linear feet.
            (2)   One (1) shrub/ground cover per one hundred (100) s.f. of
buffer area (excluding sidewalks, drives and other Hardscape areas). Turf may
be used in place of shrubs/ground covers, but the amount used shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the landscape area on a plat by plat or phase by
phase basis.
Exhibit 3.5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-717.png]
 
      3.   Urban Streets:
         a.   Urban streets may be arterials, collectors or local streets, or
stretches thereof, which are located in the VC Land Use District and the HMU,
MU, CC and NC Sub-Use Districts;
         b.   Urban streets shall have an attached or detached sidewalk on both
sides of the street. The sidewalk shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide if
attached and a minimum of five feet (5') wide with a minimum five-foot (5')
landscape buffer if detached. One eight foot (8') pathway may be implemented in
lieu of sidewalks on either side of the road;
         c.   Landscape buffers adjacent to Natural Open Space shall not be
irrigated landscape. These areas shall be reseeded back to their natural state;
         d.   Trees may be planted in planter beds, tree grates or silva cells;
         e.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area along urban streets:
            (1)   One (1) tree per sixty (60) linear feet of street frontage
(excluding driveways) on each side of the street. For urban streets with center
planted medians, a total of one (1) tree per forty (40) linear feet of roadway.
Exhibit 3.6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-719.png]
 
      4.   Local Residential Streets:
         a.   There shall be a minimum five-foot (5') wide landscape buffer for
local residential streets were detached sidewalks are located. Trees shall not
be planted in landscape buffers unless the buffer is a minimum six feet (6')
wide. Trees planted in landscape buffers at six feet (6') in width require root
barriers to be installed. No root barrier is required when the landscaped
buffer exceeds eight feet (8') in width. The minimum Setback for local streets
(both public and private) in multi-family residential uses shall correspond to
the Setbacks identified in Chapter 2, Land Use Standards, Table 2.2;
         b.   An attached or detached sidewalk shall be provided on both sides
of the roadway, unless the City waives the requirement per the below
conditions, as shown on example Exhibit 3.7 below;
         c.   The sidewalk shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and may or
may not meander depending on the Streetscape concept. The sidewalk requirement
may be waived as part of the preliminary plat approval in one of the following
conditions;
            (1)   A single-loaded street adjacent to a slope (sidewalk shall be
required on the loaded side only);
            (2)   A double-loaded street in a hillside area where topographic
constraints allow sidewalk on one side of the street only to minimize grading;
            (3)   A Single Family Special Lot (SFSL) neighborhood Plat as
detailed in Section
11B-2-5 of this Title (sidewalk shall be required on at least one side of the
street);
            (4)   Low Density (one (1) acre and larger Lots) neighborhoods
(sidewalk requirement may be waived entirely where a striped four-foot (4')
wide shoulder is provided); and
            (5)   One eight-foot (8') pathway is allowed in lieu of sidewalks
on either side of the road.
         d.   Landscape buffers adjacent to Natural Open Space shall not be
irrigated landscape. These areas shall be reseeded back to their natural state.
         e.   The following plant material shall be provided, at a minimum,
within the limits of the buffer area along local streets:
            (1)   One (1) shade class (class II or class III) selected from the
approved tree list in 11B-3-7 W of this Section shall be located on all streets
with a landscape strip between the sidewalk and the curb. If the sidewalk is
attached, then the tree shall be planted a minimum five feet (5') in back of
the sidewalk. Trees shall be planted at the front of each Lot generally located
on each side of the Lot line corner with the distance between trees to be a
minimum of thirty-five feet (35') and a maximum of eighty feet (80') of street
frontage.
Exhibit 3.7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-721.png]
 
      5.   Foothills Collector:
         a.   No landscape buffers are required.
         b.   The Setbacks from a for Foothills Collector Street section shall
be twenty feet (20') minimum except adjacent to single-family residential uses
where the minimum Setback shall be forty-five feet (45'). See Exhibit 3.8.
Exhibit 3.8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-723.png]
 
      6.   State Highway 55: The required Setback from Highway 55 shall be
twenty-five feet (25') with a ten foot (10') high berm to residential uses; and
twenty feet (20') Setback to commercial uses.
   M.   Wildlife Crossings: Wildlife crossings, if any, identified in the
Habitat Management Plan shall be avoided.
   N.   Wetland/Riparian Areas: Landscaping of wetland and riparian areas shall
be in compliance with the Avimor Wildlife Habitat Plan and as directed by the
Conservation Director.
   O.   Slope Revegetation for Naturalized Areas: Slope revegetation shall
follow the criteria set forth in the Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside
Development Standards.
   P.   Parking Lot Landscape:
      1.   Visual Impact: Landscape shall be provided to minimize the visual
impact of off-street parking: Walls, fences, hedges, berms, and landscape may
be used to screen parking areas (Cedar fencing shall not be permitted). In the
design of large parking areas, arrange bays of Parking Spaces to be separated
by landscape.
      2.   Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping Standards:
         a.   Definition: Perimeter Parking Lot landscaping shall include all
landscape areas between the outside the perimeter of the Parking Lot and the
public street Right-of-Way.
         b.   Applicability: Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping shall be
provided when a Parking Lot is located adjacent to a public streets or rights
of way. The perimeter Parking Lot landscaping shall serve to shield views of
parked cars to passing motorists and pedestrians, and to establish coordination
among architecturally diverse Buildings, which creates a pleasing, harmonious
appearance along the roadway.
         c.   Landscape Area: Four (4) options are provided for fulfilling
Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping requirement as shown on exhibit 3.9 of this
Section:
            (1)   Provide a ten-foot (10') wide landscaped strip between the
property line/Right-of- Way and the Parking Lot, and plant with a minimum of
one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty-five (35) linear feet of
frontage, excluding driveway openings;
            (2)   Provide an earth berm of thirty inches (30") minimum height
(do not exceed 3:1 slope) within a ten-foot (10') wide landscaped strip between
the property line/Right- of-Way and the Parking Lot, and plant with a minimum
of one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty-five (35) linear feet of
frontage, excluding driveway openings;
            (3)   Provide a six-foot (6') landscaped strip with a minimum
thirty-inch (30") grade drop from the property line to the Parking Lot, and
plant with a minimum of one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty-five
(35) linear feet of frontage, excluding driveway openings. Root barriers shall
be required for all trees planted within a six (6') foot planter next to a
sidewalk and paved parking area; and
            (4)   Provide a six-foot (6') wide landscaped strip between the
property line and the Parking Lot and plant a minimum of one (1) shade tree and
five (5) shrubs per thirty- five (35) linear feet of frontage, excluding
driveway openings. Root barriers shall be required for all trees planted within
a six (6') foot planter next to a sidewalk and paved parking area.
Exhibit 3.9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-725.png]
 
      3.   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping Standards:
         a.   Definition: Interior Parking Lot landscaping shall be the area
inside of the perimeter of the Parking Lot not including access driveways and
adjacent sidewalks; but shall include perimeter landscape buffers and internal
landscaped storm-water areas;
         b.   Applicability: The Parking Lot interior landscaping requirements
apply to new, private off-street Parking Lots of ten (10) spaces or more and to
existing lots which are expanded by more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
existing spaces to contain more than fifteen (15) spaces;
 
Total Number of Parking Spaces Percent of Total Interior Parking Lot
                               Landscaping
10 - 20                        5 percent
21 - 50                        8 percent
51+                            10 percent
 
         c.   Exceptions: Interior Parking Lot Landscaping Standards do not
apply to Storage Yards and Nurseries;
         d.   Perimeter Landscaping Credit: Perimeter landscaping in excess of
the dimensions required for screening may be credited towards meeting the
interior landscaping standards on a square-foot-per-square-foot basis;
         e.   Minimum Landscape Requirements:
         f.   Interior landscape shall consist of an evenly distributed mix of
shade trees with shrubs and/or ground cover plants placed in planter area
islands. At a minimum, one (1) tree and five (5) shrubs or ground covers per
twelve (12) Parking Spaces shall be planted. Trees within four feet of curb or
sidewalks shall be class II, canopy trees.
         g.   Planter Area Island Layout configuration options are shown as
example 3.10 below
Exhibit 3.10
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-727.png]
 
   Q.   Landscaped Commercial Strips:
      1.   Landscaped strips shall be provided between all nonresidential
Building development and roads classified as a local street to lend continuity
among different architectural styles, screen unsightly views, establish a
pleasing view for motorists, and create a safe and pleasant corridor for
pedestrians.
         a.   The landscaped strip shall be tenfeet (10') wide minimum and
planted with one (1) shade tree and ten (10) shrubs for every thirty-five feet
(35') of street frontage. Two (2) ornamental or two (2) evergreen trees may be
substituted for one shade tree.
   R.   Wildfire Protection: The North Foothills are prone to wildfires.
Landscape design shall be reviewed and approved by the applicable fire
districts for consistency with the Avimor wildfire management plan approved by
the Eagle fire district.
   S.   Incentives:
      1.   The Administrator may reduce the site parking requirements by up to
five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed landscape
plan incorporates the retention of existing significant trees, particularly in
the interior of the site.
      2.   The Administrator may reduce the site parking requirements by up to
five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed landscaping
exceeds the requirements of these guidelines by fifteen percent (15%) or more.
      3.   The Administrator may reduce technical standards of Parking Lot
design where paving requirements conflict with the retention of significant
trees.
   T.   Alternative Methods Of Compliance:
      1.   Project Conditions: It is not the intent of these landscape
requirements to inhibit creative solutions to land use problems. Under certain
site conditions, a strict interpretation of requirements may be either
physically impossible or impractical. Alternative compliance is a procedure
that allows certain modifications to existing regulations within this Chapter.
Requests for use of alternative landscaping schemes are justified only when one
or more of the following conditions apply:
         a.   The sites involve space limitations or unusually shaped Parcels;
         b.   Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such
that full compliance is impossible or impractical;
         c.   Due to a change of use of an existing site, the required buffer
yard is larger than can be provided; and
         d.   Safety considerations are involved.
      2.   Request For Alternative Method Of Compliance: The applicant must
provide the City with a written request if an alternative method of compliance
is proposed. The request shall state which requirement as set forth within this
Chapter is to be modified.
      3.   Tree Fund: Persons applying for an alternative method of compliance
for relief from regulations that require all existing trees to remain on site
may elect to make a financial contribution to the Eagle City tree fund in lieu
of retaining all trees on site. If the application is approved, the amount to
be contributed by the applicant will be based upon the total caliper inches of
deciduous tree(s) removed from the site and the total vertical feet of
coniferous trees removed from the site. Cost per caliper inch for deciduous
trees and cost per vertical foot for coniferous trees shall be determined by
resolution of the City Council. The applicant shall have the right to review
and consider the value determination, and following said review, to reapply for
other alternative methods of compliance.
   U.   Plan Preparation: Preparing a landscape plan requires special skills.
Landscape design involves more than a simple arrangement of plants with
irrigation; plants are not haphazardly placed in a way that fills up leftover
space. Landscape plans should reflect a theme so that site elements are
artfully and technically organized in a way that conveys meaning, coherence,
and spatial organization. Landscape should enhance the physical environment as
well as the project's aesthetic character. Therefore, landscape plans to be
submitted for approval shall be prepared by or under the responsible control of
a licensed landscape architect with said plans to be duly stamped to clearly
identify the preparer.
   V.   Grading and Drainage:
      1.   Drainage control: Site grading should control drainage. Grading
should also be designed to screen parking areas, service areas, or other
visually unattractive areas.
      2.   Storm Water Basins: Landscaped areas may be used for Storm Water
Basins to retain and/or detain stormwater. Basins must be designed to retain
and/or detain all water resulting from a 1% Annual Chance Flood, one-hour storm
event and limit discharge to pre development discharge rates. The overall
stormwater basins must also be designed so as not to cause damage to
landscaping or other improvements. The maximum depth of a Storm Water Basin
exposed to direct public view is four feet (4') in depth without a safety
bench. For deeper ponds a ten foot (10') wide safety bench will be required to
be added with top of bench at six inches (6") below design normal surface
elevation. Slopes above the bench shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1).
If a wet pond is designed as the Storm Water Basin than slopes below the bench
shall not exceed two to one (2:1). Where space is limited, retaining walls may
be used. Such walls must complement the Building architecture. Storm Water
Basin design must comply with the Local Highway Department design standards.
      3.   Runoff: Owners/occupants may not allow runoff from their Parcel to
drain onto adjacent Parcels, except through common drainage easements areas.
      4.   Grading and Building access: Site grading may not block access to
the site, internal vehicular circulation, and existing structures.
   W.   Plant Selection Guide:
      1.   This list is the preferred planting list for Avimor. Other plant
species and varieties may be considered with an alternative form of compliance
if approved by the Avimor Design Review Committee and the City Design Review,
as appropriate, if the plant is a street tree or is located within the public
Right-of-Way. Additions to the below plant selection guide can be approved by
the Administrator.
Preferred Plant Materials
Deciduous
Canopy
Trees
(Large
class II
and class
III)
Common    Scientific Size:  Firewise Regionally Deer      Xeric Varieties Character
Name      Name       Ht'xW'          Native     Resistant
Deciduous
Canopy Trees
(Large class
II and class
III)
Common Name  Scientific     Size:     Firewise Regionally Deer      Xeric Varieties    Character
             Name           Ht'xW'             Native     Resistant
                                                                                       Broad,
Bigtooth     Acer                                                                      rounded,
Maple        grandidentatum 45'x25'   X        X          X                          multi-
                                                                                       stemmed,
                                                                                       long-lived
Norway Maple Acer           55'x50'   X                                Deborah       
             platinoides
                                                                                       Not as
Sugar Maple  Acer saccharum 70'x60'   X                  X              Green        drought
                                                                          Mountain     tolerant as
                                                                                       other maples
Ginkgo       Ginkgo biloba  60'x50'                                   Autumn Gold   
                                                                                       More drought
Littleleaf                                                                             and heat
Linden       Tillia cordata 60'x40'   X                                Greenspire   tolerant than
                                                                                       other Tillia
                                                                                       species
American     Liquidamber    60'x50'   X                                Moraine      Seed ball
Sweetgum     styraciflua                                                               litter
Black        Populus                                                                   Weak wood,
Cottonwood   trichocarpa    100'x75'  X        X          X                          best in
                                                                                       natural areas
Autumn Blaze Acer x                                                                    Not allowed
Maple        freemanii      50'x40'   X                           X                 in ROWs
             'Jeffsred'
London       Platnaus       100'x80'  X                           X     Bloodgood     
Planetree    acerifolia
                                                                                       Not always
Red Alder    Alnus rubra    50'x30'   X        X                                    available in
                                                                                       a Nursery
River Birch  Betula nigra   45'x30'   X                  X              Heritage     Attractive
                                                                                       bark texture
European     Carpinus       40'x30'   X                           X     Fastigiata    
Hornbeam     betulus
Common       Celtis                                                                    Drought
Hackberry    occidentalis   50'x50'   X                           X                 tolerant and
                                                                                       clean
Net Leaf                                    X                   X                  
Hackberry
                                                                                       Solid street
             Fraxinus                                                                  tree, yellow
Green Ash    pennsylvanica  55'x50'   X                  X         X                 fall color,
                                                                                       watch for
                                                                                       borers
                                                                                       Moraine
Thornless    Gleditsia                                                    Seedless     Northern
Honey Locust triacanthos    55'x50'   X                  X         X     male         Aedaim
                                                                          cultivars    Perfeetion
                                                                                       Starburst
Quaking      Populus        50'x20'   X        X                                    Best around
Aspen        tremuloides                                                               swales
             Pyrus                                                        Aristrocrat,
Callery Pear calleryana     30'x25'   X                           X     Non-invasiv   
             "Aristocrat"                                                 e cultivars
                                                                          only
Swamp White  Quercus        60'x60'   X                                             
Oak          bicolor
                                                                                       Rapid grower,
Red Oak      Quercus rubra  60'x40'   X                           X                 nice fall
                                                                                       color, can
                                                                                       hold leaves
Burr Oak     Quercus        80'x80'   X                  X         X                  
             macrocarpa
Evergreen                                                                        
Trees
Hostemanns   Abies koreana
Silberlocke  'Horstmanns                                                          
Korean Fir   SilberLocke'
Rocky        Juniperus                                                    Skyline,
Mountain     scopulorum     30'x15'           X          X         X     Rocket        
Juniper
                                                                          Cuppresina,  Requires more
Norway       Picea abies    80'x35'                     X         X     Hoopsii,     water than
Spruce                                                                    Glauca       other
                                                                                       evergreens
Blue Spruce                                                               Hoopsii, Fat
(Compact or  Picea pungens  30'x15'           X          X              Albert,       
Dwarf)                                                                    Kosteri
Bristlecone                                                                            Long lived
Pine         Pinus arista   20'x20'                     X         X                 open canopy
                                                                                       tree
                                                                                       Slow grower
                                                                                       but nice form
Pinyon Pine  Pinus edulis   25'x25'                     X         X                 for
                                                                                       residential
                                                                                       Lots
Vanderwolf   Pinus flexilus                                                            Upright,
Pine         'Vanderwolf'   25'x12'                     X         X                 green/blue
                                                                                       needles
Oregon Green                                                                           Rich green
Austrian     Pinus nigra    20'x15'                     X         X                 with large
Pine         'Oregon Green'                                                            pipe cleaners
                                                                                       and open form
Douglas Fir  Pseudotsuga    100'x30'          X                   X                  
             menziesii
                                                                                       Best in large
Ponderosa    Pinus                                                                     spaces and
Pine         ponderosa      100'x50'  X        X                   X                 natural
                                                                                       riparian
                                                                                       areas.
Ornamental
Trees                                                                            
(Small,
class I)
Vine Maple   Acer           20'x20'   X                  X                           
             circinatum
Amur Maple   Acer ginnala   20'x20'   X                  X         X     Flame        Good color
                                                                          Autumn
Serviceberry Amelanchier    20'x15'   X                  X              Brilliance,   
             grandiflora                                                  Robinhill,
                                                                          Cumulus
                                                                          Forest       Covered in
Eastern      Cercis         25'x20'   X                           X     Pansy,       pink in early
Redbud       canadensis                                                   Lavender     spring, good
                                                                          Twist        fall color
Flowering    Cornus Florida 25'x20'   X                  X                          Showy flowers
Dogwood                                                                                (bracts)
                                                                          Thornless,   Fruit for
*Hawthorn    Crataegus sp,  20'x20'   X        X          X         X     Douglas,     birds, screen
                                                                          Washington
                                                                          Donald
Flowering                                                                 Wyman,
Crabapple    Malus sp.      20'x20'   X                  X         X     Prairie       
                                                                          Fire, Spring
                                                                          Snow
Cherry       Prunus Sp.                                                           
                                                                                       Will sucker,
Chokecherry  Prunus         25'x15'   X        X                   X     Canada Red,  useful for
             virginiana                                                   Schubert     birds and
                                                                                       wildlife
                                                                                       Usually,
Rocky                                                                                  multi-stemmed
Mountain     Acer glabrum   20'x15'   X        X                                    and so often
Maple                                                                                  considered a
                                                                                       large shrub
Paperbark    Acer griseum   30'x25'   X                                             
Maple
Large
Deciduous                                                                        
Shrubs
Western      Amelanchier    12'x6'    X        X                   X                  
Serviceberry alnifolia
Curl-leaf    Cercocarpus
Mountain     ledifolius     10'x6'    X        X          X         X                  
Mahogany
Purple       Cotinus        12'x12'                              X                  
Smoketree    coggyria
                                                                          Pallida,     Shade
             Hamamelis                                                    Arnold       tolerant
Witchhazel   virginiana     20'x20'                              X     Promise,     understory
                                                                          Jelena       plant. Winter
                                                                                       bloom
                                                                          Diablo,
Ninebark     Physocarpus    8'x6'     X        X                   X     Little       Bird habitat
             malvaceus                                                    devil,
                                                                          Coppertina
                                                                                       Good fall
Staghorn                                                                               color,
Sumac        Rhus typhina   25'x25'   X                           X     Bailtiger    naturalizer,
                                                                                       spreads and
                                                                                       colonizes
                                                                          Hakuro
Willow       Salix sp       10'x10'   X                                Nishiki,      
                                                                          Flame, Dwarf
                                                                          Arctic
Elderberry   Sambucus nigra 8'x8'     X                  X              Black Lace,  Habitat, bold
                                                                          Black Beauty texture
                                                                                       Thorns and
Silver       Shepherdia                                                                good bird
Buffaloberry argentea       8'x6'     X        X          X         X                 habitat.
                                                                                       Olive colored
                                                                                       leaves
Cascade      Sorbus                  X        X                                     
Mountain-Ash scopulina
             Syringa                                                      Sensation,   Aromatic in
Common Lilac vulgaris       8'x7'     X                  X         X     Pres Greevy, spring
                                                                          Miss Kim
Viburnum     Viburnum sp.            X                           X                  
Medium D.                                                                        
Shrubs
                                                                                       Upright with
Black        Aronia         8'x7'     X                  X         X     Autumn Magic good fall
Chokeberry   melanocarpa                                                               color,
                                                                                       Colonizer
Fourwing     Atriplex       6'x6'     X        X                   X                  
Salt Bush    canescens
Flowering    Chaenomeles    4'x5'     X                           X     Texas        Early spring
Quince       japonica                                                     Scarlet      bloom
Rabbitbrush  Ericameria     4'x4'     X        X                   X                 Naturalizer
Red-osier                                                                 Flaviamea,   Red twigs for
Dogwood      Cornus sericea 7'x7'     X        X          X         X     Bailey,      winter
                                                                          variegata    interest
Witchalder   Fothergilla    5'x5'     X                           X     Blue Shadow   
             major
                                                                                       Often
                                                                                       upright,
Hibiscus     Hibiscus sp.   6'x5'                                                 colorfully
                                                                                       flowered
                                                                                       screening
                                                                                       plants
Russian Sage Perovksia      5'x4'     X                  X         X                 Reseeds
             atriplicifolia
Mockorange   Philadelphus   7'x6'     X        X                   X                 Fragrant
             lewisii                                                                   Flowers
Cinquefoil   Potentilla              X        X                   X                 Bright yellow
             fruticosa                                                                 flowers,
                                                                          Fineline,    Glossy green
Buckthorn    Rhamnus sp.    12'x4'    X                  X              Tallhedge    columnar
                                                                                       shrubs
*Currant                                                                               Edible
Bush         Ribes sp.      6'x6'     X        X          X         X                 berries,
                                                                                       hardy
                                                                          Nearly Wild, 4-6' high
Shrub Rose   Rosa sp.       5'x5'     X                           X     Knockout     rose for
                                                                                       massing,
Spirea       Spirea sp.     4'x4'     X        X          X         X                  
Common       Symphoricarpos 4'x4'     X        X          X         X                  
Snowberry    albus
Dwarf                                                                                  Medium scale
Cranberry    Viburnum       5'x5'     X                  X         X                 shrub, great
Viburnum     opulus 'Nanum'                                                            year-round
                                                                                       interest
                                                                                       Excellent for
Yucca        Yucca          3'x3'     X                           X                 arid, sunny,
             fillamentosa                                                              exposed
                                                                                       slopes
Evergreen                                                                        
Shrubs
Blue Cloak   Abies concolor 8'x3'                                                 Dwarf tree
Fir          'Blue Cloak'                                                              form
Boxwood      Buxus sp.      3'x3'                       X         X                  
                                                                                       Evergreen,
             Mahonia                                                                   reddish in
Oregon Grape aquifolium     5'x5'     X        X          X         X                 fall, yellow
                                                                                       flowers,
                                                                                       fruit
                                                                          Pumila,
Dwarf Norway Picea abies    4'x6'                                X     Little Gem,   
Spruce       Dwarf                                                        Pusch,
                                                                          Pendula
Dwarf Mugo   Pinus mugo     5'x5'                       X         X     Pumila,       
Pine                                                                      Sherwood
Cherry       Prunus         6'x5'     X                           X     Schipka      Young plants
Laurel       laurocerasus                                                              winter burn
                                                                                       Good
Rhododendron Rhododendron   4'x5'     X                  X                          courtyard.
             sp.                                                                       Part-shade
                                                                                       shrub
Carol Mackie Daphne x                                                                  Fragrant,
Daphne       burkwoodii     3'x4'     X                  X         X                 protect from
                                                                                       winter winds
Holly        Ilex sp.       3'x3'                       X         X     Little       Male, best in
                                                                          Rascal       evening shade
Small Shrubs                                                                     
                                                                                       Silvery to
*Wormwood    Artemisia sp.  2'x3'     X        X          X         X                 blue green
                                                                                       foliage,
                                                                                       aromatic
Barberry     Berberis sp.   3'x3'     X                  X         X                  
                                                                          Pumila,
Summer Sweet Clethra sp.             X                                Little Gem,   
                                                                          Pusch,
                                                                          pendula
Winter Heath Erica sp.      2'x2'     X                  X              Kramer's Red Later winter
and Heathers                                                                           flowering
                                                                          Gold Tide    Dwarf early
Forsythia    Forsythia sp.  3'x4'     X                  X         X     and Gold     spring
                                                                          Peep         flowering
                                                                                       Great fall
Sweetspire   Itea virginica 3'x3'     X                  X              Little Henry color. Unique
                                                                                       white flowers
English      Lavandula      3'x3'     X                  X         X     Munstead and Reseeds
Lavender     angustifolia                                                 Hidcote
Growlow      Rhus aromatica                                                            Good fall
Sumac        "gro Low'      2.5'x4'   X                  X         X                 color. Easy
                                                                                       care
Desert Sage  Salvia dorrii  3'x4'             X                                    Not allows
                                                                                       available
                                                                          My Monet,
Weigela      Weigela sp.    4'x4'     X                  X              Wine and      
                                                                          Roses
Perennials                                                                       
Forbs
*Yarrow      Achillea sp.   2'x1.5'   X        X          X         X                  
Sea Thrift   Armeria        6"x10"    X                           X     Ballerina     
             maritima                                                     Lilac
                                                                          Wood Purple,
Fall Aster   Aster dumosus  2'x2'     X                                Winston       
                                                                          Churchill,
                                                                          Prof Kipp
Bellflower   Campanula sp.  .5'x2'    X                  X              Blue Clips,  Long blooming
                                                                          Serbian
                                                                          Full Moon,
Tickseed     Coreopsis sp.  2'x2'     X                  X         X     Little       Long blooming
                                                                          Sundial,
                                                                          Zagreb
             Echineachea                                                               Self seeding
Coneflower   purpurea       2.5'x1.5' X                  X         X                 spreader,
                                                                                       long blooming
Sulfur       Eriogonum                                                                 Red orange
Buckwheat    umbellatum     .5'x1.5'          X                   X                 winter
                                                                                       foliage
*Blanket     Gaillardia                                                   Arizona Sun,
Flower       aristata       1'x1'     X        X          X         X     Oranges and  Long blooming
                                                                          Lemons
                                                                          Crimson
Gaura        Gaura sp.      2'x2'     X                           X     Butterflies, Long blooming
                                                                          Siskiyou
                                                                          Pink
                                                                          Biokova,
Geranium     Geranium sp.   2'x3'                       X              Crystal      Long blooming
                                                                          Rose, New
                                                                          Hampshire
Prairie      Geum triflorum 1'x1'     X        X          X         X     Flora plena,  
Smoke
                                                                          Little       Adaptable,
                                                                          Business,    long-
Daylily      Hermerocallis  2'x2'     X                  X         X     Happy        blooming,
             sp.                                                          Returns,     self-
                                                                          Primal       propagates
                                                                          Scream
                                                                          Stained
Hosta        Hosta sp.      2'x2'     X                                Glass,       Shade
                                                                          Elegans,     tolerant
                                                                          June
*Coralbells  Huechera sp.   1.5'x1.5' X        X          X              Green Spice, Long blooming
                                                                          Lime Rickey
Daisy        Leucanthemum   2'x1'     X                  X         X     Becky, Real  Long Blooming
             vulgare                                                      Neat
*Blazing     Liatris sp.    1.5'x1'   X        X          X         X     Kobold        
Star
Lewis Blue                                                                             Self seeding
Flax         Linum lewisii  2'x1.5'   X        X          X         X                 spreader,
                                                                                       long blooming
Tufted       Oenothera
Evening-     caespitosa     .5'x2'    X        X                   X                  
Primros e
                                                                          Red Rocks,
*Penstemon                                                                Pine Leaf,   Attracts
var          Penstemon sp.  1.5'x1.5' X        X          X         X     Pikes Peak   hummingbirds
                                                                          Purple,
                                                                          Rocky Mt.
             Perovskia                                                                 Pairs well
Russian Sage atriplicifolia 3'x3'                       X         X     Little Spire with lime
                                                                                       green foliage
Coneflower   Rudbeckia      2'x1.5'   X                  X         X                 Long Blooming
             hirta
May Night    Salvia                                                                    Compliments
Sage         nemorosa 'May  2'x2'     X                  X         X                 Dianthus
             Night'
             Sphaeralcea                                                               Unique color
*Globemallow sp.            2.5'x2.5' X        X                   X                 with Russian
                                                                                       Sage
Spiderwort   Traedescantia  1.5'x1.5' X                  X         X                 Long Blooming
             sp.
Groundcovers                                                                     
                                                                                       Fine
Bearberry    Arctostaphylos .5'x3'    X        X          X         X                 textured,
             uva-ursi                                                                  year-round
                                                                                       interest
                                                                                       Evergreen but
                                                                                       dry looking
Aubrieta     Aubrieta       .5'x1.5'  X                  X              Purple       in summer.
             deltoidea                                                    Cascade      Early
                                                                                       blooming and
                                                                                       long blooming
                                                                                       Pink blooms
Wine Cups    Callirhoe      .5'x6'    X                                            for long
Poppy Mallow involucrata                                                               period. Prune
                                                                                       in Fall
Eichholz     Cotoneatester
Cotoneaster  dammeri        .5'x10'   X                  X         X                  
             "eichholz'
Ice Plant    Delosperma sp  .5'x      X                           X                 Long blooming
                                                                          Tiny Rubies,
Maiden Pink  Dianthus sp.   1'x1.5'   X                  X         X     Firewitch,   Long blooming
                                                                          Neon Star
                                                                                       Fast
*Strawberry  Fragaria sp.   .5x1'     X        X                                    spreading,
                                                                                       available
                                                                                       Spring
                                                                                       Evergreen
Candytuft    Iberis         1'x1'     X                  X         X                 foliage. Good
Little Gem   sempervirens                                                              to cut
                                                                                       biannually
Creeping                                                                               Naturalized
Oregon Grape Mahonia repens 1'x4'             X          X         X                 semi-sun
                                                                                       locations
Creeping                                                                  Pink, Blue,  Many
Phlox        Phlox subulata .5'x3'    X                  X         X     White        evergreen
                                                                                       varieties
Sedum                                                                     Vera
varieties    Sedum sp.      .5'x2'    X                           X     Jameson,      
                                                                          Autumn Joy
Creeping     Thymus praecox .5'x3'    X                  X         X                 Fast
Thyme                                                                                  spreading
Speedwell    Veronica sp.   .5'x3'    X                  X              Wooly Blue,  Attracts
                                                                                       butterflies
                                                                                       Tolerates
Periwinkle   Vinca minor    .5'x3'    X                  X         X     Bowles       many
                                                                                       conditions
Grasses/                                                                         
Sedges
Feather Reed Calamagrostis                                                Karl         Tight upright
Grass        x acutiflora   5'x2'                       X         X     Foerster,    form.
                                                                          Overdam,
                                                                          Ice Dance,   Good for
Japanese                                                                  Evergold,    partial shade
Sedge        Carex morrowii 1.5'x1.5' X                                Gold Band,   areas and
                                                                          Silver       courtyards
                                                                          Septre
Blue         Festuca        1.5'x1.5'         X                   X     Elijah,       
Bunchgrass   idahoensis                                                   Siskiyou
                                                                                       Silvery-blue,
Blue Oat     Helictotrichon 2'x2'                       X         X                 open-bladed,
Grass        sempervirens                                                              homogeneous
                                                                                       texture
                                                                                       Cut to the
                                                                                       ground in
Maiden Grass Miscanthus sp. 4'x4'                                     Hemlyn       late Winter
                                                                                       round
                                                                                       interest
                                                                                       Upright.
Little       Schizachyrium                                                             Foliage color
Bluestem     scoparium      2.5'x2'           X                   X     The Blues    changes
                                                                                       throughout
                                                                                       the season
Vines                                                                            
Trumpet      Campsis                                                                   Fast growing,
Creeper      radicans       18'x1.5'  X                  X         X                 long blooms,
                                                                                       self clinging
Grape Vine   Vitis sp.               X                                             
                                                                                       Long blooming
                                                                          Jackmanii,   last spring-
            Clemitis sp.   12'x2'    X        X          X              Henryii      fall, works
                                                                                       as a
                                                                                       groundcover
                                                                          Major        Attracts
*Honeysuckle Lonicera sp.   12'x2'    X                           X     Wheeler,     hummingbirds,
vine                                                                      Alabama      long blooming
                                                                          Crimson
NOTES: TREES APPROVED IN THE CITY OF EAGLE AREA ARE ALSO ACCEPTED IN AVIMOR * Some varieties of this
species are native while others are not
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-8: SIGNAGE:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   All Signs: Signs shall not be erected or maintained in Avimor except
those Signs specifically enumerated in this Chapter.
      2.   Undefined Or Unclassified Signs: To determine applicable regulations
for any Sign not specifically defined herein, the Administrator shall use the
definition or classification within this Chapter which most closely defines or
classifies any such Sign.
      3.   Architectural Compatibility: The number, area, and height of Signs
as outlined in this Chapter are intended to be maximum standards which do not
necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. Therefore, in addition to the
enumerated maximum standards, the City shall give consideration to a Sign's
relationship to the overall appearance of the subject property as well as the
surrounding area.
      4.   Materials And Appearance: It is the intent of this Chapter to
encourage interesting, creative, readable, effective, uncluttered, and well
maintained signage within Avimor. Sign materials and appearance shall be
complementary to the community theme, Building architecture and colors.
      5.   Nonconforming Signs: As these regulations are amended, any existing
Sign within Avimor that was erected with the approval of the City and conformed
to the previously established regulations shall be allowed to remain for the
useful life of the Sign unless otherwise prohibited.
      6.   Change Of Face, Copy And/Or Logo On Signs: Signs conforming to this
Chapter shall require an administrative Sign permit, but not a full design
review application for a change of face, copy and/or logo on any such Sign,
provided that the Sign structure is not changed in any way and provided that
the colors previously approved by the City are not changed.
   B.   Definitions: If conflict arises between any definition in this Section
and any other definition within this Title, the definition with the more
specific and/or more restrictive definition shall control. Any other words or
phrases not specifically defined shall be interpreted to give this Title its
most reasonable application.
A-FRAME SIGN:                       See definition of Sandwich Board Sign.
                                    Any Sign which is designed and
                                    constructed to give its message through a
ANIMATED SIGN:                      sequence or progressive changes or parts
                                    or lights or degree of lighting, such as
                                    an electronic reader board.
                                    The general outer surface of an exterior
                                    wall of a Building. The area of the
AREA OF THE BUILDING FACE:          Building face shall be a total area of
                                    such surface, including the area of doors
                                    and windows which open into such face, if
                                    any.
                                    A Sign with a fixed or changing display
                                    capable of displaying words, symbols,
                                    figures or images composed of, a series
                                    of light emitting elements or moving
                                    panels or parts; including, but not
AUTOMATED SIGN:                     limited to: tri-paneled, digital,
                                    electronic message boards, light emitting
                                    diodes (LED) Signs or Signs that in any
                                    other way move or create the illusion of
                                    movement. This definition does not
                                    include Signs with copy that is manually
                                    changed.
                                    Any Sign made of lightweight fabric,
                                    plastic, or similar material.
BANNER SIGN:                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-729.png]
                                    (Example)
                                    The Building face area of a single-tenant
                                    Building is the area that lies within a
                                    line drawn around the outermost points of
                                    the Building frontage wall face. Building
                                    face area shall be expressed in square
BUILDING FACE AREA:                 feet. Where a Building houses more than
                                    one business, Building face area for each
                                    business shall be that area lying within
                                    a line drawn around the outermost points
                                    of the Building frontage or Building face
                                    that is actually occupied by the
                                    individual business.
                                    A Sign consisting of a translucent or
                                    non-translucent panel containing Sign
                                    copy which is affixed to a cabinet that
CABINET SIGN (SCULPTED):            is sculpted to form a non-square or non-
                                    rectangular decorative shape which
                                    provides interest to the Sign, such as
                                    the shape of a logo, the shape of
                                    letters, or combination thereof.
                                    A Sign consisting of one or more
                                    translucent or non-translucent panels
CABINET SIGN (STANDARD):            containing Sign copy, which are
                                    interchangeable and which are affixed to
                                    a box or cabinet that is generally square
                                    or rectangular in shape.
                                    A Sign attached to or printed on the
CANOPY SIGN:                        fascia or valence of a canopy, awning or
                                    marquee. For the purposes of this Title,
                                    canopy Signs are regulated as wall Signs.
                                    For the purposes of this Chapter, the
                                    term "charitable organizations" means any
                                    tax-exempt government, religious,
                                    educational, veteran's, fraternal,
                                    service, nonprofit medical, volunteer
                                    rescue service, volunteer firemen's,
                                    senior citizen's, youth athletic, or
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS:           youth athletic park organization. An
                                    organization is tax exempt if the
                                    organization is, and has received from
                                    the internal revenue service a
                                    determination letter that is currently in
                                    effect, stating that the organization is,
                                    exempt from federal income taxation under
                                    the Internal Revenue Code.
                                    A permanent Sign identifying the City of
CITY ENTRY SIGN:                    Eagle or the central business district.
                                    No business advertising is permitted on
                                    City entry signage.
                                    A permanent Sign identifying the Planned
COMMUNITY MONUMENT:                 Development or the City of Eagle. No
                                    business advertising is permitted on
                                    entry signage.
                                    Community sponsored events such as Eagle
                                    Rodeo, Farmers' Market, Sporting Events,
COMMUNITY- EVENTS:                  and similar homeowner events, for the
                                    purpose of this Chapter, community events
                                    are considered as non-commercial events
                                    or activities.
                                    An informational Sign which identifies
                                    the architect, engineer, contractor,
CONSTRUCTION SIGN:                  banking institution, or other individual
                                    or firms involved with the construction
                                    of a Building or announcing the character
                                    of the Building or enterprise.
                                    A temporary Sign announcing builder or
DEVELOPMENT SIGN:                   business that will be constructed on the
                                    subject property and which construction
                                    activities are being actively performed.
                                    An outdoor Sign erected on a single site
                                    with multiple Buildings and where
DIRECTORY SIGN:                     multiple tenants exist, or for a multi-
                                    tenant Building and the like, which lists
                                    the names of all businesses, in a uniform
                                    manner on a single structure.
                                    See definitions of Portable Off Premises
DIRECTIONAL SIGN (OFF PREMISES):    Directional Sign and Subdivision
                                    Directional Sign (Off Premises).
                                    An on premises permanent directional Sign
                                    which foremost contains words such as
                                    "Entrance", "Enter", "Exit", "In", "Out",
DIRECTIONAL SIGN (ON PREMISES):     or other similar words, or a Sign
                                    containing arrows or characters
                                    indicating traffic directions and used
                                    either in conjunction with such words or
                                    separately.
DRIVE-THRU/DR IVE-UP SERVICE MENU   A Sign identifying products for sale and
BOARD SIGN:                         prices for those products. The menu board
                                    Sign may include business identification.
                                    The surface of the Sign area upon,
FACE OF SIGN:                       against or through which the message is
                                    displayed or illustrated.
                                    The flag of a commercial in stitution,
                                    except that no more than one (1) flag is
                                    permitted per business, the flag shall
                                    not exceed twenty (20) s.f. in surface
                                    area, shall be left loose to fly in the
FLAG (COMMERCIAL):                  breeze and shall be a maximum of fifteen
                                    feet (15') in height.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-731.png]
                                     
                                    A Sign attached underneath a canopy,
                                    awning or colonnade.
FREEHANGING SIGNBOARD:              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-737.png]
                                     
                                    A single or multiple faced Signs,
FREESTANDING SIGN:                  supported from the ground by one or more
                                    columns, uprights or braces.
                                    The elevation or level of the street
                                    closest to the Sign to which reference is
                                    made, as measured at the street's
                                    centerline, or top of curb if one exists,
GRADE:                              adjacent to where the Sign is to be
                                    placed, or the relative ground level in
                                    the immediate vicinity of the Sign if
                                    determined by the Administrator to be an
                                    accurate determination for grade with
                                    regard to the intent of this Chapter.
                                    The promotional activity used by a new
                                    business or enterprise or for a grand
                                    opening for a business or enterprise
GRAND OPENING:                      under new management. "Grand opening"
                                    does not mean the annual or occasional
                                    promotion of services or Retail Sales by
                                    a business.
                                    The vertical distance measured from the
                                    grade to the highest point of a Sign or
                                    any vertical projection thereof.
                                    Architectural elements used above any
                                    Sign area may be excluded from the
HEIGHT OF SIGN:                     maximum height measurement if the City
                                    determines that said architectural
                                    elements add to the character of the Sign
                                    and do not create an overbearing
                                    appearance in relation to the Sign,
                                    Building and area.
                                    A day designated as having special
                                    significance for which a government or
                                    religious group have deemed that
HOLIDAY:                            observation is warranted. A holiday is
                                    generally an official observance of
                                    religious, national, or cultural
                                    significance, often accompanied by
                                    celebrations or festivities.
HOLIDAY SEASON SIGN:                Signs advertising a holiday.
                                    Historical markers erected or maintained
                                    by public authority or by a historical
HISTORIC MARKERS:                   society or historical organization
                                    identifying sites, Buildings, or
                                    structures of recognized historical value
                                    or significance.
                                    Existing Signs pertaining to any
                                    commercial or noncommercial property
                                    within the planned development which is
HISTORICAL SIGNAGE:                 found by the Eagle Design Review Board
                                    and City Council to be of local
                                    historical significance are exempt from
                                    the provisions of this Title.
                                    A human Sign is a Sign held by or
                                    attached to a human for the purposes of
                                    advertising or otherwise drawing
                                    attention to an individual, business,
                                    commodity, service, activity, or product.
HUMAN SIGN:                         A person dressed in costume for the
                                    purpose of advertising or otherwise
                                    drawing attention to an individual,
                                    business, commodity, service, activity,
                                    or product shall also be construed as a
                                    human Sign.
                                    A Sign that is affected by an artificial
ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL:             light source that is not contained within
                                    the Sign itself.
                                    The illumination of a Sign is from a
                                    light source that is not visible and is
                                    concealed or contained within the Sign or
                                    located between the Sign and the
ILLUMINATION, HALO:                 structure/wall. Illumination from the
                                    source of the light becomes visible in
                                    darkness when the light is reflected off
                                    of the wall/structure upon which the Sign
                                    is attached.
                                    Illumination of a Sign from any light
                                    source that is concealed or contained
                                    within the Sign and becomes visible in
                                    darkness through a translucent surface,
ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL:             except for illumination, punch through
                                    letter Signs. This includes characters,
                                    letters, figures, designs or outline
                                    which is illuminated by gas filled
                                    luminous tubes, such as neon, argon or
                                    fluorescent.
                                    A Sign with letters, logos or other Sign
                                    graphics that are opaque (no light is
                                    permitted to shine through them), that
                                    are attached to a Sign cabinet or
                                    structure that allows light to shine
                                    through it. The distance between the
                                    letters, logos, or other Sign graphics
                                    and the background (surface of the
ILLUMINATION, PUNCH THROUGH LETTER: cabinet or structure) is a maximum of
                                    one-half (1/2) inch. The light source is
                                    concealed within the cabinet or structure
                                    and is not visible except that
                                    illumination from the light source shines
                                    through transparent (nonopaque)
                                    background material for no more than one-
                                    fourth inch around the letters, logo, and
                                    other graphics, creating a halo effect.
                                    Signs, otherwise known as "Information
                                    Signs", containing no other message,
                                    copy, announcement, or decoration other
INCIDENTAL SIGNS:                   than instructions or directions to the
                                    public. Examples of such Signs include
                                    "no parking", "loading only", or Signs
                                    that identify restrooms, walkways,
                                    entrances, exits, etc.
                                    A non-rigid permanent or temporary Sign
                                    made of durable lightweight fabric, hung
                                    from a horizontal bar, often secured at
                                    the bottom and supported by Sign brackets
LIGHTPOLE BANNER:                   which are attached to a streetlight pole.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-739.png]
                                     
                                    A plan designed to show the relationship
                                    of Signs for any cluster of Buildings
                                    intended for business occupancy, or any
                                    single Building containing more than one
                                    business or any arrangement of business
                                    Buildings or shops which constitute a
                                    visual entity as a whole. These include
MASTER SIGN PLAN:                   developments such as Shopping Centers,
                                    mini-malls, business parks, and multi-
                                    tenant commercial, Office or industrial
                                    Buildings housing two or more businesses.
                                    Additionally, a master Sign plan may be
                                    submitted for a single business if the
                                    owner chooses to submit an application
                                    for a master Sign plan for said business.
                                    A freestanding Sign with a solid base,
                                    including rock Signs, or with supports
                                    that are designed to be structurally
                                    similar to the Sign construction, and
MONUMENT SIGN:                      which incorporate architectural features
                                    which complement the Sign construction.
                                    Pole type supports are not permitted for
                                    monument Signs, unless enclosed within
                                    the monument Sign structure.
                                    A commercial or industrial Building(s)
                                    that is occupied by two or more
                                    businesses in their own physically
                                    separated tenant spaces. Physically
                                    separated means that the tenant spaces
                                    are physically separated by tenant
MULTI-TENANT BUILDING:              separation walls in such a way that each
                                    tenant space becomes its own separate and
                                    distinct space. In the event two (2) or
                                    more businesses occupy the same area,
                                    they shall be considered as a single
                                    tenant or business with regards to the
                                    total allowable signage.
                                    A painting, other than a business
                                    advertising Sign, on the outside wall of
                                    a Building. See definition of painted
                                    graphics. Murals shall be considered art
                                    and not Signs so long as the mural is not
                                    used to advertise a business, product or
                                    service, or used to provide personal
                                    messaging. Murals shall be artistic and
MURAL:                              nostalgic in nature and shall follow the
                                    theme of Avimor's architecture, as
                                    approved by the City. All properties
                                    located in the planned development and
                                    not exempt from design review must
                                    receive a recommendation from the Eagle
                                    Arts Commission, all murals shall be
                                    reviewed by the Eagle Design Review Board
                                    and approved by the City Council.
                                    A Sign indicating the name, address and/
NAMEPLATE:                          or profession of a person or persons
                                    occupying the Building.
                                    An event or activity that is open to the
                                    general public or residents of Avimor and
                                    is non-commercial in nature. Such events
                                    include but are not limited to, open-air
                                    festivals, block parties; special public
NON-                                events; a bike, run or walk on a public
COMMERCIAL EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES:   right-of-way, events in parks or public
                                    spaces, downtown events, recreation
                                    events, Farmers' Markets, parades,
                                    community garage sales, and similar
                                    events by charitable organizations. See
                                    also definition of community events and
                                    charitable organizations.
NON-CONFORMING SIGN:                Any Sign which does not comply with the
                                    provisions of this Title.
                                    Official flags of the United States, the
                                    State of Idaho, or other states of the
OFFICIAL FLAGS:                     nation, counties, municipalities and
                                    official flags of foreign nations.
                                    Official flags are not considered Signs.
                                    Signs located on a separate Parcel of
OFF PREMISES SIGN:                  land or a separate site from the place
                                    where the product, service, activity or
                                    business is located.
                                    Signs located on the same Parcel of land
ON PREMISES SIGN:                   or a site as the place where the product,
                                    service, activity or business is located.
                                    Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other
                                    material, whether or not containing a
PENNANT SIGN:                       message of any kind, suspended from a
                                    rope, wire, or string, whether in series
                                    or not, designed to move in the wind and
                                    therefore considered a moving Sign.
                                    A freestanding Sign that is supported by
POLE SIGN:                          one (1) or more poles that are not
                                    enclosed as in a monument Sign structure.
PORTABLE OFF PREMISES DIRECTIONAL   Off premises portable Signs providing
SIGN:                               directional information for businesses.
                                    Portable on premises Signs for
                                    advertising which can be used on a
PORTABLE ON PREMISES ADVERTISING    permanent basis and which are intended to
SIGNS:                              allow for business identification and any
                                    other advertising being promoted by the
                                    business or enterprise.
                                    Any Sign not designed to be permanently
                                    attached to a Building or anchored to the
PORTABLE SIGN:                      ground such as A-frame Signs, yard Signs
                                    (rigid), banner Signs, feather flag Signs
                                    and sandwich board Signs.
                                    A Sign, often referre d to as a "blade"
                                    Sign, and other than a wall Sign, that
                                    project s perpen dicularly and extends
                                    from the Buildi ng frontage or Building
                                    face to which it is attached outwardly.
PROJECTING SIGN:                    For the purposes of this Title, a
                                    projecting Sign is considered a
                                    "perpendicular" wall Sign.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-741.png]
                                     
                                    A Sign or part of a Sign on which the
READER BOARD:                       letters are readily replaceable such that
                                    the copy can be changed from time to
                                    time.
                                    A Sign advertising the sale, rental or
REAL ESTATE SIGN:                   lease of the premises upon which the Sign
                                    is placed, not including a subdivision
                                    Sign.
                                    A Sign that is erected on or above the
                                    roof of a Building and which derives its
                                    principal support from the roof or from
                                    columns or supports extending through the
ROOF SIGN:                          roof. The definition includes a Sign
                                    affixed to any structure erected upon a
                                    roof, including a structure housing
                                    Building equipment and includes a Sign
                                    erected on top of a canopy, deck, patio,
                                    or similar structure.
                                    A pair of signboards fastene d at their
                                    tops and separated at their base to form
                                    a freestan ding portable Sign structure.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN:                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-743.png]
                                     
                                    Scoreboards are Signs erected at a
                                    sporting field and which are generally
                                    used to maintain the score or time
SCOREBOARDS:                        expired in an event at the field. This
                                    definition shall also include Signs
                                    mounted or applied to the outfield wall
                                    within a baseball, football or similar
                                    type field.
                                    Reasonable seasonal decorations within
                                    the appropriate holiday season. Signs of
                                    a decorative nature, incidental and
                                    commonly associated with any national,
                                    local or religious holiday, provided such
                                    decorations and Signs are not placed
                                    within the sight vision area of an
SEASONAL DECORATIONS OR SIGNS:      intersection as determined by Local
                                    Highway Department, and that seasonal
                                    Signs are not placed in the City right of
                                    way or block ADA accessible sidewalks.
                                    However, such displays decorations and
                                    Signs shall be removed at the end of the
                                    public national, local or religious
                                    holiday season.
                                    For the purpose of applying Setback
                                    requirements for Signs, distances shall
SETBACKS:                           be measured from the property line to the
                                    nearest edge of the display surface,
                                    unless otherwise noted in this Title.
                                    Any letters, figures, design, symbol,
                                    trademark, logo or device intended to
                                    attract attention to any activity or
                                    service, place, subject, person, firm,
                                    corporation, public performance, machine
                                    or merchandise whatsoever, including the
                                    display of merchandise. Sources of light
SIGN:                               used primarily to illuminate a Sign, or a
                                    Building, or grounds surrounding the
                                    Building, shall not be considered Signs
                                    themselves; provided however, that
                                    sources of light used primarily to
                                    attract attention to the light itself or
                                    as a decorative feature of the display
                                    shall be considered as part of the Sign.
                                    The entire area within a single,
                                    contiguous perimeter enclosing the
                                    extreme limits of writing,
                                    representation, logo, emblem or any
                                    figure or similar character, together
                                    with any form or other material or color
                                    forming an integral part of the display
                                    or used to differentiate such Sign area
SIGN AREA:                          from the background against which it is
                                    placed. The Sign area shall not include
                                    the necessary supports or uprights on
                                    which the Sign is placed, and
                                    superficial, nonilluminated column
                                    covers, ornamental trim and other such
                                    incidental objects attached thereto, or
                                    portions of the Sign structure which are
                                    not designed to convey a message.
                                    The entire area within a single,
                                    contiguous perimeter enclosing the
                                    extreme limits of writing,
                                    representation, logo, emblem or any
                                    figure or similar character, together
                                    with any form or other material or color
                                    forming an integral part of the display
                                    or used to differentiate such Sign area
SIGN AREA (DISPLAY SURFACE):        from the background against which it is
                                    placed. The Sign area shall not include
                                    the necessary supports or uprights on
                                    which the Sign is placed, and
                                    superficial, nonilluminated column
                                    covers, ornamental trim and other such
                                    incidental objects attached thereto, or
                                    portions of the Sign structure which are
                                    not designed to convey a message.
                                    Size includes the height, length, width,
                                    and Sign area, also known as the display
SIZE:                               surface of a Sign unless otherwise
                                    specified in this Chapter. Measurements
                                    shall be rounded up to the nearest foot,
                                    or nearest square foot, as applicable.
                                    For the purpose of applying spacing
                                    requirements or density limits to
                                    monument Signs, distances shall be
                                    measured along a line parallel to the
SPACING AND DENSITY:                centerline of the adjacent street or
                                    highway and between the nearest edges of
                                    the display surfaces. A back-to-back Sign
                                    is counted as a single Sign for the
                                    purposes of spacing and density limits.
                                    Highways in and adjacent to the
STATE HIGHWAY:                      development that are owned and maintained
                                    by the state of Idaho.
                                    A permanent or temporary Sign, otherwise
STREETLIGHT SIGN:                   known as a light pole banner, supported
                                    by Sign brackets which are attached to a
                                    streetlight pole.
                                    A temporary off premises Sign used to
                                    advertise homes or Buildings under
                                    construction or property for sale in a
SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGN (OFF   subdivision which is to be, or is being,
PREMISES):                          developed pursuant to an approved
                                    subdivision final plat application before
                                    the City, or county if annexed into the
                                    City.
SUBDIVISION MONUMENT SIGN           A permanent on premises Sign placed at
(RESIDENTIAL):                      the entrance (s) to a subdivision.
                                    A nonpermanent Sign intended for use for
TEMPORARY SIGN:                     a limited period of time as regulated
                                    within this Chapter.
                                    The lowest element of any Sign which
                                    occupies the vertical space above a
                                    pedestrian way and is designed to permit
                                    traffic thereunder shall be at least
                                    eight (8) feet above the finished grade
VERTICAL CLEARANCE:                 of a sidewalk or other pedestrian way and
                                    at least sixteen (16) feet above the
                                    finished grade of a pavement used for
                                    vehicular traffic if such Sign is located
                                    within eighteen (18) inches of the
                                    vertical projection of the pavement edge.
                                    Any Sign, logo or advertis ement placed,
                                    painted, attached, or displayed on a
                                    vehicle.
VEHICLE SIGN:                       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-745.png]
                                     
                                    A Sign attached to or erected against the
                                    wall of a Building or structure with the
WALL SIGN (FLAT):                   face of the Sign parallel to the plane of
                                    said wall, and not extending over twelve
                                    (12) inches from the wall of the Building
                                    or structure.
                                    A Sign attached to or erected against the
WALL SIGN (PERPENDIC- ULAR):        wall of a Building or structure with the
                                    face(s) of the Sign perpendicular to the
                                    plane of said wall.
                                    Signs that serve the function of informin
                                    g people of the surround ing within the
                                    develop ment. The intent of wayfin ding
                                    Signs is for orientation and navigation
                                    purposes. For the purposes of this Title,
WAYFINDING SIGNS:                   wayfinding signage does not refer to
                                    directional, informational or incidental
                                    signage on private property.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-747.png]
                                     
                                    A non-rigid attention attracting device
                                    made of durable and lightweight fabric
                                    that flows easily in the wind and is
                                    attached entirely along the long edge to
                                    a vertical pole, including, Teardrop,
                                    Feather Convex, Feather Angled,
                                    Rectangle, Giant Flag and Econo type
WIND BANNER FLAGS:                  banner flags. The pole can either be
                                    insert ed into the grou nd or can be conn
                                    ected to a solid, spring or spinn ing
                                    base
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-749.png]
                                     
                                    A non-rigid attent ion attrac ting devic
                                    e made of durable and lightwei ght fabric
                                    that flows easily in the wind and is
                                    attach ed by one (1) edge to a vertical
                                    pole in the ground without a permanent
                                    foundation. Such flag is usually oblong
WIND FLAGS:                         in shape. For the purposes of this Title,
                                    official flags such as Government Flags
                                    or State, are not considered wind flags.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-751.png]
                                     
                                    All Signs located inside and affixed to,
                                    painted on or within three feet of
                                    windows of a Building, whether temporary
WINDOW SIGN:                        or permanent, lighted or unlighted, which
                                    may be viewed from the exterior of the
                                    Building. The term does not include
                                    merchandise located within three (3) feet
                                    of the window.
                                    Yard Signs may be referred to as "lawn
                                    Signs". Nonrigid yard/lawn Signs, or
                                    otherwise known as "stake" Signs or "wire
                                    stake" Signs are not stable and typically
                                    are susceptible to being blown over by
                                    wind and oftentimes do not remain
                                    vertical. Common types of nonrigid yard/
                                    lawn Signs are corrugated plastic, fold
                                    over cardboard, and poster type which are
                                    attached to a light metal stand with less
                                    than one-fourth inch thickness, or
                                    lattice type wood stakes, which are
                                    inserted into the ground.The metal stands
YARD SIGN (NONRIGID):               are usually an "H" or "I" type. The "H"
                                    type stand is shaped like an "H" and two
                                    (2) of the prongs insert into the Sign,
                                    or the Sign is attached to the two, and
                                    the other two prongs are inserted into
                                    the ground. The single or double crossbar
                                    between the two prongs adds minimal
                                    strength and makes the entire stand one
                                    single unit. The "I" type stand is
                                    essentially an "H" stand without a
                                    crossbar linking the prongs.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-755.png]
                                     
                                    Yard Signs may be referred to as "lawn
                                    Signs". Rigid yard/lawn Signs are stable
                                    and are not susceptible to being blown
                                    over by wind. Rigid yard/lawn Signs are
                                    made of a solid metal frame with a metal
                                    thickness of one-fourth inch or more, or
                                    they are made of metal one-half (1/2)
YARD SIGN (RIGID):                  inch by one-half (1/2) inch angle iron,
                                    both of which include solid metal legs
                                    for insertion into the ground. The metal
                                    frame includes an attached metal or hard
                                    plastic Sign face.
                                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                                    5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
                                    IMAGES/0-0-0-753.png]
                                     
 
   C.   General Regulations For All Signs:
      1.   The following shall apply to Signs in all zoning districts:
         a.   Message Substitution Allowed: A noncommercial message of any type
may be substituted, in whole or in part, for the message displayed on any Sign
for which the Sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration
of message content. This provision applies to all Signs allowed under this
Title. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional
approval, permitting, registration or notice to the City. The purpose of this
provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over
noncommercial speech or favoring of any particular noncommercial message or any
other noncommercial message. This provision prevails over any more specific
provision to the contrary.
         b.   Permits Required: No Sign, unless specifically stated in this
Chapter, shall be erected, placed, attached, altered, displayed, or secured to
the ground, any Building, or any structure, until a permit for such Sign,
including and applicable electrical permits, and any other permit required by
federal, state or local law has been issued by the City of Eagle. An
application for a Sign permit may be obtained from the City's Planning
Department and/or Building Department. A permit will be issued if a proposed
sign conforms to this Title. Incorrect information shall be grounds for
revocation of a permit. Sign permits issued are site specific and Building
specific, and are not transferrable to another site or another Building.
         c.   Permit Expiration: If the work authorized by a permit under this
Title has not been commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the
date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
         d.   Fees: A Sign permit fee, as established by resolution of the
Council, shall be paid upon issuance of a Sign permit.
         e.   Undefined or Unclassified Signs: To determine applicable
regulations for any Sign not specifically defined herein, the Administrator
shall use the definition or classification within the Title which most closely
defines or classifies any such Sign.
         f.   Architectural Compatibility: The number, area, and height of
Signs as outlined in this Title is intended to be maximum standards which do
not necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. Therefore, in addition to
the enumerated maximum standards, the City shall give consideration to a Sign's
relationship to the overall appearance of the subject property as well as the
surrounding area, through a design review process.
         g.   Materials and Appearance: It is the intent of this Chapter to
encourage interesting, creative, readable, effective, uncluttered, and well-
maintained signage. Sign materials and appearance shall be complementary to the
Building architecture and colors. Throughout the project an efficient palette
of materials is to be employed in the signage elements and the structures into
which the signage is integrated per the design guidelines as stated in this
Chapter. Depending on location and feasibility, materials may be used in their
natural state or be replicated in quality faux finishes.
         h.   Stricter Standards Prevail: Nothing in this Title is intended, no
shall be construed, to permit the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, or maintenance of any Sign at any place or in any manner unlawful
under any other federal, state, or local law. When any part of this Chapter
conflicts with another provision of federal, state, or local law, the provision
that establishes the stricter standard shall control.
   D.   Placement Restrictions:
      1.   No permanent Signs shall project into or over the public right-of-
way (existing or proposed), into any utility or access easement, or within any
vision triangle, unless otherwise specifically stated in this Title.
      2.   The lowest portion of any Sign which extends over an area intended
for pedestrian use shall not be less than eight feet above finished grade.
      3.   Any Sign placed on a sidewalk or other public right of way, where
permitted by this Title, shall comply with this Chapter and applicable
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
      4.   Signs and their location shall not obstruct or interfere with
traffic, sighting distance, signals and public Signs.
      5.   Unless otherwise allowed in this Chapter, no person shall post or
cause to be posted, attached or maintained any Sign upon any tree, light pole,
or any utility pole or structure; any fence, railing or wall, unless otherwise
specified in this Title; or any sidewalk within the right-of-way or a sidewalk
easement, curb, gutter, or street, except for house numbers or fire lane
designation.
      6.   No Sign shall be erected as to block, partially block, or interfere
in any way with a required means or exit from any Building nor with any window.
No Sign shall block, interfere, or otherwise, hinder pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public sidewalk, a public thoroughfare, a fire lane easement, or a
driveway required to access parking.
      7.   Support and Attachment: All Signs shall be constructed and installed
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications, the registered design
professional, or the Sign contractor, whichever is applicable and the most
stringent. Signs that project from the face of a Building and that require
structural support shall be designed that the structural support is integral to
the overall architecture of the Sign and Building.
      8.   Change of Face, Copy and/or Logo on Signs: For Signs conforming to
this Chapter, excepting legal Signs, a permit shall not be required for a
change of face, copy and/or logo on any such Sign, provided that the Sign
structure is not changed in any way and provided that the colors previously
approved by the City are not changed. However, Signs relocated to another site
location or Building will require new Sign approvals and permits.
      9.   License Required: No person shall install, erect, repair or maintain
any Sign that requires a permit for electrical or structure unless such person
is a licensed contractor as required by the State of Idaho. Such person shall
provide a contractor registration number to the building department prior to
the issuance of a Sign permit.
      10.   Traffic Control Signs: Traffic control Signs conforming to the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices that are installed or approved by the
highway department.
      11.   Nonconforming Signs: All Signs shall conform to this Title upon any
structural change to the Sign, Sign base, or Building to which it is attached,
or upon any change in the face or copy of the Sign for the business to which
such Sign pertains if the use associated with the business is changed, except
as provided for within subsection, "Historic Signage", of this Section.
   E.   Exempt Signs: The provisions and requirements of this Title shall not
apply to the following Signs and attention attracting devices, except that all
Signs or attention attracting devices shall still comply with the requirements
of this Chapter, and no Sign or attention attracting devices shall block ADA
accessible sidewalk requirements or the sight vision area of an intersection as
determined by Local Highway District.
      1.   Address Numbers: Numbers and letters for address identification.
      2.   Art: Sculptures, fountains, mosaics and design features which do not
incorporate advertising or identification.
      3.   Balloons: Latex and Mylar style balloons twenty-four (24) inches or
less in diameter.
      4.   Displays: Display of items for sale located within any commercial or
industrial district or on any legal nonresidential site within any residential
district, but not within any landscape area or required parking area (except as
part of a community event), and that no display of items for sale shall block
ADA accessible sidewalk requirements or the sight vision area of an
intersection as determined by Local Highway Department.
      5.   Directional Signs (On-Premise): Shall not exceed six (6) s.f. in
area.
      6.   Door Signs: Signs installed on a door of a noncommercial or
commercial Building providing identification and additional incidental
information, provided such Signs are no larger than two (2) s.f..
      7.   Emergency Service Signs: Signs for Emergency Services, such as;
police services, emergency rooms, fire departments, Hospitals, etc.
      8.   Flags (Official): As defined in this Title.
      9.   Flags (Commercial): As defined in this Title.
      10.   Historic Markers and Historical Signage: As defined in this Title.
      11.   Human Signs.
      12.   Incidental Signs: As defined in this Title.
      13.   Interior Signs.
      14.   Nonilluminated interior Signs located in the interior of any
Building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any Building or group of
Buildings, excluding window Signs, which Signs are designed and located to be
viewed exclusively by patrons of such use or uses.
      15.   Interior Signs intended to be viewed from the public sidewalk,
street, highway, alley, plaza, park, or other similar public space; provided,
however, that the Sign does not flash or employ an effect, does not contain
neon, and does not exceed eight (8) square-feet in display surface or ten (10)
percent of the total window area of all windows facing public streets,
whichever is larger, unless otherwise regulated within this Title.
      16.   Window Signs: (Nonilluminated): Nonilluminated window Signs as long
as the total area of the Signs does not cover more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the window area where it is placed.
      17.   Memorial Signs: Memorial Signs or tablets, names of Buildings and
dates of erection of a Building or structure.
      18.   Murals: As defined in this Chapter.
      19.   Nameplates for residential uses.
      20.   Sandwich Boards: As defined in this Chapter, but such Signs shall
be attractive, follow a community-wide theme, and be removed nightly.
      21.   Scoreboards: Scoreboards, except that scoreboard Signs shall be
erected within the limits of and face into the athletic field or stadium.
      22.   Seasonal Decorations or Signs: As defined in this Chapter.
      23.   Temporary or Portable Signs: Temporary or portable Signs authorized
for use within parks or on City owned property.
      24.   Traffic or Other Municipal Signs (Signs required by law): Traffic
signals, railroad crossing Signs, legal notices, and such temporary Emergency
or non-advertising Signs as may be authorized by Council.
      25.   Utility Company Signs: Signs of public utility companies indicating
danger or which show the location of utility facilities.
      26.   Warning Signs: Nonilluminated or externally illuminated "No
Trespassing", "No Parking", "No Dumping", and other warning Signs located on
the Lot to which the Sign is appurtenant and not exceeding six (6) s.f. in
area.
      27.   Wind Banner Flags: A non-rigid attention attracting device made of
durable and lightweight fabric that flows easily in the wind, and is attached
by one edge to a vertical pole in the ground without a permanent foundation.
Such flag is usually oblong in shape. For the purposes of this Title, official
flags such as Government Flags or State, are not considered wind flags.
      28.   Automated Signs for Gas Station Fuel Pricing Numbers only.
   F.   Prohibited Signs: The following Signs and attention attracting devices
shall be prohibited, except as may otherwise be specifically stated within this
Section. The Signs and other attention attracting devices prohibited herein are
subject to removal by the City at the owner's or user's expense:
      1.   Abandoned or Obsolete Signs: Signs located on a property which
becomes vacant or unoccupied for a period of 90-days or more, or any Sign which
pertains to a time, event, activity, or purpose that no longer applies.
      2.   Any Sign in violation of local, state, or federal law over which the
City exercises jurisdiction.
      3.   Any Sign which blocks the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) minimum
width required for handicap accessibility on a public sidewalk.
      4.   Any Sign whose permit or approval has expired.
      5.   Automated Signs shall be prohibited in all type of Signs, except
automated Signs are permitted as part of a Sign for religious or Civic Uses.
      6.   Billboard Signs.
      7.   Bubble Machines, except for non-commercial events and activities.
      8.   Cabinet Signs (standard), except cabinet Signs with non-translucent
panels as may be incorporated into a monument Sign which includes advertising
for multiple tenants, and as long as the cabinet portion of the multi-tenant
monument Sign is surrounded on all four sides by architectural elements of the
Sign structure.
      9.   Chasing lights, except as may be approved by the City as an integral
part of a Building or structure, and except non-commercial events and
activities and seasonal events.
      10.   Display of items for sale, for "actual" display of merchandise,
like a sidewalk or tent sale, within any landscape area or required parking
area, except as part of a non-commercial event or activity or as otherwise
stated specifically within this Chapter.
      11.   Hazardous or Unsafe Signs: Any Sign that, in the opinion of the
Building Official, Administrator, Engineer or Traffic Officer, City official,
Local Highway Department, or other public agency, creates a hazard to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or a hazard to the public in general, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
         a.   Design and construction;
         b.   Signs which because of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a
traffic control Sign, signal or device, or the light of an Emergency or radio
equipment vehicle, or Signs which obstruct the visibility of any traffic or
street Sign or signal device;
         c.   Signs purported to be, or which are, an imitation of, or resemble
an official traffic Sign or signal, or which bear the words, "Stop", "Danger",
"Warning", or similar words in a manner potentially causing confusion with such
official Signs or signals;
         d.   Signs, which by location create a vehicular or pedestrian hazard;
         e.   Any Sign that omits any sound, odor or visible matter;
         f.   Any Signs within the sight visibility triangle as specified
within Local Highway Department's "Policy Manual";
         g.   Any Sign not maintained in a safe condition;
         h.   Illegal Signs: Any Sign that employs a structure, material,
color, design, illumination, size, height, duration, or placement not
specifically allowed under this Chapter, unless the Sign is a lawfully
established non-conforming Sign;
         i.   Inflatable Balloons and Blimps: Polyurethane and polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) style inflatable balloons and blimps larger than twenty-four
(24) inches in diameter, except for non-commercial events and activities;
         j.   Off premises Signs, except as otherwise stated within this
Chapter;
         k.   Miscellaneous Signs and posters which are visible from a public
way and are tacked, pasted, taped or otherwise affixed in a similar manner to
or upon the walls of Buildings, trees, poles, posts, fences, hydrants, bridges,
or other structures;
         l.   Moving, revolving, intermittent, oscillating, animated, or
flashing Signs, except for non-commercial events, human Sign board and
activities;
         m.   Pennants, propellers, pinwheels, streamers and similar objects,
except as temporary displays authorized by the City for carnivals and open-air
festivals and other community events;
         n.   Pole Signs;
         o.   Roof Signs;
         p.   Searchlights, beacons, strobe lights, scintillating lights, and
similar lights, except for noncommercial events and activities;
         q.   Temporary Signs In lieu of Permanent Signage, except for
otherwise specifically stated within this Chapter;
         r.   Unsightly Signs: Any Sign which is in whole or in part week,
unsafe or constructed of broken, unsightly, inferior or old, worn or faded
material;
         s.   Wall Signs that extend above the parapet wall; and
         t.   Yard Signs (nonrigid): except for Signs that are placed
completely on private property in accordance with this Chapter.
      12.   Window Signs (Neon).
   G.   Signs On City Owned Property:
      1.   No person shall erect a Sign upon any property owned or controlled
by the City without first having procured prior written permission from the
City. Before any permit shall be granted for the erection and maintenance of a
Sign upon property of the City, a Sign approval application shall be required
with any additional information which the Administrator shall deem necessary to
carry out the purposes and intent of this Title. In the event the permit does
not specify a term, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance.
      2.   In the event that any Sign is erected or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this subsection, the City may direct the removal of such
Sign. In the event the permittee deems such removal to be without cause, they
may, within thirty (30) days after such removal, make written appeal to
Council. The findings of Council, after notice to the permittee and due
hearing, shall be final.
   H.   City Entry Statement And Cooperative Sign Plan: The City may develop a
City entry statement and cooperative Sign plan which includes the City entry
Signs and streetlight signage and which specifies the design criteria,
aesthetics, locations and funding methods for future public, private or public/
private partnership construction of cooperative business identification and
directional signage.
   I.   Sign Inspections; Reinspections:
      1.   The Administrator and/or Building Official and their duly authorized
representatives are authorized and reserve the right to perform inspections of
all Signs regulated by this Chapter. The purpose of the inspection is to
ascertain whether the same is unsafe or insecure, is dilapidated or
deteriorated, and to ensure that the Sign has been constructed in accordance
with the standards contained herein, any other applicable ordinances, and the
applicable permits. The method and time of such inspections shall be determined
by the Administrator and/or Building Official.
      2.   A footing inspection may be required prior to the pouring of any
concrete or covering of any footing. All requests for such footing inspection
shall be made directly to the Building department.
      3.   It is the responsibility of the Sign contractor and/or Sign permit
applicant to ensure that full compliance is met with all requirements of this
Chapter. Failure to comply may result in the removal, replacement and/or
alteration of the noncompliant Sign at the sole expense of the contractor and/
or Sign permit applicant.
      4.   Upon presentation of proper credentials, enforcement officers may
enter at reasonable times any Building, structure or premises in the City to
make inspection of a Sign, its structural and electrical connections and to
ensure compliance with any of the provisions of this Chapter, including repair
or structural alteration for safety of Signs which present a hazard to the
public.
   J.   Sign Supports:
      1.   Unless approval to place a Sign in the right of way has been
obtained from the Local Highway Department, Sign supports shall be located on
private property, to include footing, foundations and projections.
   K.   General Illumination Standards:
      1.   The City must find that any illuminated Sign permitted under the
specific regulations within this Chapter are designed such that brightness
levels are controlled to assure a soft, subtle effective light in accordance
with the Sign matrix shown in Section 11B-3-8-P; see Table 3.1.
   L.   Sign Maintenance:
      1.   Maintenance of legal Signs is allowed and maintenance of the same
shall not require a permit. Sign maintenance is the replacement or repair of a
part or portion of a Sign required by ordinary wear, tear, or damage, with like
material, color, and design. Maintenance of legal Signs does not include
changing the color, size, design, or styles of Signs. Any Sign or component of
a Sign which is in a damaged or deteriorated condition and constitutes a danger
or hazard to public safety shall be promptly repaired or replaced. Surface
materials and components shall be kept free of chipping, peeling, fading,
cracks, holes, buckles, warps, splinters, or rusting visible from an adjacent
property or street. Illuminated Signs shall be maintained in good operating
condition including prompt removal and replacement of all defective bulbs,
light emitting diodes, fluorescent tubes, neon or other inert gas light
segments, damaged or deteriorated electrical wiring, and malfunctioning control
devices and related circuitry.
      2.   Graffiti on a Sign shall be removed within five days of notice of
its placement on such Sign. Graffiti remaining on a Sign for longer shall be
considered a nuisance.
      3.   All parts, portions, units and materials composing a Sign, together
with the frame, background surface, support or enclosure therefor shall be
maintained in a safe condition, painted, and adequately protected from
weathering with all braces, bolts, and structural parts and supporting frames
and fastenings reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening so
that they do not create a hazard to persons or property or constitute an
attractive nuisance.
      4.   Any Sign or Sign structure that is sagging, leaning, fallen,
decayed, broken, deteriorated, faded, or in another dilapidated condition shall
be promptly repaired, to the satisfaction of the City, or removed.
      5.   All ground area surrounding Signs shall be kept free of rubbish and
weeds, and landscaping be maintained.
   M.   Permanent Sign Allowances And Requirements:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to erect or install a Sign having a
type, size, quantity or height greater than allowed within the following
Section.
      2.   An abandoned or obsolete Sign, as defined under prohibited Signs
above, shall be removed by the owner of the Sign or owner of the premises
within thirty (30) days of being declared an abandoned Sign.
      3.   Drive-Thru Signs:
         a.   No more than two Drive-Thru lane Signs are allowed for each
Drive-Thru lane serving a business establishment.
         b.   The Signs may be either a ground mounted or wall mounted Sign.
         c.   The Signs shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height and the Sign
area shall not exceed thirty-five (35) s.f..
      4.   Internal illumination may be permitted if the City determines the
following:
         a.   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with the
general objectives, or with any specific objective of this Chapter;
         b.   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
         c.   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      5.   Free hanging Signboards:
         a.   Free hanging signboards shall not exceed eight (8) s.f. nor shall
any such Sign extend beyond the Porch or canopy to which it is attached; and
         b.   A minimum distance of eight (8) feet shall be required between a
pedestrian walkway and the bottom of a free hanging signboard.
      6.   Fuel Island Signs:
         a.   Fuel island canopies shall be permitted to have a maximum of
three Signs;
         b.   The Signs shall be attached to, or painted on, the canopy face;
         c.   The height and width of the Sign shall be reviewed with regard to
its proportional relationship to the height and width of the canopy face to
which it is attached or painted. The Sign area shall be a maximum of twenty
(20) square-feet but in no case, shall the Sign cover more than one-third (1/3)
of the area of the face of the canopy to which it is attached or painted;
         d.   If more than one Sign is proposed, each Sign shall be located on
a different side of the canopy and should be oriented to face oncoming traffic;
and
         e.   A one (1) s.f. Sign may be permitted for the fuel logo or fuel
brand only on each side of each fuel dispenser or spandrel attached thereto.
      7.   Interstate and Highway Signs:
         a.   Signs along interstate and primary highways shall conform to
federal and state transportation department regulations as well as this Title.
Notwithstanding, applicants are responsible for ensuring their compliance with
any federal or state regulations as the City will not evaluate Signs in
accordance with those entities' rules.
      8.   Monument Signs:
         a.   For single-tenant Buildings which are not within the HMU or MU
Sub-Use District or within a "Shopping Center", monument Signs shall not exceed
eight (8) feet in height and the Sign area shall not exceed sixty (60) square-
feet per side;
         b.   For multi-tenant Buildings which are not within the HMU or MU
Sub-Use District or within a "Shopping Center", monument Signs shall not exceed
fifteen (15) feet in height and the Sign area shall not exceed one hundred and
forty (140) square-feet per side;
         c.   For single-tenant Buildings which are within the HMU or MU Sub-
Use District, monument Signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and the
Sign area shall not exceed forty (40) s.f. per side;
         d.   For multi-tenant Buildings which are within the HMU or MU Sub-Use
District, monument Signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and the Sign
area shall not exceed sixty (60) square-feet per side;
         e.   For any single-tenant Building or multi-tenant Building which is
not located in a Shopping Center, one monument Sign per abutting street shall
be permitted;
         f.   A "Shopping Center", as defined in Definitions of this Title
shall be allowed one monument Sign per street that it abuts for any site less
than twenty (20) acres in size and two (2) Signs for any site twenty (20) acres
in size or larger. The height of any such Sign shall not exceed fifteen (15)
feet adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state highway and
twenty- five (25) feet adjacent to any state highway. The Sign area shall not
exceed one hundred and forty (140) square-feet per side adjacent to a roadway
that is not designated as a state highway and two hundred (200) square-feet per
side adjacent to any state highway. If the Shopping Center has a single
address, the address shall be located on the monument Sign and shall be a size
that is readable from the street;
         g.   In addition to any Shopping Center monument Signs, any single-
tenant Building within a Shopping Center, and adjacent to a roadway, shall be
permitted one monument Sign. The height of any such Sign shall not exceed 6
feet adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state highway and 8 feet
adjacent to any state highway. The Sign area shall not exceed forty (40)
square-feet per side adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state
highway and sixty (60) square-feet per side adjacent to any state highway;
         h.   The minimum distance between monument Signs on a single Parcel,
shall be one hundred (100) feet;
         i.   No monument Sign shall be any closer than fifty (50) feet from a
monument Sign, or other freestanding Sign, on an adjacent property;
         j.   Monument Signs are permitted to be double faced;
         k.   Landscaping shall be provided at the base of all monument Signs.
Landscape plans shall be prepared by or under the responsible control of a
licensed landscape architect with said plans to be duly stamped to clearly
identify the preparer. The amount required shall be three times the size of the
largest Sign area: An example is shown as follows;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-757.png]
 
         l.   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with the
general objectives, or with any specific objective of this Title; and
         m.   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area. The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      9.   Subdivision Monument Signs:
         a.   One subdivision Sign on each side of the street may be permitted
at the principal entry or entries into residential subdivisions, or within the
landscape median at the entry road if approved by the Local Highway Department,
and at the intersection of any collector and/or arterial streets abutting the
subdivision;
         b.   Subdivision Signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height,
unless located along HWY 55 which would allow for a maximum height of twenty
(20) feet, and the Sign area shall not exceed sixty (60) -square-feet per side;
and
         c.   Subdivision entry signage requires design review approval.
      10.   Wall Signs (Flat and Perpendicular):
         a.   A single-tenant Building shall be allowed a maximum of three wall
Signs, provided that each Sign is placed on a different side of the Building;
         b.   Each business within a multi-tenant Building shall be allowed a
maximum of three wall Signs provided that each Sign is placed on a different
side of the Building;
         c.   For a single-tenant Building the total Sign area of any wall Sign
shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the Building face to which it
is attached, except that any wall Sign that has a Building wall facing a state
highway shall be permitted a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the area of the
Building face to which it is attached;
         d.   For a multi-tenant Building the total Sign area of all wall Signs
shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the Building face to which
they are attached, except that the total Sign area for wall Signs that has a
Building wall facing a state highway shall be a maximum of twenty (20) percent
of the area of the Building face to which they are attached;
         e.   The Sign area, per side, of any perpendicular wall Sign shall not
exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the Building face to which it is
attached;
         f.   Wall Signs shall not extend above the top of the wall to which it
is attached;
         g.   Flat wall Signs shall be attached parallel to the plane of the
wall, and not extend over twelve (12) inches from the wall of the Building or
structure; and
         h.   Perpendicular wall Signs shall have a minimum vertical clearance
of eight (8) feet from the bottom of the Sign to the sidewalk, and a maximum
projection from the wall of four (4) feet.
      11.   Wayfinding Signs:
         a.   Wayfinding Signs are permitted to be established or posted within
the right-of-way by or at the direction or authorization of the Administrator.
Such Signs must not advertise a specific business and must serve the intent as
defined within this Title. Such Signs may advertise a point of interest, such
as a Farmers' Market, post office, Golf Course, or other public or private
related destination; and
         b.   Requests for wayfinding signage shall be submitted in writing to
the Administrator, along with a site plan showing the location of such
requested signage. All wayfinding Signs installed will be in accordance with an
established size, height, type, location and architectural design as adopted by
this Title. Approval for signage will be subject to the approval of the
Administrator, Local Highway Department, the City Engineer, the Building
Official, and any other pertinent agency.
   N.   Temporary And Portable Sign Allowances:
      1.   District Temporary and Portable Sign Provisions: It is unlawful for
any person to erect or install a Sign having a size or height greater than that
allowed by Table 3.1 located in Section 3-8-P of this Chapter.
      2.   Applicability: The objective for restricting and limiting the size,
height, type, location, and time frame of temporary and portable Signs is to
assist in the elimination of visual clutter and to allow the City to the
flexibility in regulations in order to partially achieve the objective without
having to take a comprehensive approach to achieving the aesthetic objective.
      3.   Certain Temporary and Portable Signs Prohibited: If a Sign type is
desired in a zone but is not recognized/listed in the tables (e.g., roof Sign)
then it is not, and shall not, be allowed.
      4.   Temporary and Portable Signs, General Standards: All temporary and
portable Signs shall adhere to the size, height, and placement locations as
listed within this Chapter.
      5.   Number: A maximum of one (1) temporary or portable Sign shall be
displayed or business at any given time, except as noted herein or in the
tables within this Section. If a business abuts more than one (1) street, it
shall be permitted one-temporary or portable Sign per street that it abuts as
long as the Signs are a minimum of fifty (50) feet apart.
      6.   Construction and Maintenance: All temporary and portable Signs must
be professionally made, be weatherproofed and kept in a state of good
condition, appearance, safety and repair. No broken, unsightly, inferior,
faded, ripped, or worn materials may be utilized. The intent by which is to
guard against decay, unsafe, and poorly maintained Signs.
      7.   Support: Temporary and portable Signs shall be self-supporting so as
to remain in an upright position.
      8.   Location: All temporary and portable Signs shall be located on
private property unless otherwise specifically stated within this Section; and
no Signs shall be placed within any landscaping strips, unless otherwise
specifically stated herein.
      9.   Temporary and portable Signs shall not be attached to trees,
shrubbery, utility poles, or like items and shall not obstruct or obscure
permanent Signs on adjacent premises.
      10.   No temporary or portable Sign shall be erected or maintained which,
because of its size, location, or construction constitutes a hazard to the
public by impeding the vision of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, placed in/on
the streets, placed within the public rights of way, or placed within the
vision clearance area.
      11.   Banners: Wall banners shall be securely fastened on all four
corners and at midway points along the top and bottom of the banner for the
entire length.
      12.   Spacing: All temporary and portable Signs shall be spaced a minimum
of fifteen (15) feet away from any other temporary, portable, or permanent
Sign.
      13.   Illumination: All temporary and portable Signs are prohibited from
internal or external illumination.
      14.   Compliance Time Line: All temporary and portable Signs must be in
compliance with this Title within ninety (90) days of the effective date
hereof.
   O.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   All permanent Signs hereof shall conform to this Title upon any
structural change to the Sign, Sign base, or Building to which it is attached,
or upon any change in the face or copy of the Sign for the business,
subdivision, and/or property to which such Sign pertains if the use associated
with the business, subdivision, and/or property is changed.
   P.   Enforcement, Violation And Penalties For Noncomplying Signs:
      1.   If any Sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions
of this Title, the City of Eagle or their representative shall give written
notice to obtain permits, repair, remove or replace said Sign to the person or
persons responsible for such Sign or property owner on which Sign is located.
If the responsible person and/or owner fails to obtain permits, repair, remove
or replace the Sign within thirty (30) days after such notice or to make
written appeal to the Council, the Administrator is hereby authorized to cause
the removal of such Sign. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the immediate
removal, without notice, of any Sign or portion of a Sign which is determined
by the Building Official to be an immediate threat or danger to the public
health, safety, or welfare. Any expense incident to the removal of a Sign
pursuant to this paragraph shall be paid by the responsible party and/or owner
of the site on which the Sign is located. The removal of the Sign or portion of
the Sign shall be limited to the extent necessary to eliminate the threat to
the public health, safety and welfare. In addition to or in lieu of removal on
noncomplying Signs by the City as permitted by this Title, the City of Eagle or
their representative sworn as a limited purpose deputy, may issue to the known
owner of such Sign an infraction citation which shall be an infraction. Each
day a Sign continues in violation of this Section shall be deemed a separate
offense.
      2.   Community Sign Gallery and Matrix: The below matrix and designs are
conceptual and indicative of the design that is desired.
Table 3.1
AVIMOR SIGN MATRIX
Use Sign Type Orientation Size Parameters Aggregate Size Illumination Materials
                                          Limits
Table 3.1
AVIMOR SIGN MATRIX
Use       Sign     Orientation   Size Parameters Aggregate    Illumination Materials
          Type                                   Size Limits
                                                                           Neon not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           External,
                                                                           visible
                   Orientation                                             raceways
                   for                                                     not
                   visibility to                                           allowed.
                   Hwy 55. No                                              Custom
                   orientation                   Single                    background
                   toward                        tenant                    cabinets
                   residential                   application               will be
                   areas                         - 500 sq.    External     allowed
                   Signs are     2 sq. ft. per 1 ft. maximum  Illumination only if
Hotel and          allowed on    linear foot up  aggregate.   Halo         such is
Motel     Wall-    all public    to 80% of       However,     Illumination required by
Building  mounted  street        building        applications Punch        national
                   frontages as  frontage        must meet    through      brand
                   long as                       indicated    letter       standards
                   illuminated                   Size                      of tenant.
                   signage is                    Parameters                Letters/
                   not                           as noted.                 graphics to
                   orientated                                              be mounted
                   toward                                                  on Building
                   residential                                             facade with
                   neighborhoods                                           repairable
                                                                           Building
                                                                           surface
                                                                           (i.e. -
                                                                           EFIS,
                                                                           stucco).
                                                                           Neon not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           External,
                                                                           visible
                                                                           raceways
                                                                           not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           Allowances
                                                                           for tenant
                                                                           design
                                                                           standards
                   Located at                                              will be
                   roadway in    Freestanding                 External     considered;
                   front of and  ground monument              Illumination however,
Hotel and Free-    adjacent to   with a maximum  One monument Halo         cabinets
Motel     standing the Hotel     height of 6 ft. per Hotel    Illumination with
Building  ground   main          and maximum     Building/    Punch        applied
          monument vehicular     size of 48 sq.  tenant       through      halo
                   public entry  ft.                          letter       illuminated
                   point                                                   letters/
                                                                           graphics
                                                                           are
                                                                           encouraged.
                                                                           Monument
                                                                           materials
                                                                           are to be
                                                                           in keeping
                                                                           with
                                                                           overall
                                                                           project
                                                                           design
                                                                           guidelines.
                                                                           Neon not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           External,
                                 For primary                               visible
                                 street                                    raceways
                                 frontage, 1 sq.                           not
                                 ft. per 1                                 allowed.
                                 linear foot up                            Custom
                                 to 80% of store                           background
                                 frontage        Per tenant                cabinets
                                 For other       application               will be
                                 elevations      - 200 sq.    External     allowed
                   Oriented to   where signs are ft. maximum  Illumination only if
Multi-             the street    applied, 1/     aggregate.   Halo         such is
Tenant    Wall-    immediately   2 sq. ft. per 1 However,     Illumination required by
Retail    mounted  adjacent to   linear foot of  applications Punch        national
Shops              storefront    the primary     must meet    through      brand
                                 frontage will   indicated    letter       standards
                                 be allowed      Size                      of tenant.
                                 Sign to occur   Parameters                Letters/
                                 within          as noted.                 graphics to
                                 architecturally                           be mounted
                                 designed sign                             on Building
                                 band area on                              facade with
                                 main store                                repairable
                                 frontage                                  Building
                                                                           surface
                                                                           (i.e. -
                                                                           EFIS,
                                                                           stucco).
                                 No more than
                                 25% of each                               White Vinyl
                                 individual                                (or visible
                                 window area may                           color TBD
                                 have signage or              Non-         by owner)
                                 graphics                     illuminated  applied to
                                 applied to, or  Not included Vinyl        store
                                 within three    in overall   applied to   window
                                 feet (3')       aggregate    store window No printed,
Multi-             Oriented to   behind the      Sign         Halo         hand
Tenant    Window   the street    window area.    allowance as Lighting     lettered,
Retail    Signage  immediately   Storefront      long as Sign Self         window
Shops              adjacent to   graphics        (s) do not   Contained    painted
                   storefront    aggregate       exceed the   illuminated  sales
                                 allowances      maximum 25%  Signs to be  promotions
                                 'nclude all     allowance    approved per will be
                                 temporary                    tenant by    allowed.
                                 signage                      the City and No
                                 applications                 ADRC         illuminated
                                 and/or any                                signage
                                 permanent                                 will be
                                 identification                            permitted.
                                 signage.
                                                                           Neon not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           External,
                                                                           visible
                                                                           raceways
                                                                           not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           Individual
                                                                           pan channel
                                                                           letters or
                                                                           graphics
                                                                           with tenant
                                                                           brand Plex
                                                                           color
                                                                           faces. Trim
                                 For primary                               caps to
                                 street                                    match
                                 frontage, 1 sq.                           letter
                                 ft. per 1                                 face.
                                 linear foot up                            Returns
                   Signs are     to 80% of store Per tenant                painted to
                   allowed on    frontage        application               match
                   all public    For other       - 350 sq.                 Building
                   street        elevations      ft. maximum  External     surface.
Single             frontages as  where Signs are aggregate.   Illumination Custom
Tenant    Wall-    long as       applied, 1/     However,     Halo         background
Pad       mounted  illuminated   2 sq. ft. per 1 applications Illumination cabinets
Buildings          signage is    linear foot of  must meet    Punch        will be
                   not           the primary     indicated    through      allowed
                   orientated    frontage will   Size         letter       only if
                   toward        be allowed.     Parameters                such is
                   residential   Sign to occur   as noted.                 required by
                   neighborhoods within                                    national
                                 architecturally                           brand
                                 designed Sign                             standards
                                 band area on                              of tenant.
                                 Building                                  Letters/
                                 frontage(s)                               graphics to
                                                                           be mounted
                                                                           on Building
                                                                           facade with
                                                                           repairable
                                                                           Building
                                                                           surface
                                                                           (i.e. -
                                                                           EFIS,
                                                                           stucco)
                                                                           Application
                                                                           details to
                                                                           be reviewed
                                                                           and
                                                                           approved by
                                                                           owner.
                                                                           Neon not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           External,
                                                                           visible
                                                                           raceways
                                                                           not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           Allowances
                                                                           for tenant
                                                                           design
                                                                           standards
                   Located at                                              will be
                   roadway in    Freestanding                 External     considered;
                   front of and  ground monument              Illumination however,
Single    Free-    adjacent to   with a maximum  One monument Halo         cabinets
Tenant    standing the business  height of 6 ft. per single   Illumination with
Pad       ground   main          and maximum     pad tenant   Punch        applied
Buildings monument vehicular     size of 48 sq.  Building     through      halo
                   public entry  ft.                          letter       illuminated
                   point                                                   letters/
                                                                           graphics
                                                                           are
                                                                           encouraged.
                                                                           Monument
                                                                           materials
                                                                           are to be
                                                                           in keeping
                                                                           with
                                                                           overall
                                                                           project
                                                                           design
                                                                           guidelines.
                                                                           Neon not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           External,
                                                                           visible
                                                                           raceways
                                                                           not
                                                                           allowed.
                                                                           Allowances
                                                                           for tenant
                   Located at                                              design
                   roadway in                    Monuments to              standards
                   front of and                  be placed in              will be
                   adjacent to   Freestanding    most cases   External     considered;
                   the           ground monument at vehicular Illumination however,
Multi-    Free-    Building's    with a maximum  parking      Halo         cabinets
Tenant    standing main          height of 6 ft. entries, but Illumination with
Buildings ground   vehicular     and maximum     could be     Punch        applied
          monument entry point   size of 48 sq.  repeated at  through      halo
                   and/or        ft.             major        letter       illuminated
                   pedestrian                    pedestrian                letters/
                   walkway entry                 walkway                   graphics
                   point                         entries                   are
                                                                           encouraged.
                                                                           Monument
                                                                           materials
                                                                           are to be
                                                                           in keeping
                                                                           with
                                                                           overall
                                                                           project
                                                                           design
                                                                           guidelines.
 
AVIMOR SIGN MATRIX
                                   Size       Aggregate
Use Sign Type Function Orientation Parameters Size      Illumination Materials
                                              Limits
AVIMOR SIGN MATRIX
Use         Sign Type  Function   Orientation   Size          Aggregate   Illumination  Materials
                                                Parameters    Size Limits
                                                No more than
                                                25% of each
                                                individual                              White Vinyl
                                                window area                             (or visible
                                                may have                                color TBD
                                                signage or                              by owner)
                                                graphics      Not                       applied to
                                                applied to,   included in               store
                                                or within     overall                   window
                                                three feet    aggregate                 No printed,
                                  Oriented to   (3') behind   Sign        Non-          hand
Single      Window     Tenant ID  the street    the window    allowance   illuminated   lettered,
Tenant Pad  Signage    Hours of   immediately   area.         as long as  Vinyl applied window
Buildings              operation  adjacent to   Storefront    Sign(s) do  to store      painted
                                  storefront    graphics      not exceed  window        sales
                                                aggregate     the maximum               promotions
                                                allowances    25%                       will be
                                                include all   allowance                 allowed.
                                                temporary                               No
                                                signage                                 illuminated
                                                applications                            signage
                                                and/or any                              will be
                                                permanent                               permitted.
                                                identify
                                                signage.
                                                                                        Individual
                                                                                        reverse
                                                                                        pans
                                                                                        channel
                                                                                        letters or
                                                                                        graphics
                                                                                        with tenant
                                                                                        brand Plex
                                                                                        color
                                                                                        faces. Trim
                                                                                        caps to
                                                                                        match
                                                                                        letter
                                                                                        face.
                                                                                        Returns
                                                1 sq. ft. per                           painted to
                                                1 linear foot                           match
                                  Oriented to   up to 75% of                            Building
                                  the street    Building      Per tenant                surface.
                                  immediately   frontage      application               Custom
                                  adjacent to   Signs are     - 100 sq.                 background
                                  storefront    allowed on    ft. maximum               cabinets
Multi-                            Signage may   all public    aggregate.  Non-          will be
Tenant      Wall-      Tenant ID  be applied to street        However,    illuminated   allowed
Office      mounted               Building      frontages as  application dimensional   only if
                                  exterior not  long as       s must meet letters       such is
                                  necessarily   illuminated   indicated                 required by
                                  adjacent to   signage is    Size                      national
                                  actual        not           Parameters                brand
                                  interior      orientated    as noted.                 standards
                                  tenant space. toward                                  of tenant.
                                                residential                             Letters/
                                                neighborhoods                           graphics to
                                                                                        be mounted
                                                                                        on Building
                                                                                        facade with
                                                                                        repairable
                                                                                        Building
                                                                                        surface
                                                                                        (i.e. -
                                                                                        EFIS,
                                                                                        stucco).
                                                                                        Application
                                                                                        details to
                                                                                        be reviewed
                                                                                        and
                                                                                        approved by
                                                                                        owner.
                                                                                        Neon not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        External,
                                                                                        visible
                                                                                        raceways
                                                                                        not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        Allowances
                                                                                        for tenant
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        standards
                                                All Office                              will be
                                                Tenants will                            considered;
                                  Located on    be identified                           however,
                                  street level  on separate                             cabinets
            Free-                 immediately   tenant name   One panel                 with either
            standing              adjacent to   panels        per tenant.               routed,
Multi-      Pedestrian            office        Freestanding  Not         Individually  Plex-backed
Tenant      Directory  Tenant ID  Building      ground        included in halo          letters/
Office      - Multi-              entry or      monument with overall     illuminated   graphics or
            Office                entrance to   a maximum     aggregate   letters       cabinets
            Tenant                upper-level   height of 6   Sign                      with
            panels                office        ft. and       allowance                 applied
                                  tenants       maximum                                 halo
                                                overall size                            illuminated
                                                of 48 sq. ft.                           letters/
                                                                                        graphics
                                                                                        are
                                                                                        encouraged.
                                                                                        Monument
                                                                                        materials
                                                                                        are to be
                                                                                        in keeping
                                                                                        with
                                                                                        overall
                                                                                        project
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        guidelines.
                                                                                        Painted,
                                                                          Non-          cut out,
                                                Sign                      illuminated   layered, or
                                  Mounted to    configuration One wing    hanging Sign  applied
Live/Work   Wall-      Pedestrian wall          TBD, however  Sign is     panel mounted vinyl
(non-       mounted    scale      immediately   total         allowed per to standard   signage
residential wing Sign  Tenant ID  adjacent to   allowable is  Live/Work   project       assemblies
space)                            store/Office  8 sq. ft. of  tenant.     mounting      suspended
                                  entry         Sign panel                bracket/      from
                                                area.                     assembly.     standard
                                                                                        wing Sign
                                                                                        bracket
                                                                                        Neon not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        External,
                                                                                        visible
                                                                                        raceways
                                                                                        not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        Only logos/
                                                                                        logotype
                                                                                        font may be
                                                                                        internally
                                                                                        illuminated
                                                                                        in Sign
                                                                                        cabinets
                                                                                        and must be
                                                Major and                               Plex-backed
                                                Minor retail                            on double
                                                tenants will                            sided
                                                be identified                           faces.
                                                on separate                             Tenant
                                                tenant name                             logos/
                                  Located on    cabinets (4                             logotype
Multi-      Free-                 Hwy 55        to 7)         One Major                 may be
tenant /    standing              adjacent to   Major cabinet panel. Not  Individually  used,
Project ID  Highway    Project    Avimor (east  is approx. 36 included in halo          however all
Highway     Monument - and Tenant and west side sq. ft. (dbl  overall     illuminated   Plex is
Monument    4-7 tenant ID         of hwy) at    sided)        aggregate   letters       white
(quantity   name                  future off-   Each Minor    Sign                      Project ID
10)         cabinets              ramp          tenant        allowance                 is reverse
                                  locations     cabinet is                              pan
                                                approx. 20                              letters/
                                                sq. ft. (dbl.                           graphic and
                                                Sided) or 10                            halo
                                                if split into                           illuminated
                                                two tenant                              Cabinets
                                                panels                                  with
                                                                                        applied
                                                                                        halo
                                                                                        illuminated
                                                                                        letters/
                                                                                        graphics.
                                                                                         
                                                                                        Monument
                                                                                        materials
                                                                                        are to be
                                                                                        in keeping
                                                                                        with
                                                                                        overall
                                                                                        project
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        guidelines.
                                                Regional Sign             Ground        Monument
                                                ID not to                 mounted flood materials
            Free-                 Located at    exceed 30 sq.             lights on     are to be
            standing              Trail Heads   ft,                       monument      in keeping
Trail       ground     Trail ID   and Trail     Trail ID not  NA          only. No      with
            monument              Intersections to exceed 6               overcasting   overall
                                  for Trail ID  sq. ft. each              or toward     project
                                                side                      residential   design
                                                                          neighborhoods guidelines.
                                                                                        Neon not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        External,
                                                                                        visible
                                                                                        raceways
                                                                                        not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        Allowances
                                                                                        for tenant
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        standards
                                                                                        will be
                                                                          Individually  considered;
                                                                          halo          however,
                                                                          illuminated   cabinets
                                  Located at                              letters.      with either
                                  roadway in                              Ground        routed,
            Free-                 front of and  Sign area to              mounted flood Plex-backed
Entry       standing   Project ID adjacent to   be 80 ft.     NA          lights on     letters/
            ground                the main      maximum                   monument      graphics or
            monument              vehicular                               only. No      cabinets
                                  public entry                            overcasting   with
                                  point                                   or toward     applied
                                                                          residential   halo
                                                                          neighborhoods illuminated
                                                                                        letters/
                                                                                        graphics
                                                                                        are
                                                                                        encouraged.
                                                                                        Monument
                                                                                        materials
                                                                                        are to be
                                                                                        in keeping
                                                                                        with
                                                                                        overall
                                                                                        project
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        guidelines.
                                                Freestanding              Ground        Materials
                                                ground                    mounted flood are to be
            Free-      Community  Signs are     monument with             lights on     in keeping
            standing   Event Info allowed on    a maximum                 monument      with
Marketing   ground     and        all public    height of 9   NA          only. No      overall
            monument   Project ID street        ft. and                   overcasting   project
                                  frontages     maximum                   or toward     design
                                                overall size              residential   guidelines.
                                                of 78 sq. ft.             neighborhoods
                                                                                        Neon not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        External,
                                                                                        visible
                                                                                        raceways
                                                                                        not
                                                                                        allowed.
                                                                                        Allowances
                                                                                        for tenant
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        standards
                                                                                        will be
                                                                          Individually  considered;
                                                                          halo          however,
                                                Freestanding              illuminated   cabinets
                                  Located at    ground                    letters.      with either
                                  roadway in    monument with             Ground        routed,
            Free-                 front of and  a maximum                 mounted flood Plex-backed
Place card  standing   Project ID adjacent to   height of 8   NA          lights on     letters/
            ground                the main      ft. and                   monument      graphics or
            monument              vehicular     maximum                   only. No      cabinets
                                  public entry  overall size              overcasting   with
                                  point         of 78 sq. ft.             or toward     applied
                                                                          residential   halo
                                                                          neighborhoods illuminated
                                                                                        letters/
                                                                                        graphics
                                                                                        are
                                                                                        encouraged.
                                                                                        Monument
                                                                                        materials
                                                                                        are to be
                                                                                        in keeping
                                                                                        with
                                                                                        overall
                                                                                        project
                                                                                        design
                                                                                        guidelines.
                                  Signs are
                                  allowed on
                                  all public                                            Materials
                                  street                                                are to be
                       Community  frontages as  Maximum                                 in keeping
            Free       Event Info long as       height of 14'             Non-          with
Banner      Standing   and        illuminated   and maximum   NA          illuminated   overall
            poles      Project ID signage is    overall size                            project
                                  not           of 32 sq. ft.                           design
                                  orientated                                            guidelines.
                                  toward
                                  residential
                                  neighborhoods
                                                Freestanding                            Materials
                                                ground                                  are to be
            Free-      Community  Oriented      monument with                           in keeping
Directional standing   Event Info perpendicular a maximum                 Non-          with
/wayfinding ground     and        to the street height of 9   NA          illuminated   overall
            monument   Project ID immediately   ft. and                                 project
                                  adjacent      maximum                                 design
                                                overall size                            guidelines.
                                                of 78 sq. ft
 
Community Directional - Exhibit 3.11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-799.png]
 
Community Monument Signage - Exhibit 3.12
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-797.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-795.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-793.png]
 
Community Entry Sign - Grade Adaptive - Exhibit 3.13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-791.png]
 
Community Entry Sign with Bern - Exhibit 3.14
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-789.png]
 
Community Entry Sign with Wall - Exhibit 3.15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-787.png]
 
Community Entry Signs - Exhibit 3.16
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-785.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-783.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-781.png]
 
Community Trail Signs - Exhibit 3.17
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-779.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-777.png]
 
Facility or Amenity Freestanding - Exhibit 3.18
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-775.png]
 
Facility or Amenity Place Card - Exhibit 3.19
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-773.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-771.png]
 
Freestanding Multi-Tenant - Exhibit 3.20
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-769.png]
 
Highway Monument - Exhibit 3.21
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-767.png]
 
Construction Signage for Highway - Exhibit 3.22
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-765.png]
 
Office Multi-Tenant - Exhibit 3.23
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-763.png]
 
Office Single Tenant Signage - Exhibit 3.24
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-761.png]
 
Retail Shop Signage - Exhibit 3.25
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-759.png]
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-9: LIGHTING:
   A.   General:
      1.   Street lighting will be restricted to intersections, in public
parking areas, and specified public places in the Village Center Land Use
District. All other districts shall not require lighting at these locations or
others. All such lighting shall be controlled to prevent spillage and glare in
accordance with Dark Sky standards.
      2.   Pedestrian areas, patios, sidewalks, and Building entrances, in the
Village Center, should be adequately lit to provide safety and security.
      3.   Any lights used to illuminate a site and Building shall be arranged
to reflect the light away from the adjoining property.
      4.   Recessed down-lights are encouraged at entries and patios. Surface-
mounted light fixtures shall have shielded light sources with bulbs or tubes
not directly visible. Wall or eave-mounted floodlights, including motion-sensor
lighting, are prohibited.
      5.   Building light fixtures shall be designed or selected to be
architecturally compatible with the main structure, which should complement the
theme of the surrounding area.
      6.   Blinking, flashing lights, and exposed neon lighting used to
illuminate Building facades or to outline Buildings are prohibited.
      7.   Parking Lot lighting should be shielded to have a minimal effect on
surrounding properties and Buildings. Lighting should be directed downward to
minimize glare, and light intensity should be of satisfactory quality to ensure
visibility, safety, and security.
      8.   Landscape lighting shall be low-voltage only and controlled with an
electric clock or photocell device. Light sources must be shielded from view
with perimeter landscaping providing a 12-month screen of sufficient height and
Density to conceal such fixtures. Controller equipment must be located in a
discreet location or screened from view from the street or adjacent property.
      9.   Exterior lighting design shall promote Dark Sky principals.
   B.   Lighting Design And Maintenance Regulations And Requirements:
      1.   Subject to the Dark Sky standards set forth in this Chapter,
exterior lighting shall comply with Section 11B-3-9-F of this Chapter.
      2.   Site Lighting: Parking areas used during the hours of darkness shall
have lighting that provides adequate illumination, security, and safety while
maintaining Dark Sky principles. The only parking areas that may be required to
be lit are parking areas located within the Village Commercial.
      3.   Lighting Plans: All plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City
of Eagle Administrator prior to issuance of a Building/zoning permit.
      4.   Screening and/or Landscaping: Parking Lot screening and landscaping
shall comply with this Chapter.
      5.   Area Lighting shall meet the general requirements of the following
schedule:
Area Lighting Standards Schedule
 Uses
         Site lighting > 1 acre Site lighting < 1 acre Recreation fields,
 Streets or Parking Lots > 100  or Parking Lots < 100  courts and other sports
         cars                   cars                   facilities
Area Lighting Standards Schedule
                Uses
                                Site lighting > Site lighting < Recreation
                                1 acre or       1 acre or       fields, courts
                Streets         Parking Lots >  Parking Lots <  and other
                                100 cars        100 cars        sports
                                                                facilities
                                Village         Village
                Village         Commercial      Commercial
                Commercial      (VCOM), Highway (VCOM), Highway
                (VCOM), Highway Mixed Use       Mixed Use       Any Permitted
Sub-Use         Mixed Use       (HMU), Mixed    (HMU), Mixed    or Approved
Districts       (HMU), Mixed    Use (MU),       Use (MU),       Conditional Use
                Use (MU) and    Community       Neighborhoo d   Zone
                Community       Commercial      Commercial (NC)
                Commercial (CC) (CC),           and Multi-
                                                family 1 (MF1)
Maximum
mounting height 25'             25'             25'             30'
*
Maximum Ave.    1 fc            .5 fc           .5 fc           1.5 fc
Footcandles
Maximum         7000            8000            7000            9000
Luminance
Maximum Kelvin  3000            3000            3000            3000
Temp
Maximum
Trespass into   0.01 Fc at 15'  0.01 Fc at 15'  0.01 Fc at 15'  0.01 Fc at 20'
residential or  from property   from property   from property   from property
Common Area     line            line            line            line
uses
Minimum         NA              8:1             5:1             5:1
Uniformity
*All fixtures shall be full cut-off*Any lighting placed with within 50' of an
occupied residence shall require a reduced height of 15'
 
      6.   Building Lighting shall meet the general requirements of the
following schedule:
Building Lighting Standards Schedule
 Uses
 Commercial Buildings, Civic Buildings, Single Family and Multi-Family
 Public Buildings and Quasi-Public      residential Buildings
 Buildings:
Building Lighting Standards Schedule
                          Uses
                          Commercial Buildings,      Single Family and Multi-
                          Civic Buildings, Public    Family residential
                          Buildings and Quasi-Public Buildings
                          Buildings:
Maximum mounting height   20'                        15' except recessed soffit
                                                     lights and can lights
Maximum Ave. Footcandles  1fc                        .5 fc
Maximum Luminance         8000                       7000
Maximum Kelvin Temp       4000                       3000
Maximum Trespass into     .01 fc at 15' from
residential or Common     property                   .01 fc at 5' from property
Area uses
Maximum Flood Light angle 40 degrees                 40 degrees
Minimum Uniformity        NA                         NA
 
* Mounting Height shall include the base
   C.   Exterior Lighting:
      1.   All exterior lighting shall provide acceptable qualities and
quantities of illumination for its function and minimize off site glare and
light trespass. Any lights used to illuminate a site shall be arranged to
reflect light away from the adjoining property.
      2.   Lighting design shall promote Dark Sky principles and minimize light
pollution by incorporating lighting practices that minimize the amount and area
of illumination. Such practices include:
         a.   Providing lighting fixtures that maximize uniformity and minimize
lamp wattages;
         b.   Providing energy efficient light sources;
         c.   Minimizing light trespass and glare by aiming fixtures downward,
shining light only where it is needed, shielding light from adjacent property,
and preventing light from escaping upward, causing sky glow; and
         d.   Minimizing the duration of illumination of certain light sources
by having lights out as long as practical.
   D.   Sports Lighting:
      1.   General Requirements: All exterior sports and recreational lighting
installations shall require a conditional use permit. Photometric calculations
by a licensed electrical engineer are required in all applications.
Additionally, all lighting must comply with Section 11B-3-9-F of this Chapter.
   E.   Pathway/Trail Area Lighting:
      1.   To facilitate Dark Sky principles, Pathways and Trails shall not be
lit except within the VCOM Sub-Use District.
      2.   Allowed pathway and lighting shall consist of only two (2) lighting
types: (i) pole lights; and (ii)bollard lights in compliance with Dark Sky
standards. Bollard lighting shall be restricted 32" to 44" in height.
   F.   Dark Sky:
      1.   All lighting within Avimor shall comply with the following:
         a.   Provide shielded down-lighting of the patio and plaza areas to
promote safety;
         b.   Street lighting will be limited to intersections, along the
Village Commercial areas, in public parking areas. All such lighting shall be
controlled to prevent spillage and glare;
         c.   Pedestrian areas, patios, sidewalks, and Building entrances
within the non-residential areas, should be adequately lit to provide safety
and security;
         d.   Lighting shall be limited to the Building area;
         e.   Recessed down-lights are encouraged at entries and patios.
Surface-mounted light fixture shall have shielded light sources with bulbs or
tubes not directly visible. Wall or eave mounted floodlights, including motion-
sensor lighting, are prohibited;
         f.   Skylights are very useful in conserving energy, but they can
provide objectionable light spillage and glare in the night sky. Skylights are
allowed on residential Units, but they must ensure they are not unsightly and
do not cause undue light spillage;
         g.   Permanent blinking, flashing lights, and exposed neon lighting
used to illuminate Building facades or to outline Buildings are prohibited;
         h.   Parking Lot lighting should be designed to have a minimal effect
on surrounding properties and Buildings. Lighting should be directed downward
to minimize glare, and light intensity should be of satisfactory quality to
ensure visibility, safety, and security;
         i.   Landscape lighting shall be low-voltage only and must be shielded
from view;
         j.   Business signage shall avoid glare or visual interference for
vehicular and pedestrian safety; and
         k.   Energy efficiency and low wattage, high life lighting is
encouraged. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-10: ADMINISTRATIVE AND BOARD LEVEL APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Administrative Level Design Review Applications: All design review
applications shall be reviewed and shall be acted on by the Administrator,
except for applications for development specifically listed in subsection B
below.
   B.   Board Level Design Review Applications: Shall be scheduled as
stipulated in this Chapter. Design review applications for the following types
of development shall be reviewed, and shall be acted on by the Design Review
Board:
      1.   One or more new Buildings subject to design review;
      2.   An addition to an existing Building, subject to design review, which
is greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the existing Gross Floor Area;
      3.   New Building facades with material changes, subject to design
review;
      4.   An addition to an existing Building subject to design review that is
equal to or greater than twenty thousand (20,000) s.f.; and
      5.   Master Sign plans which include five (5) or more businesses.
   C.   Concurrent Sign And Building Applications: All Sign applications
(including master Sign plans) made pursuant to this Chapter that accompanies
new development subject to design review are required to be submitted for
review contemporaneously with the Building design review application is made.
This Section is not intended to apply to Sign applications made for the
advertisement of businesses in existing Buildings where no changes are proposed
to the Building at the time of the application.
   D.   Administrator Decision: The ultimate decision of whether an
administrative level review or board level review will be required shall be
determined by the Administrator. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-11: APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect, move, construct, alter, or enlarge any Sign
without first obtaining the appropriate permits and approvals.
   B.   Required Reviews and Approvals: Except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter, all Signs shall be subject to design review, either administrative
staff level or board level review in accordance with this Title.
   C.   Structural Design Criteria: All monument Signs shall be designed to
resist the minimum wind load as specified in the current City adopted
International Codes.
   D.   Validity and Transferability: If work authorized under a permit has not
been commenced within 180-days after the date of issuance, said permit shall
become null and void. Permits are nontransferable.
   E.   Master Sign Plans: A "master Sign plan", as defined by this Chapter,
shall be required to be submitted to the City for review and approval for the
following:
      1.   Building complexes and business parks;
      2.   Multi-tenant Building and/or structures;
      3.   Shopping Centers and mini-malls;
      4.   Multiple Buildings on a single site or development; and
      5.   Any arrangement of Buildings or shops which constitute a visual
entity.
   F.   The purpose of the master Sign plan is to coordinate Signs, and create
a plan that establishes a Building or site's overall Sign design. The master
Sign plan shall show Sign colors, styles and locations of Buildings, maximum
size, illumination, and materials to be used.
   G.   The master Sign plan may be approved by the City with elements that
require suspension or relaxation of the height, area, number of Signs, or
locations of Signs specified within this Title if the City Design Review Board
finds that extraordinary conditions exist which allow suspension or relaxation,
but that any suspension or relaxation will still meet the intent of this Title
and:
      1.   The development site contains unique or unusual physical conditions
such as topography, proportion, size or relation to a public street that would
limit or restrict normal Sign visibility.
      2.   The proposed or existing development exhibits unique characteristics
of land use, architectural style, site location, physical scale, historical
interest or other distinguishing features that justify variation from
conventional development.
      3.   The proposed signage incorporates special design features such as
logos, emblems, murals, statuaries or similar architectural elements that are
designed in a manner determined by the City to be architecturally compatible to
the Sign and area.
   H.   Concurrent:
      1.   All Sign applications made pursuant to this Chapter are required to
be submitted for review at the time the respective Building design review
application is made, unless otherwise specified in this Chapter. For commercial
plats, a master Sign plan is required to be submitted with the plat for
preliminary approval. This Section is not intended to apply to Sign
applications made for the advertisement of businesses in existing Buildings
where no changes are proposed to the Building at the time of the application.
      2.   Application for Permanent Sign Permits: Application for a Sign
permit shall be made upon forms furnished by the Administrator and shall be
accompanied by such information as may be required to ensure compliance with
this Title Sign applications shall be accompanied by the following:
         a.   A site plan (to scale and fully dimensioned) showing the location
of the site, all property lines, easements, Setbacks, landscaping areas, and
indicating the location of all Signs;
         b.   An elevation drawing, footing design, connection details and
specifications for all monument Signs. All drawings and details shall be to
scale and fully dimensioned;
         c.   A master Sign plan is required to be submitted for any cluster of
Buildings intended for business occupancy, or any single Building containing
more than one business or any arrangement of business Buildings or shops which
constitute a visual entity. These include developments such as Shopping
Centers, mini-malls, business parks, and multi-tenant commercial, Office or
industrial Buildings housing four or more businesses. Additionally, a master
Sign plan may be submitted for a single business if the owner chooses to submit
an application for a master Sign plan for said business;
         d.   Structural engineering calculations for monument Signs that are
over fifteen (15') feet in height; and
         e.   An elevation, connection details and specifications for all
attached wall Signs. All drawings and details shall be to scale and fully
dimensioned.
   I.   Application for Temporary Sign Permits:
      1.   Application for temporary Signs as required in this Chapter shall be
made upon forms furnished by the Administrator and shall be accompanied by such
information as may be required to ensure compliance with this Title. Sign
applications shall be accompanied by the following:
         a.   A site plan (fully dimensioned) showing the location of the site,
all property lines, easements, Setbacks, landscaping areas, and indicating the
location of all Signs;
         b.   An elevation drawing depicting the size, message or
advertisement, connection method, and design color scheme; and
         c.   Fees: Sign permit applications shall be accompanied by fees as
established by Council resolution.
   J.   Activities Exempt from Permit Requirements: The following activities do
not require a Sign permit.
      1.   For Signs conforming to this Chapter, a permit shall not be required
for a change of face, copy and/or logo on any such Sign, cleaning, and normal
maintenance and repair of a Sign, provided that the Sign structure is not
changed in any way and provided that the colors previously approved are not
changed. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-12: NOTIFICATION:
The Administrator shall provide notice to applicant, owner, purchaser of
record, at least seven (7) days prior to the design review board meeting. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-13: DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty-five (35) days
prior to action by the Administrator or design review board, anyone required to
comply with this Title shall submit their application, together with the
required fee, to the Administrator. The Administrator may extend the review
time for design review applications that are unusually large or complicated and
may decrease review times for applications that are minor or do not require
transmittals to other agencies. At least seven (7) days prior to any scheduled
design review board meeting, all applications to be considered at that meeting
shall be made available to each member of the board.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the Administrator or Design Review Board, whichever is
applicable, shall approve the application as presented, approve the application
with supplementary conditions, continue the application for further review, or
deny the application.
      1.   City Findings: The City shall make findings which address the
following:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for the approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
      2.   General Standards For Design Review: The Administrator or Design
Review Board, whichever is applicable, shall review the particular facts and
circumstances of each proposed design review in terms of the following
standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such design review at
the proposed location:
         a.   Will function in conformance with the regulations of this Title;
         b.   Is of a scale, intensity, and character that is in harmony with
existing conforming and planned development in the vicinity of the site;
         c.   Is designed with adequate off-street parking facilities in such a
way as to not interfere with ingress/egress to the site and will serve the
intended use so as to not cause conflict with adjacent uses;
         d.   Will not interfere with the visual character, quality, or
appearance of the surrounding area and City, and where possible, enhance the
continuity of thematically common architectural features;
         e.   Will have facades, features, and other physical improvements that
are designed as a whole, when viewed alone as well as in relationship to
surrounding Buildings and settings;
         f.   Will not obstruct views and vistas as they pertain to the urban
environment and in relation to artistic considerations;
         g.   Will provide safe and convenient access to the property for both
vehicles and pedestrians through patterned traffic circulation and connectivity
to abutting development;
         h.   Is in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare
promoting a pedestrian friendly and walkable environment in balance with
protecting a viable commercial center in the area; and
         i.   Will have Signs, if proposed, that are harmonious with the
architectural design of the Building and adjacent Buildings, and will not cover
or detract from desirable architectural features. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-14: APPEALS:
See Chapter 7 this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-15: TERMS OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Any approval given pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall
lapse and become null and void twelve (12) months following the date on which
it was given, unless, prior to the expiration date, construction or development
is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the
subject of the application.
      1.   A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of the
approved design review application may be approved by the City Council, at its
sole discretion, if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding design review conditions of approval
violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be
conditioned by the City Council to be cured as a condition of the extension of
time;
         b.   The design review application, as previously approved, remains in
the best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this Title between the
date of application approval and the application date of the time extension
request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates that the project will commence within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress of the project.
      2.   The City Council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This Section does not limit the number of extensions the City
Council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in this
subsection are met. Nothing in this Section requires the City Council to grant
any extension of an approval period. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-16: MODIFICATIONS:
After approval of a design review application, the applicant may request a
modification(s) to the approved Development Plans or conditions. Such request
shall be made upon an application form prescribed by the Administrator and
shall be determined pursuant to the standards set forth in this Chapter.
   A.   Administrative Level Approvals: The Administrator is authorized to
approve all modifications to approved design review applications except for
those listed in subsections B and C of this Section.
   B.   Board Level Approvals: The following modifications to an approved
design review application shall require approval from the design review board:
      1.   Any change that may impact an adjoining residential neighborhood;
and
      2.   Any requests that, in the opinion of the Administrator, would
significantly alter the approved design of the site and/or Building(s) in a
manner such that design review board review and approval should be required.
   C.   City Council Approvals: City Council approval is required for any
request to change or delete a condition of approval which was established by
the Council as part of their approval of any design review application which
was appealed to the City Council for their action.
   D.   Appeal: Any action on a modification to an approved design review
application by either the Administrator or design review board may be appealed
in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Title.
   E.   Failure To Obtain Approval: Failure of the applicant to obtain approval
of any modifications constructed contrary to the approved design review plans
may result in the requirement to reconstruct the development to comply with the
original City approved design review plan. The City will not issue a final
occupancy or accept a certificate of completion from the licensed architect or
licensed landscape architect until the issue of the modification has been
resolved. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-17: RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:
   A.   Building/Zoning Permits: The Administrator shall not issue a Building/
zoning permit to any applicant from within the design review overlay district
until the design review application has been specifically approved in writing
by the Administrator or Design Review Board and is in full compliance with this
Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-18: SURETIES:
   A.   Prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, a surety
in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit, or cash, in the amount equal to
one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated construction costs of site
improvements, landscaping and irrigation shall be provided by the owner/
developer to the City to be held and deposited by the City until said
construction, landscaping and irrigation is complete. Construction cost
estimates shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrator prior to City
acceptance of said surety. The surety initiation and extension fees shall be
established by resolution of the City Council. No final certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping and irrigation and required
construction is complete. In the event the owner/developer fails to complete
all improvements required pursuant to the City approved plans the City may,
after written notice of intent to proceed, draw on the surety to completely
install, repair, or replace any and all improvements which are the subject of
noncompliance. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3-19: INSPECTION:
   A.   When Required: For any development that is the subject of a design
review application, the Administrator shall cause an inspection of the
development to be performed to verify that the development has been completed
in accordance with the specifications set forth in this Title.
   B.   Certification Of Completion:
      1.   Upon the completion of a Building, or any other improvement subject
to design review approval, the licensed architect responsible for the plan
shall prepare and file with the City a written certification of completion. The
certification of completion shall state that the construction of the Building
is in substantial compliance with the City approved architectural plan. This
certification shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in lieu of, the inspections
performed and certificates issued by the City;
      2.   In the event that deficiencies are present in the construction of
the Building, or any other improvement subject to design review approval, the
licensed architect shall prepare and file with the City a report noting the
deficiencies in the construction. The City will not accept a certification of
completion, or issue a certificate of occupancy, until the licensed architect
has verified that the deficiencies have been corrected; and
      3.   The licensed architect may, at their discretion, appoint an
authorized designee to certify the project provided that the designee is a
licensed architect.
   C.   Certificate Of Occupancy: The Building inspector shall not issue a
final certificate of occupancy to the applicant until all of the requirements
of the design review applications, as approved by the Design Review Board, have
been complied with. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 3A
VILLAGE ONE DISTRICT DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
11B-3A-1: Applicability
11B-3A-2: Village One Land Use Plan
11B-3A-3: Road Standards
11B-3A-1: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter 3A shall govern and control all development within the Village One
District. The provisions of this Title, including, but not limited to Chapter
3, shall govern all standards or processes that are not specifically
identified, set forth, or modified by this Chapter 3A. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3A-2: VILLAGE ONE LAND USE PLAN:
The Village One Land Use Plan, shown as Figure 3A.1, below, designates the Sub-
Use Districts in the Village One District.
Figure 3A.1 - Village One Land Use Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-801.png]
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3A-3: ROAD STANDARDS:
   A.   The design of the on-site vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation
system for the Village One District is focused on the following objectives:
      1.   Meeting the intent of the Ada County Highway District (ACHD) design
standards and guidelines;
      2.   Meeting the response and access needs of emergency service
providers;
      3.   Providing an efficient and safe network of vehicular, bicycle, and
pedestrian facilities that support the multi-modal vision of the development;
      4.   Supporting the planned land uses of the development; and
      5.   Blending into, respecting, and preserving the natural rural
environment.
   B.   The Village One District street standards are based on ACHD standards.
However, given the diverse character of the Village One District there may be
modifications or exceptions based on location and site-specific conditions that
will be proposed to ACHD early in the preliminary platting process and will
address these unique requirements of each development phase. The authorized
roadway standards for the Village One District include:
      1.   Reserve And Cottage Residential Streets: These standards are
appropriate in the RR and CR Sub-Use Districts.
         a.   ACHD sections for:
            (1)   Two-lane Collector;
            (2)   Two-lane, residential collector; and
            (3)   Two-lane, minor local.
         b.   Modifications/Exceptions:
            (1)   Option to replace curb and gutter with ribbon curb in large
Lot Areas with moderate grades;
            (2)   Separated (one-way) travel lanes in steeply-sloped areas with
twenty foot (20 foot) wide lanes to meet emergency service provider
requirements;
            (3)   Single, separated pedestrian facility in large Lot Areas; may
be located in ACHD right-of-way or within an easement adjacent to street;
            (4)   The twenty-nine foot (29') reduced street section, may be
modified to allow parking on both sides with Fire District approval; and
            (5)   One side-only parking areas will be denoted by "chokers" and
pavement striping, not signage, except for one "No Parking" Sign located at the
beginning of the restricted block.
      2.   Phase 1 Mixed Use Streets: These standards are appropriate in the
P1MU Sub-Use District:
         a.   ACHD sections for:
            (1)   Three-lane collector;
            (2)   Two-lane, standard local;
            (3)   Two-lane, minor local; and
            (4)   Two- Lane, local minor.
         b.   Modifications and Exceptions:
            (1)   Addition of planted median, where appropriate, instead of
turn lane;
            (2)   One-way sections around greens and parks designed to meet
Emergency standards with On Street Parking on at least one side (see Village
One-Way Option graphic, following page);
            (3)   The twenty-nine foot (29') reduced street section, may be
modified to allow parking on both sides with Fire District approval; and
            (4)   One side-only parking areas will be denoted by "chokers" and
pavement striping, not signage, except for one "No Parking" Sign located at the
beginning of the restricted block.
      3.   Special Street Sections:
         a.   Within the Village One District, specialized facilities-roadways,
lanes, alleys, and Emergency or maintenance accesses, are allowed to address
site specific conditions or community design. Allowed special street sections
include the following:
            (1)   Constrained: An optional roadway section is available for
Village One District streets in steeply sloped areas that cannot reasonably
accommodate the standard width required for the typical section. This section
includes a forty (40) foot right-of-way with two (2), ten (10) foot travel
lanes and two (2) foot ribbons (or vertical) curbs on each side.
Drainage is accommodated by a grass swale on the uphill side of the street.
Protection for pedestrians is by a standard raised curb or a special wood
guardrail depending on the separation between the vehicle travel-way and the
single pedestrian path located within the right-of-way, on the downhill side of
the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-811.png]
 
            (2)    Village One Lane: Village One lanes are for limited use to
provide access to individual residential driveways or connections for alleys in
areas that do not require On Street Parking or pedestrian facilities. The
typical section is a twenty-two (22) foot paved travel way and no sidewalks.
The minimum right-of-way will be thirty (30') feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-809.png]
 
            (3)    Mixed Use Alley: Mixed Use Alley will eliminate driveways
and conflicts on some streets. Fewer driveways on streets will result in more
On Street Parking, fewer conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles, and
eliminate the need to have garages lining residential streets. Alleys will be
used for utilities and trash collection. The typical Alley section includes a
twelve (12) foot paved lane with eight (8) inch concrete ribbon curbs plus a
three to four (3-4) foot landscaped buffer on each side. In locations where
alleys intersect, flatter curves or widening may be required to accommodate
turning vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-807.png]
 
            (4)   One-Way Option: One-way streets will provide vehicular
circulation around greens or park areas. The street section within a forty (40)
foot right-of-way consists of a twenty to twenty-seven (20-27) foot travel way,
an optional bike lane (where applicable) On Street Parking on one side (to the
right of traffic flow), a five (5) foot planter strip, and detached sidewalk.
The planter strip is optional and the sidewalk may meander or be adjacent to
the curb. On Street Parking may be provided along the interior park area (to
the left of traffic flow) if located in pods of two (2) or four (4) parallel
Parking Spaces and the twenty (20) foot travel way is maintained.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-805.png]
 
            (5)   Restricted Emergency/Maintenance Access (Private): Where
fully-improved roadway connections between residential clusters are impra ctic
al or wh ere ma intena nce access to a community facility is required, a twenty
(20) foot-wide paved access will be constructed to provide maintenance or
secondary Emergency connections. Vehicular use will be restricted to
maintenance or emergency vehicles by Fire District-approved bollards or gates,
but the access will be open for use by pedestrians and bicyclists. The twenty
(20) foot paved travel way will be located within a twenty-four (24) foot
easement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-803.png]
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 3B
BOISE COUNTY PHASE 1 SUBDIVISION LAND USE MAP
SECTION:
11B-3B-1: Applicability
11B-3B-2: Boise County Phase 1 Subdivision Land Use Map
11B-3B-1: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter 3B shall govern and control all development and land uses within
the Boise County Phase 1 Area. The provisions of this Title, including, but not
limited to Chapter 3, shall govern all standards and processes for development
in the Boise County Phase 1 Area that are not specifically identified, set
forth, or modified by the Avimor Development Agreement. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-3B-2: BOISE COUNTY PHASE 1 SUBDIVISION LAND USE MAP:
The Boise County Phase 1 Subdivision Land Use Map, shown as Figure 3B.1, below,
designates the Sub-Use Districts in the Boise County Phase 1 Area.
Figure 3B.1 - Boise County Phase 1 Subdivision Land Use Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-813.png]
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
SECTION:
11B-4-1: Purpose
11B-4-2: Supplemental General Provisions
11B-4-3: Commercial And Industrial Uses Restricted
11B-4-4: Specific Land Use Standards
11B-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of Specific Use Standards is to set specific conditions for various
uses where problems are frequently encountered. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-4-2: SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this Title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted
to accommodate an increased number of Dwelling Units unless:
      1.   The Lot Area per family equals the Lot Area requirements for new
structures in that district and the number of Dwelling Units per acre is less
than or equal to the requirement in that district; or
      2.   The conversion does not exceed the total number of Units allowed in
Avimor.
   B.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary Buildings, construction Trailers,
equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work only shall
be permitted in any district during the period construction work is in
progress, but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the
completion date of the project shall require a zoning permit authorized by the
Administrator.
   C.   Parking And Storing Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked
or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely
enclosed Building or carport. Further, no boats, motor homes or other
recreational vehicles shall be parked more than seventy-two (72) consecutive
hours in front of any residentially zoned property. One boat and one
recreational vehicle may be stored in the side or rear yard. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-4-3: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES RESTRICTED:
   A.   Performance Requirements: No land or Building in any Land Use District
shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious
or otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the
surrounding areas or adjoining premises; except, that any case permitted by
this Title may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and
safeguards to reduce dangerous and objectionable conditions to acceptable
limits as established by the following performance requirements:
      1.   Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable
or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved
as specified in the uniform fire code and the national safety foundation
publications;
      2.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit
harmful radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the
creator of such disturbance;
      3.   Noise: Objectionable noise, as determined by the Administrator,
which is due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise
controlled. Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes are exempt from this requirement;
      4.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without instruments on any adjoining Lot or property;
      5.   Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority;
      6.   Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is
visible from any property outside a Manufacturing district or from any street;
      7.   Erosion: No erosion by man, wind or water shall be permitted which
will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties; and
      8.   Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the
requirements and regulations established by the health authority.
   B.   Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of
the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American standards
institute, New York, the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington,
D.C., the United States bureau of mines and the health authority.
   C.   Enforcement: The Administrator, prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the
manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and
in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits
and tolerances. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-4-4: SPECIFIC LAND USE STANDARDS:
Certain land uses may pose special circumstances that may have detrimental
effects on surrounding land uses and require specific conditions. In addition
to the other requirements of these standards, the following standards apply to
the uses listed in this Chapter. If the proposed use does not meet the
standards contained herein, and is otherwise not subject to a conditional use
permit, then a conditional use permit shall be required.
   A.   Aggregate Processing, Asphalt, and Concrete Batch Plants: Any new
Aggregate Processing, Asphalt, and Concrete Batch Plant is permitted with a
conditional use permit subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The operator shall obtain all required permits and comply with all
applicable local, state and federal regulations;
      2.   The plant shall be erected as a Temporary Use for the sole purpose
of providing asphalt or concrete to support development within Avimor or use on
any projects that are placed as a condition of approval on the Avimor
development. The plant and all associated structures shall be removed from
Avimor following cessation of operations;
      3.   The plant operator shall treat all haul routes and parking areas
with an effective dust inhibiting surface;
      4.   Plant operations may be conducted employing portable equipment which
contain and utilize state-of-the-art pollution control features. A 70-foot-high
silo will be the maximum allowable height for these operations. All other
activities shall be maintained within thirty-five (35) feet or less in height.
The operator shall shield such activities by using measures to reduce noise,
visual impact, and dust on existing and future commercial and residential
developments within Avimor. Concrete operations shall incorporate an automatic
shut-off valve for the cement and fly ash fill tubes. The shut-off valve will
prohibit bulkers from over filling silos and adding particulate matter to the
atmosphere;
      5.   The operator shall take such steps as are necessary to mitigate the
visual, noise, dust, and any other impacts on nearby residential and/or
commercial development from operation of the plant. The operator shall comply
with the following:
         a.   Prior to start-up, all plant facilities shall be shielded, both
visually and audibly from the existing and future residential and commercial
development. The maximum noise level at the property line shall be 70 dB. See
also the buffer area and screening requirements in Section 3-7 of this Title;
         b.   The operator shall treat all Access Roads, haul roads and parking
areas with an effective dust inhibiting surfacing. The operator shall submit a
plan to the City showing planned treatment of all Access Roads, haul roads, and
parking areas as part of the permitting process;
         c.   The operator shall clean the Access Road(s) at a frequency that
effectively controls material buildup and associated dust or other hazards;
         d.   The operator shall at all times keep the plant sites and
excavation sites free from the accumulation of waste materials, rubbish, debris
and toxic or hazardous materials caused by his/her operations and operations of
any subcontractors;
         e.   Ready-mixed concrete and asphaltic concrete batch plants shall be
portable facilities employing state-of-the-art production and pollution control
features;
         f.   The operator shall install and utilize an effective system to
control spillage of diesel fuel and other materials used to clean or coat
trucks used to transport asphaltic concrete;
         g.   The operator shall comply with fire department regulations for
all tanks containing fuel or hazardous materials;
         h.   The operator shall take steps necessary to eliminate dust, sand
and other materials from being blown from trucks leaving the plant sites and
excavation sites. These steps may include wetting of material after loaded onto
trucks and truck covers;
         i.   The primary processing plant shall be located and operated in
those locations where it does not have a sustained noticeable impact on
residential and/or commercial developments. It is anticipated that the impact
from the primary plant will be dependent on its distance from residential/
commercial development, combined with the length of time the plant shall be
located at the specific plant site. At a minimum, the plant shall be located
five hundred (500') feet from any residential property;
         j.   Trucks shall not use compression brakes within Eagle City limits;
         k.   All lights, except those on mobile equipment, shall be directed
downward and shielded to the extent possible so as not to shine towards any
occupied residences within one- half mile; and
         l.   Location of the plant equipment and hours of operation shall be
submitted to the City for administrative approval. Normal operations are 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday from June through September and 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday during other months.
      6.   New plants shall require site plan review and conditional use permit
approval by the City;
      7.   The operator shall submit a demobilization and site clean-up plan
with the conditional use permit application. The plan shall include the
requirement for the operator to engage a licensed engineer to perform a Phase 1
Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) upon demobilization of the plants, and, if
recommended by the Phase 1 ESA, the operator shall perform a Phase 2 ESA and
perform all required clean-up operations. The conditional use permit shall set
forth the duration of the use and
      8.   A change in location, expansion, or an extension of time period for
use shall require a new conditional use permit.
   B.   Animal Daycare:
      1.   See "Kennel and Pet Shop" for the specific land use standards that
apply to the Animal Daycare use.
   C.   Agriculture:
      1.   The feeding or sheltering of livestock or poultry in penned
enclosures shall not occur within fifty (50') feet of any existing residential
property other than on the property for which the livestock is being fed or
sheltered.
   D.   Auto Body Shop:
      1.   The use shall be buffered from the residential property and
landscaped pursuant to the buffer area and screening requirements in Section 3-
7 of this Title.
      2.   No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment may be located in
any open area outside of an enclosed Building.
      3.   All disabled or wrecked vehicles shall be stored in an area which is
screened from view from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets
pursuant to the requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter. Such vehicles
shall not be stored on the property longer than twenty-one (21) days.
      4.   All repair work shall be performed within an enclosed Building.
      5.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the Lot.
   E.   Auto Gas Station:
      1.   The use shall be buffered from the residential property and
landscaped pursuant to the buffer area and screening requirements in Section 3-
7 of this Title.
      2.   Uses permissible at auto gas stations do not include major
mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found at an automotive gas station. An Auto Gas Station is not an Auto
Repair And Service Shop and is not an Auto Body Shop.
      3.   The following services may be provided:
         a.   Sales and service of spark plugs, batteries and distributors'
parts;
         b.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or re-grooving;
         c.   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts,
brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like;
         d.   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
         e.   Washing, polishing and sale of washing and polishing materials;
         f.   Greasing and lubrication;
         g.   Replacing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines;
         h.   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
         i.   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
         j.   Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor;
         k.   Sales of beverages, packaged food, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for service station customers, as an Accessory Use incidental
to principal operations;
         l.   Sales of alternative fuels such as natural gas and ethanol;
         m.   Provisions of road maps and other informational materials to
customers and provision of restroom facilities;
         n.   Warranty maintenance and safety inspections;
         o.   Emissions testing; and
         p.   Car washing that meet the requirements for Car Wash in this
Chapter.
      4.   Such uses shall be buffered from a residential property pursuant to
in Section 3-7 of this Title.
      5.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the Lot.
      6.   Sales of alcoholic beverages shall conform to the provisions of
Idaho and City Code. The sale of packaged liquor, beer, wine and coolers is
subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the City and will be
considered an assessor to the approved use.
   F.   Auto Repair and Service Shop, Major (including tow service):
      1.   The use shall be buffered from the residential property and
landscaped pursuant to in Section 3-7 of this Title.
      2.   The operating hours shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m.
      3.   The use shall be located on a site with other commercial development
with an overall minimum size of 5 acres.
      4.   All repair and service work shall be done within a completely
enclosed Building.
      5.   Storage of stock, equipment or used or discarded auto parts located
in any open area outside of an enclosed Building shall be screened from view
pursuant to the requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      6.   All disabled vehicles shall be stored in an area which is screened
from view from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets pursuant to the
requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      7.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the Lot.
   G.   Auto Repair and Service Shop, Minor:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from
any single-family residential property and a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
from any multi-family property as measured from Building to the residential
property line in a straight line. In addition, the uses shall be buffered from
the residential property pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
      2.   The use shall be located on a site with other commercial development
with an overall minimum size of three (3) acres.
      3.   All repair and service work shall be done within an enclosed
Building or otherwise screened from adjacent properties.
      4.   Storage of stock, equipment, or used or discarded automotive parts
located in any open area outside of an enclosed Building shall be screened from
view pursuant to the requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      5.   All disabled vehicles shall be stored in an area which is screened
from view from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets pursuant to the
requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      6.   Permitted minor auto mechanical repair and service facilities shall
be limited to the following kinds of activities:
         a.   Electronic tune ups;
         b.   Brake repairs (including drum turning);
         c.   Air conditioning repairs;
         d.   Generator and starter repairs;
         e.   Tire installation and repairs;
         f.   Front end alignments;
         g.   Battery recharging;
         h.   Emissions testing;
         i.   Lubrications;
         j.   Selling/installing minor parts and accessories; and
         k.   Repairing and installing other minor elements of an automobile
such as windshield wipers, hoses and windows, but excluding engine,
transmission and differential repair or installation.
      7.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the Lot.
   H.   Auto Rental Agencies:
      1.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
      2.   Any used or discarded automotive parts or equipment located in any
open area outside an enclosed Building must be located behind the Building and
screened from view pursuant to the requirements for Outdoor Storage in this
Chapter.
      3.   Such uses shall be buffered from any residential property pursuant
to the buffer area and screening requirements in Section 3-7 of this Title.
      4.   All exterior lighting shall be in compliance with Dark Sky
principles.
   I.   Auto and Recreational Vehicle Sales:
      1.   Major and Minor Auto Repair And Service Shops are permitted as part
of the facility.
      2.   No equipment or process shall be conducted adjacent to a residential
use which creates noise, glare, vibration, fumes, odor or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses from off of the Lot.
      3.   Any used or discarded parts or equipment located in any open area
outside an enclosed Building shall be screened from view pursuant to the
requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      4.   Such uses shall be buffered from any residential property pursuant
to in Section 3-7 of this Title.
      5.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
      6.   All exterior lighting shall be in compliance with Dark Sky
principles.
      7.   No commercial activities, other than those included in and
incidental to the operation of the facility, shall be conducted on site.
   J.   Bar / Pub / Nightclub and Club or Lodge:
      1.   Any establishment serving alcohol shall comply with City Code and
shall obtain a permit from the City. Such uses shall also comply with Idaho
Code.
      2.   Such uses shall be buffered from any residential property per
Section 3-7 of this Title.
   K.   Bed and Breakfast Facilities:
      1.   The facility shall have no more than ten (10) guestrooms and twelve
(12) guests at one time.
      2.   No cooking shall be allowed in guestrooms. The only meal to be
provided guests shall be breakfast, and it shall only be served to guests
taking lodging in the facility.
      3.   Bath facilities shall be shared by no more than two (2) guestrooms.
      4.   Off-street Parking Space shall comply with Table 5.3 in Chapter 5 of
this Title.
      5.   All signage shall comply with the Sign guidelines per Chapter 3 of
this Title.
   L.   Car Wash:
      1.   All businesses providing self-service or Drive-Thru Car Wash
facilities shall identify the stacking lane and wash location on the site plan.
      2.   If within the NC district, a Car Wash facility shall be allowed only
as an Accessory Use to a gasoline or diesel fuel sales facility. The Car Wash
facility shall be limited in capacity to a single vehicle.
      3.   A one hundred (100) foot separation shall be maintained between a
Car Wash facility (which includes, without limitation, Buildings and vacuum
islands) and any residential property line. In addition, such facility shall be
buffered from any residential property pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
      4.   Drive aisles along any property lines shall be screened pursuant to
Chapter 3 of this Title.
      5.   Vehicle stacking lanes shall be available on the property but
outside the Car Wash facility entrance. Stacking lanes shall have sufficient
capacity to prevent obstruction of the public right-of-way by patrons. Such
stacking lanes shall be separate from areas required for access and parking.
      6.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
   M.   Childcare Facility:
      1.   There shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) s.f. of net Floor Area
indoors per child. This space shall be measured wall to wall in rooms that are
regularly used by the children, exclusive of halls, bathrooms, and kitchen.
      2.   On-site vehicle pick-up and turnaround areas shall be provided to
ensure safe discharge and pick-up of children.
      3.   No portion of the facility shall be within three hundred feet (300')
of hazardous material storage, flammable substance storage, gasoline or diesel
fuel sales facility, Brewery, bar, Adult Business, or Winery.
      4.   An outdoor play area shall be provided that is sized to provide one
hundred (100) s.f. per child for the number of children using the play area at
any one time. This requirement may be waived if the facility is within three
hundred (300) feet of a park or Open Space Lot or a pathway connecting to a
park or Open Space Lot that can be used by the children.
   N.   Circus and Carnival:
      1.   All structures or outdoor use areas shall maintain a minimum Setback
of two hundred (200) feet from all abutting residential districts.
      2.   Such uses shall require a Temporary Use permit and a vendor permit
from the City and shall be permitted for not more than seven (7) days.
   O.   Colleges and Universities:
      1.   Colleges and Universities located prior to or in conjunction with a
preliminary plat shall be a permitted use. Schools located subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
   P.   Community Information Center:
      1.   A community or residential Sales Office use is allowed within the
center until project build-out.
      2.   Community Information Centers will need a zoning permit from the
City.
   Q.   Construction Office, Temporary:
      1.   A Construction Office requires a zoning permit from the City.
      2.   A Construction Office requires a site plan review and approval by
the Administrator.
      3.   The applicant shall provide a specific timeline for the duration of
the use.
      4.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 5 of this Title.
      5.   A Construction Office is allowed during the construction of the
associated project and shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit for the last home/structure within the project.
   R.   Construction Yard, Temporary:
      1.   A Construction Office requires a zoning permit from the City.
      2.   A Construction Office is allowed during the construction of the
associated project and shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit for the last home/structure within the project.
      3.   When located within or adjacent to a developed and occupied area and
the duration of use exceeds eighteen (18) months the yard shall be screened
from view.
      4.   Temporary Construction Yards may use chain link fencing for the
perimeter for the security of the items.
   S.   Convenience Store:
      1.   A Convenience Store that includes fuel sales shall be buffered from
a residential property pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
      2.   A Convenience Store that sells alcoholic beverages shall conform to
the following:
         a.   Approval of a conditional use permit by the City.
         b.   Provisions of Idaho and City Code.
      3.   A Convenience Store that includes fuel sales shall be regulated as
an auto gas station.
      4.   Any Convenience Store (with or without fuel sales) wishing to
operate before 6:00 a.m. or after 11 p.m. will require a conditional use
permit, except for stores located within the HMU zone, which may operate 24-
hours with an approved conditional use permit.
   T.   Dwelling, Accessory:
      1.   No more than one Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be permitted on a Lot
less than one (1) acre in size.
      2.   The minimum Lot size that will support an Accessory Dwelling Unit is
six thousand (6,000) s.f.
      3.   The maximum size of an Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be as follows:
         a.   500 sq. feet on Lots 6,000 - 7,500 s.f.;
         b.   640 sq. ft. on Lots 7,501 - 10,000 s.f.; or
         c.   800 sq. ft. on Lots over 10,000 s.f.
      4.   An Accessory Dwelling Unit shall meet the Setback requirements for
the principal dwelling and:
         a.   Shall be limited to one (1) bedroom;
         b.   Shall be no taller than the principal dwelling;
         c.   Shall be architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling
and shall be similar in appearance, materials and color as the principal
dwelling;
         d.   If located in the front of the principal dwelling, shall not
dominate the facade of, nor obstruct the view of the main entrance to the
principal dwelling when viewed from the street;
         e.   Shall not have direct access from the street on which the
principal dwelling fronts. Shall have a minimum separation of six feet (6')
from the principal dwelling if detached from the principal dwelling; and
         f.   Shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) coverage of the rear
or side yard area.
      5.   If the Accessory Dwelling Unit is above the ground floor and access
thereto is by a stairwell, then the stairwell shall be enclosed within the
structure or have a solid guardrail that extends to the ground and shall not be
perpendicular to an adjacent street, Alley or residence.
      6.   Parking for an Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be in addition to the
required parking for the principal dwelling. Parking may be provided in tandem
on a driveway with the principal dwelling.
      7.   The principal dwelling shall be owner-occupied.
      8.   An Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not be sold separately from the
principal dwelling.
      9.   Accessory Dwelling Units will need a zoning permit if not approved
with the principal structure.
   U.   Electric Sub-Stations:
      1.   A sub-station located subsequent to a preliminary or final plat
shall need a conditional use permit.
      2.   Such use shall be buffered from adjacent uses pursuant to Section 3-
7 of this Title.
   V.   Entertainment Facility:
      1.   Golf Driving Ranges, Moto Cross, accessory sales and rental of golf
equipment shall be allowed.
      2.   Golf Driving Ranges shall be designed to protect abutting property
and roadways from golf balls.
      3.   An illuminated golf driving range shall be located a minimum of
three hundred (300) feet from a residential property as measured from any light
standard to the residential property line in a straight line. The distance
shall be measured from the edge of the driving range to the residential
property in a straight line. Such lighting shall comply with the Dark Sky
principles as shown in Section
11B-3-9-F of this Title and shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m.
   W.   Equestrian Center:
      1.   An Equestrian Center in the RR and ER sub districts that is for
personal use shall be a permitted use. An Equestrian Center in the RR and ER
sub districts that is open to the public and is approved prior to or in
conjunction with a preliminary plat shall be a permitted use. An Equestrian
Center approved subsequent to a preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
      2.   Stables and loafing sheds shall have a minimum separation of three
hundred (300) feet from any residence, except for an owner's residence. In
addition, all facilities shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30)
feet from any property line.
      3.   Equestrian Centers shall be designed and located with full
consideration given to their proximity to adjacent uses and their effect on
adjacent and surrounding properties as to the storage of horse trailers and the
factors of noise and odor.
      4.   The owner or operator of such use shall have a continuous obligation
to maintain adequate housekeeping practices and to prevent the creation of a
nuisance.
      5.   Equestrian Centers must obtain a zoning permit from the City.
   X.   Equestrian Lots:
      1.   Horses may be kept on residential Lots only in the RR sub district
and are restricted to Lots that are a minimum of one (1) acre. One horse is
allowed on a one (1) acre Lot and one (1) additional horse is allowed for each
additional one-half (1/2) acre. Acres shall be rounded to the nearest whole
half-acre to determine total horses per Lot.
      2.   Accessory structures such as barns and stables, indoor and outdoor
riding facilities, storage Buildings and similar structures shall meet the
Setback requirements of the applicable residential district.
      3.   Barns and stables, covered or indoor riding facilities, storage
Buildings and similar structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the
max Lot Coverage in Table 2.2.
      4.   Private Equestrian Centers that are providing boarding for a fee
must obtain a Home Occupation permit.
   Y.   Farmers' Markets:
      1.   Farmers' Markets shall require a conditional use permit if not
approved with the preliminary plat for the area. A vendor permit from the City
is also required.
      2.   A parking plan will be required as part of the conditional use
permit application through the City.
   Z.   Fire/Police Station:
      1.   A fire or police station located prior to or in conjunction with a
preliminary plat shall be a permitted use. A station located subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
   AA.   Flex Space:
      1.   The Gross Floor Area of each Building used as Flex Space shall be a
maximum of thirty thousand (30,000) s.f.
      2.   Loading docks, if present, shall comply with this Title.
      3.   Hours of operation shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
   BB.   Seasonal Sale:
      1.   All Seasonal Sales require a zoning permit and a vendor license for
the City.
      2.   All Seasonal Sale requires a site plan review and approval by the
Administrator.
      3.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 5 of this Title.
      4.   Seasonal Sales are allowed for up to thirty (30) days. All zoning
permits shall establish a sunset date for the use.
   CC.   Heliports:
      1.   A Heliport pad located prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary
plat shall be a permitted use. A Heliport pad located subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
   DD.   Home Occupation: The provisions herein are to permit the establishment
of    Home Occupations that are compatible with the Sub-Use Districts in which
they are located. The intent of the regulations is to establish performance
standards for all Home Occupations. Home Occupations shall be classified as
either Class "A", "B" or "C" Home Occupations and shall be regulated as
follows:
      1.   Class A Home Occupations:
         a.   Shall be limited to only those uses expressly listed on Table 2.1
in Chapter 2 of this Title and permitted within the underlying Sub-Use
District.;
         b.   Shall require a City-issued business license; and
         c.   Shall not require a Home Occupation permit.
      2.   Class B Home Occupations:
         a.   Shall be those Home Occupation uses conducted entirely within the
dwelling or accessory structure, except that, outdoor swimming lessons and dog
training classes shall be permitted;
         b.   Shall require a City-issued business license; and
         c.   Shall not require a Home Occupation permit.
      3.   Class C Home Occupations:
         a.   Shall be those uses including activities conducted outside of the
dwelling or accessory structure, except for those uses classified as Class A or
B Home Occupations;
         b.   Shall require a City-issued business license;
         c.   Shall require City Council approval of a conditional use permit
for the Home Occupation permit if deemed to be in compliance with this Title;
         d.   If applicable, shall have the outdoor area of use designed to
assure no damage results to adjacent property;
         e.   No outdoor display or storage of unregistered vehicles, vehicle
parts, materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed on the
premises, except for lawfully parked registered vehicles;
         f.   Shall have a minimum of forty feet (40') between the outdoor area
of use and the property line;
         g.   If applicable, shall have a minimum of two (2) acres for sports
fields, sports courts, horse riding lessons, and other similar uses as may be
determined by the City Council;
         h.   If applicable, shall have a minimum of three (3) acres for uses
such as small wedding venues and other similar uses as may be determined by the
City Council;
         i.   May include conditions of approval specified by the City Council
to regulate the hours of operation, days of operation, number of events,
numbers of employees/customers/patrons/attendees, and other conditions
specifically related to the proposed use to assure compliance with this
Chapter:
         j.   Within seven (7) days after a written decision has been rendered
by the City Council, the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request; and
         k.   The Home Occupation permit shall be valid for a maximum of five
(5) years at which time a new permit shall be required.
      4.   Regulations Applicable to All Home Occupations:
         a.   The operator of every Home Occupation shall reside in the
dwelling unit on the property where the Home Occupation operates or on an
adjacent property owned by the same.;
         b.   A Home Occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit,
within an approved accessory structure, or outdoors in accordance with this
section. Parcels on which the Home Occupation is located may be adjacent to the
parcel in which the dwelling unit is located so long as the adjacent parcels
are under the same ownership;
         c.   For Home Occupations conducted within a dwelling unit the total
area used for the Home Occupation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the total floor area of the dwelling;
         d.   For Home Occupations conducted within an accessory structure, the
entire area of an accessory structure may be used for the Home Occupation
provided the use within the structure is permitted by the building code adopted
by the City;
         e.   The Home Occupation business must be clearly incidental to the
residential use of the subject property;
         f.   No alteration of the exterior of the dwelling in which the Home
Occupation is being conducted shall be made that changes the character thereof
as a dwelling;
         g.   No advertising or business signs are permitted in conjunction
with the Home Occupation;
         h.   No outdoor display or storage of unregistered vehicles, vehicle
parts, materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed on the
premises, except for lawfully parked vehicles;
         i.   On-site parking for any vehicle primarily used in connection with
the Home Occupation (employees/customers/patrons/attendees) shall be provided
on a dust free surface in addition to parking required for the dwelling unit;
         j.   The minimum number of covered parking spaces for the dwelling
unit shall not be reduced below the minimum number required by this Title;
         k.   Sale of goods on the premises shall be limited to the products
produced by the Home Occupation;
         l.   Deliveries of bulk material other than by mail, local courier, or
inter-city courier pertaining to the Home Occupation shall not exceed one (1)
per week and shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday. Further, traffic circulation shall not be restricted or
disturbed as a result of a delivery to a home occupation;
         m.   The Home Occupation shall not interfere with the delivery of
utilities or other services to the area;
         n.   The Home Occupation shall not generate any noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare or electrical interference with radio or
television transmission in the area that would exceed that which is normally
produced by a dwelling unit use;
         o.   No toxic, explosive, flammable, radioactive or other restricted
or hazardous material shall be used, sold or stored on the site; and
         p.   The Home Occupation shall at all times comply with all applicable
zoning codes and any requirements of other regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction.
      5.   Prohibited Home Occupations:
         a.   The following uses are prohibited for Home Occupation use:
Residential:
Dwelling, Multi-Family
Dwelling, Single Family Attached
Commercial:
Adult business
Aggregate Processing, Asphalt and Concrete Batch Plants
Auto body shop
Auto Repair and Service Shop (Major)
Auto gas station
Auto Rental Agency
Auto Repair and Service Shop Major and Minor
Auto and Recreational Vehicle Sales
Banks/financial institutions (no drive-up service)
Banks/financial institutions (with drive-up service)
Bar/Pub/Nightclub
Bed and Breakfast Facility
Brewery
Building Materials/Lumber Yard
Car Wash
Check-Cashing
Childcare: Group Daycare and Daycare Center
Church/Place of Religious Assembly
Circus and Carnivals
Clinic
Club or lodge
Communication facilities
Community Association Building/Facility
Community Garden
Community Information Center
Contractor's yard and/or shop
Convenience store
Dry Cleaner/Laundromat
Electric Substation
Entertainment Facility
Event Center
Farmers Market
Fire/ Police Station
Flex space
Food and beverage sales
Golf Course
Health Club
Hospital
Hotel and Motel
Institution
Junkyard
Kennel and Pet Shop
Laboratory
Library
Liquor Store
Maintenance Facility related to Open Space
Manufacturing, Light
Mortuary/Funeral Home
Motel
Museums
Nursing/convalescent home/Transitional Housing/Assisted Living
Outdoor Storage
Parking Lot/ Parking Garages (Commercial)
Pawn Shop/Auto Title Loans
Plant Nursery/Sod Farm (Retail &Wholesale)
Post Office/Annex
Pump Station
Radio and Television Broadcast Station
Recreation/Community Center
Recreation Field, Court, and Sports Facility
Recycling/Solid Waste Transfer Center
Recreational Vehicle Storage
Rental Service/Storage Yard (Large Equipment)
Research and Development
Resort
Restaurant (with or without drive-thru)
Retail Sales
Roadside Stand
Rodeo
Seasonal Sales
Schools, Business
Schools, Colleges and Universities (including satellite campuses)
Schools, Elementary/Middle/ High schools (public & private)
Schools, Vocational/Technical
Shooting Range/Gun Club (Indoor)
Shooting Range/Gun Club (Outdoor)
Shopping Center, Community
Shopping Center, Neighborhood
Special Care Facility
Special Event
Special Event (Avimor)
Sporting Event
Television Production Facility
Temporary Construction Yard
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic
Warehousing, Storage and Ministorage
Wastewater Treatment Facility
Water Storage Facility
Wholesaling Distribution and Storage
Winery
Wireless Communications Facility
 
         b.   As determined by the Administrator, uses that are not consistent
with this chapter and that impair the integrity of and/or exert a negative
influence on the residential neighborhood in which they are located, and/or
other uses similar to those prohibited Home Occupation uses listed in this
section shall be prohibited.
         c.   Repair or painting of motorized vehicles such as repair or
painting/wrapping of autos, trucks, trailers and boats, except that hobbyist
restoration of vehicles is permitted if entirely enclosed within an accessory
structure or garage and all other conditions herein are satisfied.
         d.   Upon the submittal of a waiver application and findings adopted
by the Administrator addressing compliance with the following criteria, the use
(s) noted in subsection 5a. above may be permitted for Home Occupations that:
            (1)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
            (2)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighborhood uses;
            (3)   Will be compatible with the scale and design of the
structures and overall existing development pattern of the surrounding area;
            (4)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
            (5)   If the waiver application is denied, the decision may be
appealed in accordance with Chapter 11 of this Title. If no appeal is
submitted, the decision is final.
   EE.   Hotel and Motel:
      1.   Hotels and Motels shall be designed and developed to fit into the
unique and special vision of Avimor and shall be subject to the Setback
standards of the Land Use District within which the use is located.
      2.   Maximum height allowed in the CC district as shown in Table 2.2.
   FF.   Kennel and Pet Shop:
      1.   All animals shall be confined within an enclosed area or on a leash
at all times.
      2.   Kennels and Pet Shops shall comply with all State and local
regulations relative to such an operation and maintain adequate housekeeping
practices designed to prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce the
factors of noise and odor to a minimum.
      3.   Pet boarding Kennels shall be operated with an attendant present on
the premises twenty-four (24) hours a day.
      4.   Outside runs shall have a minimum three hundred foot (300')
separation between any dwelling, except the owner's dwelling, as measured from
the run to the dwelling in a straight line. The Administrator may modify this
requirement if the animals are completely housed in soundproof structures that
completely screen them from view from the abutting residential property.
      5.   Adequate fencing shall be provided for outdoor runs to restrain
animals from running at large. At a minimum, the animals shall be enclosed with
a six (6) foot fence or wall. Electronic fences shall not be used as the sole
method of restraining animals.
      6.   In residential districts, pet boarding Kennels will only be allowed
in ER or RR sub districts as an Accessory Use and will require a conditional
use permit. In addition, the use shall be buffered from other residential
properties pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
   GG.   Library:
      1.   A Library approved prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary
plat shall be a permitted use. A Library approved subsequent to a preliminary
plat shall be a conditional use.
   HH.   Liquor Store:
      1.   All businesses which sell alcoholic beverages shall conform to the
provisions of the Idaho and City Code. The sale of packaged liquor, beer, wine
and coolers is subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the City.
   II.   Living Quarters, Accessory:
      1.   No more than one accessory living quarter structure shall be
permitted on a Lot and must comply with Chapter 3 of this Title.
      2.   The principal Dwelling Unit shall be owner-occupied.
      3.   Accessory Living Quarters shall not be sold separately from the
principal Dwelling Unit.
   JJ.   Manufacturing, Light:
      1.   Light Manufacturing operations are permitted to produce products for
retail sale and wholesale distribution. It is intended that such uses shall not
generate conditions which are typical of many Manufacturing and industrial
operations, such as noise, smoke, objectionable odors, dust, noxious gases and
other industrial wastes, vibrations, glare, heat and fire hazards.
      2.   All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or
enclosures which screen such material from surrounding properties and abutting
streets and comply with the requirements for Outdoor Storage requirements in
this Chapter. Storage of flammable materials shall be constructed of
nonflammable material and shall meet the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code.
      3.   No dust fumes, smoke, or vibrations above ambient levels (levels of
the surrounding environment) shall be detectable from adjacent Parcels.
      4.   Such use shall be buffered from any residential property pursuant to
Section 3-7 of this Title.
   KK.   Mortuary/Funeral Home:
      1.   All phases of the operation of a Mortuary/Funeral home, other than
those related to transport and servicing, shall be within a completely enclosed
Building.
      2.   Mortuary/ Funeral Homes shall have a minimum separation of five
hundred (500) feet from any residential areas.
      3.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
   LL.   Motion Picture/Radio/Television Production Facility:
      1.   Outdoor facilities shall be buffered from residential properties
pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
   MM.   Oil and Gas Extraction and Post Extraction:
      1.   Eagle City Code 8-3-5(J)-(K), as it may be amended, shall apply to
property designated within the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District (APD)
to the extent it does not conflict with the provisions in this Title.
   NN.   Outdoor Storage:
      1.   Outdoor Storage areas shall be screened by a minimum six (6) foot-
high solid wall or fence along any property line that adjoins a residential Lot
and the use shall be buffered from a residential Lot pursuant to the buffer
area and screening requirements in Chapter 3 of this Title.
      2.   Outdoor Storage of chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers shall have
fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved by the fire
district.
      3.   Outdoor Storage shall not be located in any front yard Setback area
and shall not block sidewalks or parking areas or impede vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
      4.   No commercial activities, other than those associated with the
Principal Use of the property are permitted.
      5.   The full-time commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers
and other like vehicles is prohibited.
      6.   The operation of spray-painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      7.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
      8.   Outdoor Storage in a residential district shall only be allowed as
an Accessory Use.
   OO.   Plant Nursery/Sod Farm, Retail and Wholesale:
      1.   Outdoor mechanical equipment (including, but not limited to, heaters
and fans) shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a property line. To
reduce noise, permanently mounted mechanical equipment shall be enclosed to the
maximum extent possible.
      2.   Outdoor Storage areas for materials shall comply with the
requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter. The following Nursery
materials shall be exempt from this requirement:
         a.   Growing plants in ground or in containers; and
         b.   Wood chips, bark, rock, gravel, or similar ground cover material
where such storage piles do not exceed 6 feet in height.
      3.   The application of fertilizer or process wastewater at agronomic
rates shall be deemed a component of the Nursery use and shall follow State and
local regulations.
      4.   The following additional standards shall apply for a wholesale and/
or retail Nursery located within a residential district or adjoining a
residential district:
         a.   Any storage area for material in the process of being converted
into compost shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line; and
         b.   No aerial spraying of the property shall be allowed.
      5.   Retail plant nurseries are not permitted in the ROS sub district
(wholesale nurseries only are permitted).
      6.   Retail plant nurseries are considered an Accessory Use in the RR and
ER residential sub districts and subject to a conditional use permit.
      7.   Plant nurseries for the express purpose of growing plant materials
for use in Avimor or for the City shall be allowed on any Parcel as a Temporary
Use. (See Temporary Construction Office / Yard.)
      8.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Title, Master
Developer may site a plant Nursery on any property within the Avimor Planned
Development zoning district, where such nursery solely supports Master
Developer's development and does not offer development within the zone and such
facility does not offer goods or services for wholesale of retail sale.
   PP.   Radio and Television Broadcast Stations:
      1.   Outdoor facilities shall be buffered from residential property
pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
   QQ.   Recreation Field, Court and Sports Facility:
      1.   Sports field lighting shall meet the criteria requirements in the
Sports Lighting Section of Chapter 3 of this Title.
   RR.   Recreational Vehicle Storage:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from
any single-family residential property and one hundred (100) feet from any
multi-family residential property as measured from the residential property
line in a straight line. Notwithstanding the aforementioned if the use is
specifically cited in the preliminary plat as an amenity to the community the
Setback shall not be required.
      2.   All vehicles shall be stored in an area which is screened from view
from the surrounding properties and adjoining streets and shall meet the
requirements for Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      3.   No vehicles shall be stored in the required front Setback area.
      4.   No commercial activities, other than those associated with the
Principal Use of the property are permitted.
      5.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited unless the storage facility is adjunct to a body
shop, service and repair facility, or Recreational Vehicle Sales establishment.
      6.   The operation of spray-painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      7.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
      8.   Recreational Vehicle Storage shall have no less than ten percent
(10%) of the site landscaped.
   SS.   Recycling / Solid Waste Transfer Center:
      1.   Outdoor Storage areas shall comply with the requirements for Outdoor
Storage in this Chapter.
      2.   No unsorted material shall be stored outdoors except for after-hours
donation containers.
      3.   Any container provided for after-hours donation of recyclable
materials shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a residential district,
shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, and shall have sufficient capacity
to accommodate materials collected.
      4.   Power driven processing (including, but not limited to, aluminum
foils and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing
activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of materials)
may be allowed when located within an enclosed structure.
      5.   All Recycling Center grounds and facilities shall be maintained in
an orderly manner so as not to create a public nuisance.
      6.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
   TT.   Rental Service Store/Yard (Large Equipment):
      1.   Such uses shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from
any single-family residential property and a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
from any multi-family property as measured from any Building or storage yard to
the residential property line in a straight line. In addition, the use shall be
buffered from the residential property pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
      2.   The installation and use of an outside public address or bell system
is prohibited.
      3.   Outdoor Storage areas shall comply with the requirements for Outdoor
Storage in this Chapter.
   UU.   Resort:
      1.   A Resort located prior to or in conjunction with a preliminary plat
shall be a permitted use. A Resort located subsequent to a preliminary plat
shall be a conditional use.
      2.   A maximum height of fifty-two (52) feet shall be allowed in
residential districts with a conditional use permit.
      3.   Resorts shall be designed and developed to fit into the unique and
special environment of Avimor.
   VV.   Restaurant (with Drive-Thru):
      1.   Such uses shall be designed with landscape/berm(s)/decorative walls
to prevent trash from moving onto other properties.
      2.   A minimum six (6) foot high solid wall or fence shall be provided
along any property line that adjoins a residential property and the use shall
be buffered from such residential property pursuant to Section 3-7 of this
Title.
      3.   Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided.
      4.   Night lighting shall be shielded and not directed toward any
residence and comply with Dark Sky principles.
      5.   Drive-thrus shall be designed so headlights are screened by
landscape, berm(s), decorative walls or Buildings so they are not visible from
the public right-of-way when vehicles are stopped in the queue or at the drive-
up window.
   WW.   Roadside Stand:
      1.   A Roadside Stand shall operate for no more than one hundred and
twenty (120) days in a calendar year and shall require a zoning certificate and
vendor permit from the City.
   XX.   Sales Office/Trailer, Temporary:
      1.   A Sales Offices/Trailers requires a zoning permit from the City.
      2.   Parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 5 of this Title.
      3.   A Sales Office/Trailer is allowed during the construction of a
project within Avimor and shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance
of an occupancy permit for the last home/structure within the applicable phase
of the project.
   YY.   Shooting Range / Gun Club (Indoor):
      1.   All activities shall be housed totally within an enclosed structure
and designed for safety and noise factors involved in the type of use.
      2.   If located on the ground level, Accessory Uses such as gun sales,
gun repair, and training courses shall be allowed when such uses take up no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the Gross Floor Area on the ground
level.
      3.   If gun sales or gun repair are conducted within the facility, the
owner of the indoor Shooting Range shall secure and maintain a valid federal
firearms license.
      4.   The applicant shall provide written documentation that the proposed
target backstops conform to the standards for indoor ranges in "The NRA Range
Source Book" published by the National Rifle Association.
   ZZ.   Shooting Range / Gun Club (Outdoor):
      1.   Accessory Uses such as gun sales, gun repair, and training courses
shall be allowed when such uses take up no more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the Gross Floor Area of the Building.
      2.   The applicant shall provide written documentation that the proposed
target backstops conform to the standards for indoor ranges in "The NRA Range
Source Book" published by the National Rifle Association.
   AAA.   Sporting Event:
      1.   All structures or outdoor use areas shall maintain a minimum Setback
of two hundred (200) feet from all abutting residential districts.
      2.   Such uses shall require a Temporary Use permit and a vendor permit
from the City and shall be permitted for not more than seven (7) days.
      3.   Paved Parking is not required.
   BBB.   Special Event:
      1.   Shall require a zoning permit and not operate for a duration longer
than seven (7) days without a Conditional use permit.
      2.   Parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 5 of this Title.
      3.   Sales of items and goods that are reasonably related to the Special
Event program shall be permitted with a vendor permit from the City.
      4.   If security staffing is needed the applicant will pay for the
services for the event.
         a.   Special Event (Avimor):
            (1)   Shall not require a conditional use permit.
            (2)   Parking, if applicable, shall be provided.
            (3)   Shall be coordinated with the local police department if
security staffing is needed.
            (4)   Sales of items and goods that are reasonably related to the
special event program shall be permitted.
   CCC.   Veterinary Hospital / Clinic:
      1.   If overnight accommodations are provided, they shall comply with the
requirements for Kennel and Pet Shop in this Chapter.
   DDD.   Vocational/ Trade Schools:
      1.   Vocational/Trade Schools located prior to or in conjunction with a
preliminary plat shall be a permitted use. Schools located subsequent to a
preliminary plat shall be a conditional use.
   EEE.   Warehousing, Storage and Ministorage:
      1.   Ministorage facilities may include the storage of boat and
recreational vehicles.
      2.   The use shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from
any single-family residential property and fifty (50) feet from any multi-
family residential property as measured from the Building to the residential
property line in a straight line. The use shall be buffered from the
residential property by a solid wall or fence or berm(s) and landscape, or a
combination of both, pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
      3.   No more than one manager's or security residence is permitted. Such
residence shall not be considered a Dwelling Unit for the purposes of
calculating residential Density for Avimor.
      4.   All storage must be within an enclosed Building except for the
storage of recreational vehicles, which shall be screened from view from
surrounding properties and abutting streets and meet the requirements for
Outdoor Storage in this Chapter.
      5.   No Outdoor Storage shall be allowed in the required front Setback
area.
      6.   Vehicle storage shall meet the meet the requirements for Outdoor
Storage in this Chapter.
      7.   No commercial activities, other than those included in the operation
of the ministorage facility, shall be conducted on the site.
      8.   Retail or Wholesale sale of stored items on the premises is
prohibited.
      9.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited.
      10.   The operation of spray-painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      11.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
   FFF.   Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage:
      1.   The use shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from
any single-family residential property and fifty (50) feet from any multi-
family residential property as measured from the Building to the property line
in a straight line. The use shall be buffered from the residential property by
a solid wall or fence, or berm(s) and landscape, or a combination of both,
pursuant to Section 3-7 of this Title.
      2.   No more than one manager's or security residence is permitted. Such
residence shall not be considered a Dwelling Unit for the purposes of
calculating residential Density for Avimor.
      3.   No more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross area of the site
shall be used for Outdoor Storage and shall meet the requirements for Outdoor
Storage in this Chapter.
      4.   No commercial activities, other than those included for the
operation of the facility, shall be conducted on the site.
      5.   On Site Retail sale of stored items on the premises is prohibited.
      6.   The commercial repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and other
like vehicles is prohibited.
      7.   The operation of spray-painting equipment, power tools, welding
equipment or other similar equipment is prohibited.
      8.   The production, fabrication or assembly of products is prohibited.
   GGG.   Wireless Communication Facilities: Wireless communication facilities
and    Towers (including Personal Wireless Facilities, Spires, Poles, Antennas,
Steeples, Towers, And Similar Structures) shall comply with the following:
      1.   Towers In Zoning Districts:
         a.   Personal wireless facilities including Towers supporting amateur
radio Antennas shall be prohibited in all residential Land Use Districts.
Personal wireless facilities shall be camouflaged or concealed, not readily
identifiable as such, designed to be esthetically compatible with existing and
proposed uses on the site in all residential zones.
         b.   Wireless Antennas in non-residential and Open Space districts may
be permitted to be attached to existing light standards and power line support
devices (or replacement equivalent of same height) provided, however, the
Antenna(s) are either flush mounted or mounted in a manner that provide minimum
visual impact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all provisions of this subsection
shall be applicable to wireless Antennas located on existing light standards
and power line support devices.
      2.   Collocation Requirements:
         a.   A proposal for a Tower mounted personal wireless facility in
excess of thirty-five feet (35) in height shall not be approved unless the
Council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed
Tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved Tower or Building
within the following radii of the proposed Tower:
            (1)   A two (2) mile radius for Towers with a height over one
hundred ten feet (110);
            (2)   A one-mile radius for Towers with a height over eighty feet
(80) but not more than one hundred ten feet (110);
            (3)   A one-half (1/2) mile radius for Towers with a height over
fifty feet (50) but not more than eighty feet (80); and
            (4)   A one-quarter (1/4) mile radius for Towers with a height over
thirty-five feet (35) but not more than fifty feet (50').
         b.   It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the
proposed Tower or Antenna cannot be accommodated on an approved Tower or
Building within the required search radius due to one or more of the following
reasons:
            (1)   Unwillingness of another Tower or facility owner to entertain
shared use;
            (2)   The proposed Collocation of an existing Tower or facility
would be in violation of any local, state or federal law;
            (3)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved Tower or Building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved Tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost;
            (4)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the Tower or
Building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
            (5)   Existing or approved Towers and Buildings within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer; and
            (6)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved Tower or
Building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, or
other professional qualified to provide necessary documentation.
         c.   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service Tower
shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicants Antennas and comparable Antennas for at least
two (2) additional users if the Tower is over one hundred ten feet (110) in
height, for at least one (1) additional user if the Tower is over fifty feet
(50) in height.
         d.   Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
Antennas upon the Tower and to accept Antennas mounted at varying heights.
         e.   Personal wireless facilities proposed at a location which has an
approved conditional use permit (approved after the effective date hereof) for
an existing facility which was required to allow Collocation shall not be
required to obtain a separate conditional use permit as long as all the
requirements of the previously approved conditional use permit will be complied
with. Design Review, and subsequent Building permit, will be required for any
such proposal.
      3.   Tower And Antenna Design Requirements:
         a.   All personal wireless facilities shall be required to obtain
design review approval prior to construction.
         b.   Personal wireless facility Towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the Council determines that an alternative design would better blend
into the surrounding environment.
         c.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
and connection lines approved by the issuing authority, no part of any Antenna
or Tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with
either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right of way,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
         d.   Every Tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the Tower by unauthorized persons. The climbing pegs
within the bottom twenty feet (20) of the Tower shall be removed and shall only
be used when the Tower is being serviced.
         e.   Metal Towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material.
         f.   Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances.
      4.   Tower Setbacks:
         a.   Towers shall meet the Setbacks of the underlying Land Use
District with the exception of Mixed Use and Highway Mixed Use land use sub
districts, where Towers may encroach into the rear Setback area, provided that
the rear property line abuts another Mixed Use or Highway Mixed Use property
and the Tower does not encroach upon any easements.
         b.   The base of the personal wireless facility shall be set back a
minimum distance of two times (2x) the height of the Tower from the property
line of any residential dwelling.
         c.   If the Tower does not exceed the height limitations of the Land
Use District in which it is located, the Tower shall meet the Setback
requirement of the Land Use District except as allowed in this Chapter. If the
Tower exceeds the height limit of the Land Use District in which it is located,
the Tower shall be set back one foot (1') for every ten feet (10') in total
Tower height. In either case, the Tower shall be constructed to the
telecommunications industry association/electronic industries association (TIA/
EIA) 222 revision F standard entitled Structural Standards for Steel Antenna
Supporting Structures or as hereinafter may be amended. Otherwise, the Tower
shall be located a minimum of one foot (1) for each foot of height from all
property lines (the fall zone). No storage or structures other than the
accessory utility Buildings, are permitted in the fall zone, except as may be
specifically permitted through a conditional use permit.
         d.   Towers shall be set back from all existing public right of way
lines (or planned right of way lines if additional is to be acquired in the
future) by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the Tower including
all Antennas and attachments.
         e.   Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street.
         f.   A Tower's Setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied, at the sole discretion of the Council, to allow the
integration of a Tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a Church
steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure.
         g.   If this requirement conflicts with other Setback requirements of
this Title the Setback with the greater distance shall prevail, except as may
be allowed in this Chapter.
      5.   Tower Lighting, Signage, And Attachments:
         a.   No Antenna or Tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any
way, except during time of repair or installation, any stationary lights,
strobe lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as
specifically required by the federal aviation administration, federal
communications commission, or other federal or state authority.
         b.   When incorporated into the approved design of the Tower, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, Parking Lots, or similar areas may be
attached to the Tower if approved by the City.
         c.   The use of any portion of a Tower for signs, other than warning
or equipment information signs, is prohibited.
         d.   No Tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in
any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during
periods of construction or repair.
      6.   Amateur Radio Antennas: In accordance with the federal
communications commission's preemptive ruling PRB 1, Towers erected for the
primary purpose of supporting amateur radio Antennas may exceed thirty feet
(30) in height provided that a determination is made by the City that the
proposed Tower height is technically necessary to successfully engage in
amateur radio communications. A conditional use permit is required for any
amateur radio Antenna in excess of thirty-five feet (35).
      7.   Accessory Utility Buildings: All utility Buildings and structures
accessory to a Tower are required to have design review approved by the City
prior to construction.
      8.   Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers: As a condition of
approval of any required conditional use permit for personal wireless
facilities, all abandoned or unused Towers and associated facilities shall be
required to be removed within sixty (60) days of cessation of use as a personal
wireless facility unless a time extension is granted by the City. A copy of the
relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the applicant to remove the
Tower and associated facilities upon cessation of the use as a personal
wireless facility, shall be submitted at the time of application. In the event
that the Tower and associated facilities are not removed within the sixty (60)
days, the Tower and associated facilities may be removed by the City and the
costs of removal assessed against the property.
      9.   Additional Application Submittal Requirements: In addition to the
information required elsewhere in this Title, development applications for
personal wireless facilities, shall include the following supplemental
information:
         a.   Documentation from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
showing that the proposed facility will be in compliance with the FCC standards
regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
         b.   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
which describes the Tower height and design (including a cross section and
elevation); documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated Antennas and the minimum separation distances between
Antennas; describes the Tower's capacity, including the number and type of
Antennas that it can accommodate; documents what steps the applicant will take
to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications;
includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and includes other
information necessary to evaluate the request.
         c.   For all personal wireless facilities, a letter of intent
committing the Tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of
the Tower, as required by this Title, if an additional user agrees in writing
to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
         d.   Documentation showing that the proposed Tower complies with
regulations administered by federal aviation administration.
         e.   Written approval of the site location with specific reference to
the height of the Antenna structure and any lighting issues, from the federal
aviation administration and the chief of the Idaho bureau of aeronautics, as
applicable.
         f.   Propagation charts showing existing and proposed transmission
coverage at the subject site and within an area large enough to provide an
understanding of why the facility needs to be in the chosen location.
         g.   A written analysis demonstrating that the proposed site is the
most appropriate site within the immediate area. For the purposes of this
subsection, the analysis shall include all properties within the search radii
stated above. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Description of the surrounding area, including topography;
            (2)   Natural and manmade impediments that would obstruct adequate
cellular telephone transmissions;
            (3)   Physical site constraints that would preclude construction of
a cellular telephone facility on any other site; and
            (4)   Technical limitations of the system that limit siting
options.
      10.   Permits:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, re-
erect, or replace, any Tower without first making application to the City and
securing a building/zoning permit.
         b.   A building/zoning permit shall not be required for Antennas and/
or Towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for Emergency communication,
or for broadcast remote pick up operations. Temporary Antennas shall be
permitted for a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours unless specifically approved
by the Council.
         c.   In addition to the findings required and conditions permitted for
conditional use permits, as stated within Section 11B-7-3-5 of this Title, the
Council shall make an additional finding concerning the duration of the
conditional use permit. Upon finding that the conditional use permit is to be
limited in duration, a condition limiting the duration and the basis for such a
condition shall be included within the findings of fact and conclusions of law
for the conditional use permit.
      11.   Additional Requirements For Notice Of Public Hearing: All personal
wireless facilities requiring a conditional use permit shall comply with the
conditional use notice requirements within this Title. Tower mounted personal
wireless facilities shall comply with the following additional requirements:
         a.   All property owners within one thousand feet (1,000) of all
property lines of the site (or lease boundary lines, if applicable) shall be
notified of the public hearing by the City, by mail, a minimum of fifteen (15)
days before the scheduled public hearing. The applicant will be required to
provide the names of the property owners to the City.
         b.   Any required public notice Signs, to be located on a proposed
site, shall be required to comply with the requirements for posting of a
rezone/subdivision. Restricted Areas:
            (1)   Telecommunications Towers in excess of thirty-five feet (35)
in height shall not be permitted within the Willow Creek Road corridor. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 5
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
11B-5-1: Purpose And Interpretation Of Provisions
11B-5-2: Application Of Provisions
11B-5-3: Design And Maintenance
11B-5-4: Additional Parking Regulations And Requirements
11B-5-4-1: Location Of Parking Spaces
11B-5-4-2: Additional Design And Maintenance Regulations And Requirements
11B-5-4-3: Joint And Off-Site Parking
11B-5-4-4: Parking Disabled Vehicles
11B-5-4-5: Bicycle Parking
11B-5-4-6: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
11B-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   This Chapter provides standards for parking and loading facilities to
ensure adequate parking areas for various uses, minimize traffic hazards and
congestion, promote vehicular and pedestrian safety and efficient land use, and
mitigate impacts on surrounding properties.
Parking is a key element of any development. An oversupply can result in excess
environmental and physical impacts while an undersupply can result in vehicles
intruding onto adjoining properties and neighborhoods. The goal is to find the
balance between providing adequate parking to support approved uses while
minimizing the negative effects of excessive land area or resources devoted to
parking. A well-planned and executed parking program is essential to
establishing and maintaining a human scale environment that emphasizes parking
efficiency over parking supply.
Shared parking is encouraged and is a critical factor in the design and success
of a mixed-use project such as Avimor. A shared parking program versus
traditional parking standards reduces parking requirements, enhances community
character and vitality, increases Streetscape appeal, reduces impervious
surface area and decreases storm water and pollution runoff, reduces the "urban
heat island effect," reduces conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians, and
provides better pedestrian flow and connectivity.
   B.   In the interpretation of this Chapter, the following shall govern:
      1.   Parking Spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed
herein shall be determined by the Administrator. Among the factors for
determining the number of spaces to be required for a use not listed herein,
the Administrator shall compare the proposed use with a use which has similar
traffic generating characteristics as outlined in the most recent version of
the institute of transportation engineers trip generation manual;
      2.   Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number;
      3.   When more than one use is conducted on a site, the total number of
Parking Spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for each use unless shared
parking is approved;
      4.   When computing parking requirements based on the amount of square
footage in Buildings, all calculations shall be on a Gross Floor Area basis,
unless specifically stated otherwise;
      5.   Parking Based on Seating: When the parking requirements are based on
seating and the seating consists of benches or pews, each twenty-four (24)
linear inches of bench or pew shall be considered one seat;
      6.   Parking Based on Employees: For the purpose of computing parking
requirements based on the number of employees, calculations shall be for the
largest number of persons working on any single shift; and
      7.   Residential Parking: Driveways may be used to satisfy minimum on-
site parking requirements, beyond the covered parking requirements, for
residential dwellings, provided that sufficient length is available to satisfy
the minimum design standards with no obstructions to the adjoining sidewalk.
   C.   Waivers:
      1.   Request: Any person may request a waiver of any provision of this
Chapter.
      2.   Submittal: A request for waiver must be submitted to the
Administrator in writing and must provide specific reasons for which the waiver
is sought. Additionally, it must include an approval letter of waiver request
by the Avimor Design Review Committee.
      3.   Response: The City shall provide a written response within thirty
(30) business days of receipt of a request for waiver.
      4.   Appeal Of Decision: Within ten (10) days of the decision of the
Administrator an appeal may be filed to Council. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   No Building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered, or
its use changed unless permanently maintained Off Street Parking and Loading
Spaces have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
   B.   The provisions of this Chapter, except where there is a change of use,
shall not apply to any existing Building or structure. Where a new use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such spaces as
may be required by this Title.
   C.   Whenever a Building, structure, or use, constructed or changed in use
after the effective date hereof, is changed or enlarged in Floor Area, number
of employees, number of Dwelling Units, seating capacity, or otherwise to
create a need for an increase in the number of existing Parking Spaces per this
Title, additional Parking Spaces shall be provided so that the existing
Building, structure, or use, and proposed enlargement or change in use, shall
then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
   D.   The parking requirements in Section 5-4-6 of this Chapter represent
general parking standards for individual uses under which all proposed
development will be evaluated. Requirements for uses not specifically listed
shall be determined by the Administrator based on uses with similar traffic
generation characteristics as outlined in the most recent Institute of Traffic
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. Parking includes garage and carport
spaces.
   E.   Parking Lots shall be screened from adjacent uses, streets and Pathways
by walls, plantings, earth berms or a combination thereof pursuant to the
screening requirements of this Title. Where On Street Parking is provided
adjacent to the use it serves, it shall count towards the parking requirement
for the use.
   F.   Consideration should be given to providing spaces to accommodate
alternative forms of transportation such as, for example, motorcycles, motor
scooters and golf carts. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-3: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Surfacing and Striping, except as approved by the Administrator, or as
allowed below, all parking and loading facilities shall be surfaced, striped
and marked to clearly define access lanes, standard, compact and handicapped
Parking Spaces, and internal circulation movements. The following uses may
require a conditional use permit or Zoning Permit but shall not be required to
have paved parking areas:
      1.   Aggregate Processing, Asphalt, and Concrete Batch Plant;
      2.   Equestrian Center;
      3.   Sports Field or Sporting Events (overflow parking);
      4.   Agriculture;
      5.   Roadside Stand;
      6.   Plant Nursery / Sod Farm (Wholesale);
      7.   Maintenance Facility;
      8.   Carnivals and Circuses;
      9.   Any Outdoor Event;
      10.   Winery and Vineyard (depending on location to perpetuate an
agrarian character of the site);
      11.   Temporary Construction Office / Yard;
      12.   Temporary Sales Office/Trailer (if it will not be in use for more
than 12 months);
      13.   Model Homes; and
      14.   Special Events.
   B.   Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper
drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways. Drainage plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
City engineer and, for any site abutting a public street, such plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the Local Highway Department having jurisdiction.
   C.   Access: Off-street parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering
room so that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction.
Access driveways for parking areas or Loading Spaces shall be located in such a
way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be clearly visible by
a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or
private street.
   D.   Maintenance: The Owner of parking facilities shall be responsible to
continually maintain the parking facilities in compliance with approved site
plans and shall be free of litter and debris.
   E.   Compact Spaces: Shall be designed consistent with Table 5.2 of this
Chapter.
   F.   Location: Off-street parking areas should be located on the sides or
rear of Buildings instead of the front. When parking areas are located in the
front of Buildings, they should be adequately screened pursuant to with Chapter
3 of this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-4: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
11B-5-4-1: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street
Parking Spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking Spaces for all detached residential uses may be located on
the same Lot as the use which they are intended to serve. If the Parking Spaces
are not located on the same Lot, a conditional use permit shall be required;
      2.   Parking Spaces for retail or customer parking for commercial,
industrial, or public/semipublic uses shall be located not more than seven
hundred feet (700') from the Principal Use measured along the sidewalk, or
walkway available for public use, from the primary entrance of the Principal
Use to the furthest Parking Space within the Parking Lot;
      3.   Parking Spaces for multi-family dwellings shall be located not more
than five hundred feet (500') from the Principal Use measured along the
sidewalk, or walkway available for public use, from the primary entrance of the
Principal Use to the furthest Parking Space within the Parking Lot;
      4.   Parking Spaces for employee parking on a daily basis where the
vehicle is used occasionally, regardless of the nature of employment, shall be
located not more than one thousand feet (1,000) from the Principal Use measured
along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use, from the primary
entrance of the Principal Use to the furthest Parking Space within the Parking
Lot; and
      5.   When offsite parking is provided; a directional Sign shall be
erected on the premises and shall advise the public of the distance and
direction to the offsite parking area. Any such Sign shall conform to
applicable requirements of Chapter 3 of this Title.
   B.   A reduction in parking requirements can be requested at preliminary
plat or site plan when evidence is provided to warrant a modification of the
parking requirements. The Administrator may grant up to a twenty percent (20%)
reduction. A greater reduction requires approval by Council. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-5-4-2: ADDITIONAL DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site Lighting: Parking areas used during the hours of darkness shall
have lighting that provides adequate illumination for security and safety while
maintaining Dark Sky lighting principles. The minimum requirements are
contained in Section
11B-3-9-F of this Title.
      1.   Lighting plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrator
prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit.
   B.   Screening And/Or Landscaping: Parking Lot screening and landscaping
shall comply with Chapter 3 of this Title.
   C.   Wheel Stops/Curbing: Concrete curbing at least six (6) inches high and
six (6) inches wide or wheel stops shall be provided to prevent vehicles from
overhanging abutting sidewalks, properties, or public rights-of-way, to protect
landscaped areas, and to protect adjacent properties. Such curbing or wheel
stops shall be located at least three (3) feet from any adjacent wall, fence,
property line, walkway, or structure where parking and/or drive aisles are
located. Wheel stops are not required where parking abuts a walkway with an
attached curb and the walkway provides a minimum four (4) foot pedestrian clear
area.
   D.   Off Street Parking Design And Dimension Tables: See Tables 5.1, 5.2
below for parking dimensions.
Table 5.1 - Parking Dimensions For Standard Cars
 
Parking angle (A)        45°    60°    90°    Parallel
Width of space (B)       9 feet  9 feet  9 feet  9 feet
Length of space (C)      18 feet 18 feet 18 feet 21 feet
Width of Drive Aisle (D) 13 feet 17 feet 24 feet 12 feet
 
Table 5.2. - Parking Dimensions For Compact Cars
 
Parking angle (A)        45°      60°      90°      Parallel
Width of Space (B)       7'6" feet 7'6" feet 7'6" feet 7'6" feet
Length of Space(C)       17 feet   18 feet   17 feet   19 feet
Width of Drive Aisle (D) 13 feet   17 feet   24 feet   12 feet
 
Notes:
      1.   Length of spaces may be reduced by two feet (2') with no tire stops
and a two-foot (2') overhang into an adjacent walkway when the walkway is at
least seven (7) feet wide and free of impediments.
      2.   Aisles less than fifteen feet (15') in width, with no parking, are
considered one way.
      3.   Handicapped spaces shall comply with UBC or federal standards.
      4.   Handicapped Parking: Handicapped spaces shall be elevenfeet by
eighteen feet (11 x 18') or one (1) nine foot by eighteen fet (9' x 18'), with
an attached five-foot (5') aisle.
      5.   Reduction For Planter Overhangs: When a Parking Space abuts a
landscape planter, the front two feet (2') of the required length for a Parking
Space may overhang the planter.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-4-3: JOINT AND OFF-SITE PARKING:
   A.   The parking requirements may be met by the use of joint and/or off-site
parking facilities. Alternatives to the parking requirements contained herein
will be considered to:
      1.   Avoid the visual intrusion and heat build-up that results from large
paved areas;
      2.   Insure the efficient use of land; and
      3.   Create an incentive to provide pedestrian-friendly development.
   B.   The Administrator may authorize the use of joint parking, offsite
parking or a combination of the methods as described below:
      1.   Joint Parking:
         a.   The uses separately generate parking demands primarily during
hours when the other uses are not in operation and the Parking Spaces serve the
uses without conflict;
         b.   The peak hours of parking demand from the uses shall generally
not coincide so that the peak demand will be less than the parking required;
         c.   The applicant provides documentation showing the parking demand
will be reduced if a public or private transit system serves the use;
         d.   A shared parking analysis has been submitted describing the
nature of the uses and the times when the uses operate so as to demonstrate the
lack of potential conflict;
         e.   A shared parking facility, if located on a site other than the
site where the uses are located, shall be located no further than that
permitted this Chapter;
         f.   The owners of the Parcels or uses cooperatively establish and
operate the facilities;
         g.   The owners of the Parcels execute a cross access agreement for
parking, which outlines the terms and conditions of the shared parking
arrangement. The agreement shall include the following as approved by the City
of Eagle:
            (1)   A guarantee that there will be no substantial alteration in
the uses that will create a greater demand for parking; and
            (2)   A guarantee among the landowners for access to a use of the
shared parking facility.
         h.   Any other information required to be documented on such agreement
by the City in an effort to assure compliance with this Chapter. The agreement
must contain the legal description of both Parcels and must be of sufficient
duration to ensure the continued use of the shared parking facilities. The
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and run with
the land.
   C.   Off-Site Parking. The parking requirements may be met by locating the
required Parking Spaces on a separate Parcel from the Lot on which the
Principal Use is located. Off-site parking shall be approved if:
      1.   The Parcels containing the use and the off-site parking are under
common ownership, or a cross-parking easement agreement is provided.
      2.   The Parcel to be used for parking is located as follows from the
Building or use it is intended to serve (as measured along the sidewalk or
walkway available for public use from the primary entrance of the Principal Use
to the furthest Parking Space within the Parcel:
         a.   Not more than five hundred (500') feet for residential uses;
         b.   Not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500') feet in the
Community Commercial (CC), Highway Mixed Use (HMU), and Mixed Use (MU), Village
Commercial (VCOM) and Neighborhood Commercial (NC) sub districts and for all
public/quasi-public uses; and
         c.   Not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet for employee
parking on a daily basis where the vehicle is used occasionally, regardless of
the nature of employment.
      3.   The Parcel to be used for parking is not separated or divided from
the Building or use it is intended to serve by an expressway, highway, or
primary arterial.
      4.   The applicant satisfies the Administrator that the use of the off-
site Parcel for parking will not be detrimental to public safety.
      5.   The owner of the Parcels executes an agreement or similar document,
satisfactory to the City attorney, which outlines the terms and conditions of
the off-site parking use. The document must contain the legal description of
both the off-site Parcel and the Parcel where the Principal Use is located and
must be of sufficient duration to ensure the continued use of the off-site
Parcel for parking. In order to provide record notice of the existence of the
off-site parking arrangement, the applicant shall record the document in the
office of the County Recorder and provide a copy of the document to the City.
   D.   Hotel and Motel, Resort Parking: The Administrator may authorize a
reduction in the total number of required Parking Spaces for Hotel, Motel and
Resort developments pursuant to the Joint and Off-Street Parking standards of
this Chapter. Such reduction shall apply only to such uses as Restaurants,
retail stores, amusements/recreational facilities and similar uses which are
clearly ancillary to the Hotel, Motel or Resort. In determining the parking
requirement, the Administrator shall consider the following:
      1.   The characteristic of each use and the projected peak parking
demand, including hours of operation;
      2.   The potential reduction in vehicle movements afforded by multi-
purpose use of spaces by employees or customers;
      3.   The potential reduction in vehicle trips afforded by multiple use of
the facilities by guests and customers; and
      4.   The extent to which the applicant can document the lack of potential
conflict among parking needs and facilities. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-4-4: PARKING DISABLED VEHICLES:
The parking of a disabled vehicle within any Land Use Districts for a period of
more than one (1) weeks shall be prohibited unless such vehicle is stored in an
enclosed garage or other accessory Building. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-4-5: BICYCLE PARKING:
One (1) bicycle Parking Space within an approved rack shall be required for
each thirty (30) required automobile Parking Spaces or fraction thereof for
office and commercial developments. Multi-family residential developments shall
provide one (1) bicycle rack space per each ten (10) Units. Bicycle parking
racks design shall be approved by the Avimor Design Review Committee. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
11B-5-4-6: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
In accordance with this Chapter, Parking Spaces for other permitted or
conditional uses not listed herein shall be determined by the Administrator.
Among the factors for determining the number of spaces to be required for a use
not listed herein, the Administrator shall compare the proposed use with a use
which has similar traffic generating characteristics as outlined in the most
recent version of the institute of transportation engineers trip generation
manual.
For the purpose of this Title, the following space requirements shall apply:
Table 5.3 Required Parking
COMMERCIAL USES
Auto Body Shop 1 space per 350 s.f. of GFA
Auto Gas       1 space per 2 gas pumps and 2 spaces per service bay (not counting fronts of
Station        bays/pumps)
Auto Repair
and Service    1 space per 350 s.f. of GFA
Shop (Major
and Minor)
Auto Rental    1 space per 200 s.f. of GFA
Agency
Auto and
Recreational   1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA, plus 1 space per 1,000 s.f. of outdoor display
Vehicle Sales
Bank /         1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA, plus 1 lane per drive-up window and/or automatic
Financial      teller machine with stacking for 4 vehicles per lane
Institution
Bar / Pub /    1 space per 200 s.f. of GFA
Nightclub
Bed and
Breakfast      1 space per sleeping room plus 2 spaces for primary residence
Facility
Building
Materials /    1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA,
Lumber Yard
Car Wash       1 space per 200 s.f. of GFA of sales, office or lounge area, plus stacking for
               3 cars per washing station
Check-Cashing  1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA
Childcare
Facility       1 space on-site (may include driveway)
(Family / Home
Day Care)
Childcare
Facility       2 spaces
(Group Day
Care)
Childcare
Facility       2 spaces per classroom, but not less than 9 spaces for the Building
(Daycare
Center
Clinic         1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA
Club or Lodge  1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA
Commercial
Center,        Determined by Building use at site plan review
Community
Commercial
Center,        Determined by Building use at site plan review
Neighborhood
Convenience    1 space per 2500 s.f of GFA with fuel center; 1 space per 2000 s.f. of GFA
Store          without fuel center
Dry Cleaner /  1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA, plus stacking for 3 cars per drive-up window
Laundromat
Emergency      Ambulance Services: 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA, plus 2 enclosed ambulance
Health Care    storage spaces;Emergency Health Care: 1 space per 300 s.f. of GFA;Emergency
Facility       Services: 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA, plus 2 enclosed vehicle storage spaces
               General: 1 space per 250 s.f. of GFABowling Centers/Lanes: 3 spaces per lane,
               plus 1 space per 5 seats for Restaurant, cocktail lounge, arcade area or
Entertainment  similar useGolf Driving Ranges: 3 spaces per teeMiniature Golf Courses: 3
Facility       spaces per holeSkating Rinks (ice/roller): 1 space per 250 s.f. of skating rink
               areaTennis/Racquetball Clubs: 3 spaces per court Theaters (live and movie): 1
               space per 5 fixed seats or 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA, whichever is greater
Flex Space     1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA
Food and       1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA
Beverage Sales
Health Club    1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA
Home           1 space on-site (may include driveway)
Occupation
Hospital
(included      1 space per patient bed
related
facilities)
Hotel and      1 space per guest room, plus 1 space per 2 employees; parking requirements for
Motel          Hotels that contain ancillary uses (retail, Restaurants, conference centers,
               etc.) shall require no additional parking
Kennel and Pet 1 space per 200 s.f. of GFA
Shop
Laboratory     1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA
Liquor Store   1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA
Manufacturing, 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA used for Manufacturing/processing, plus 1 space per
Light          300 s.f. of Office or sales area
Mortuaries /   1 space per 4 seats
Funeral Homes
Motion Picture
/ Radio /
Television     Determined by site plan review
Production
Facility
Nursing /
Convalescent
Home /
Transitional   1 space per 3 beds
Housing /
Assisted
Living
Office,
Business &     General: 1 space per 250 s.f. of GFAMedical/Dental: 1 space per 200 s.f. of GFA
Professional
Outdoor        Determined at site plan review
Storage
Personal       General: 1 space per 250 s.f. of GFABarber Shops/Beauty Parlors: 2 spaces per
Service        barber chair or beautician stationRepair Shops (appliances and electronics): 1
               space per 400.s.f. of GFA
Radio and
Television     1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA
Broadcast
Station
Recreational   Sales: 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA
Vehicle
Dealership /   Service: 2 spaces per service bay Storage: 1 space per 1,500 s.f. of gross
Service /      storage area, plus 1 space per 1,500 s.f. of outdoor display
Storage
Recycling /
Solid Waste    1 space per employee
Transfer
Center
Rental Service
Stores /       Sales: 1 space per 400 s.f. of GFAService: 2 spaces per service bayStorage: 1
Storage Yards  space per 500 s.f. of GFA of Office space, plus 1 space per 500 s.f. of outdoor
(large         display
equipment)
Research and   1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA
Development
Restaurant
(with and
without Drive- With Drive-thru: 1 space per 200 s.f. of GFA, plus stacking for 5 cars for
Thru use) and  drive-up service;Without Drive-thru: 1 space per 150 s.f.
Catering
Establishment
Resort         Determined by site plan review
Retail Sales   General: 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFAFurniture and Large Appliance Stores: 1
(other than    space per 500 s.f. of GFA of sale floor display area, Printing and Blueprint
those listed)  Facilities: 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA Rental Stores (small tools/equipment: 1
               space per 750 s.f.)
Shooting Range
/ Gun Club     1 space per target and/or shooting station
(Indoor or
Outdoor)
Shopping
Centers        Determined at site plan review
(Community and
Neighborhood)
Special Care   1 space per 3 beds
Facility
Veterinary
Hospital /     1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA
Clinic
Warehousing,
Storage and
Ministorage
and            General: 1 space per employee Mini-Storage: 1 space per 20 storage units
Wholesaling,
Distribution
and Storage
RESIDENTIAL USES
Accessory      1 space per Unit
Dwelling Unit
Multi-Family,
Studio & One   1.5 spaces per Unit, including 1 covered space
Bedroom
Multi-Family,  2 spaces per Unit, including 1 covered space
Two Bedroom
Multi-Family,
Three Bedroom  2 spaces per Unit, including 1 covered space
and Above
Single-Family
Attached /     2 spaces per Unit
Detached /
Equestrian Lot
Single-Family  2 spaces per Unit, plus .25 spaces per Unit for guest parking (adjacent On
(SFSL)         Street Parking shall count toward guest parking requirement)
CIVIC, COMMUNITY, & PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC USES
Art Gallery    1 space per 500 s.f of GFA, plus one bike rack for every 30 Parking Spaces.
Community
Association
Buildings and  General: 1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA Swimming Pools: 1 space per 2 persons
Facilities,    capacity, plus one bike rack for every 30 Parking Spaces.
including
Clubhouse and
Swimming Pool
Community
Information    1 space per 750 s.f.
Center
Event Center   1 space per 4 fixed seats or 10 spaces per 5,000 s.f. of GFA, whichever is
               greater
Equestrian
Center /
Riding Academy 1 space per 4 stalls
(public and
private)
Fire / Police  1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA plus one bike rack per 30 Parking Spaces
Station
Golf Course    4 spaces per hole
Library        1 space per 250 s.f. of GFA plus one bike rack per 30 Parking Spaces
Museum         1 space per 500 s.f. of GFA
Post Office /  1 space per 750 s.f. of GFA, but not less than 6 spaces plus 1 bike rack per 30
Annex          Parking Spaces
Recreation /   1 space per employee for offices, plus 1 space per 300 s.f. of GFA for weight
Community      rooms/workout and/or dance rooms, plus 1 space per 4 seats for Restaurant/café
Center         or snack plus additional parking for any stadiums/arenas
Recreation
Field, Court   1 space per 3 seats in spectator area; if there is no seating for spectators,
and Sports     an interpretation by the Administrator is required
Facility
Religious      1 space per 5 individuals based off of the max occupancy
Facility
Swimming Pool,
Outdoor
(Public,       1 space per 6 persons' capacity, plus 1 space per 10 seats
Community, or
Club)
Utility
Building and   Determined by site plan approval or CUP
Facility
Wireless
Communications 1 space per employee
Facilities
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
Business,
Technical and  1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA
Vocational
Schools
College and
University
(including     1 space per 400 s.f. of GFA
satellite
campus)
Elementary /   1 space per classroom, plus 1 space per 5 seats in auditoriums or assembly
Junior High /  halls
Middle School
High School    5 spaces per classroom, plus 20 spaces for administrative staff
Pre-School and
Kindergarten   1 space per classroom, but not less than 9 spaces for the Building
(Private)
AGRICULTURAL USES
Plant Nursery  Retail: 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 750s.f. of outdoor display/lathe
/ Sod Farm     house/greenhouse areaWholesale: 1 space per employee plus 2 guest Parking
(retail and    Spaces
wholesale)
Vineyard (no   1 parking per employee
Winery)
Winery         1 space per 1,000 s.f. of GFA. Gift shops, Restaurants, event facilities, etc.,
               shall require no additional parking
TEMPORARY FACILITIES
Aggregate
Processing,
Asphalt, and   1 space per employee
Concrete Batch
Plant
Carnival and   1 space per 3 seats or can be reduced by a site plan or CUP through
Circus         Administrator
Farmers'       As determined by a site plan or CUP
Market
Seasonal Sales As determined by a site plan.
Special Event  Determined by site plan
Temporary
Construction   1 space per 2 employees using the facility, plus 2 spaces
Office/ Yard
Temporary Real
Estate Sales   1 space per 2 employees using the facility, plus 2 spaces
Office /
Trailer
GFA= Gross Floor Area
 
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 6
NON-CONFORMING USE
SECTION:
11B-6-1: Non-Conforming Use
11B-6-1: NON-CONFORMING USE:
Eagle City Code 8-5 shall apply to property designated within the Avimor
Planned Development Zoning District (APD) to the extent it does not conflict
with the provisions in this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11B-7-1: Administrator
11B-7-2: Zoning Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
11B-7-3: Conditional Uses
11B-7-3-1: Purpose And Interpretation Of Conditional Use
11B-7-3-2: General Standards For Conditional Uses
11B-7-3-3: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
11B-7-3-4: Conditional Use Permit
11B-7-4: Variances
11B-7-4-1: Authority To Grant Variances
11B-7-4-2: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
11B-7-4-3: Procedure For Approval Of A Variance
11B-7-5: Design Review; Administrative
11B-7-5-1: Administrative Level Design Review Application
11B-7-5-2: Administrative Legal Design Review Appeals
11B-7-6: Design Review; Board Level Review
11B-7-6-1: Board Level Design Review Application
11B-7-6-2: Board Level Design Review Appeals
11B-7-7: Appeals; Administrative Decisions
11B-7-7-1: Administrative Appeals
11B-7-8: Title Amendments
11B-7-9: Zoning; Sub-Area Plan; And Subdivision Land Use Map
11B-7-10: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
11B-7-11: Notice Requirements
11B-7-12: Violations And Penalties
11B-7-1: ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Administration: The Administrator shall administer this Title.
   B.   Duties: For the purpose of this Title, the Administrator shall have the
following duties:
      1.   To advise interested persons of the provisions of this Title;
      2.   To aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications;
      3.   To issue zoning permits, certificate of occupancy permits,
notifications and such similar administrative duties;
      4.   To investigate all violations of this Title and notify in writing
the person responsible for such violation(s), ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation;
      5.   To assist the Council in carrying out the provisions of this Title;
      6.   To manage the day-to-day and long-range function of this Title
including but not limited to the acceptance, review, processing and approval of
all permits and applications within the Administrator's authority for
development within Avimor; and
      7.   To effectuate any minor amendments as set forth in the Avimor
Development Agreement and this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-2: ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Zoning Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: No use, Building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall any Building,
structure or land be established or changed in use without a permit therefore
issued by the Administrator. Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity
with the provisions of this Title.
      2.   Application For Permit: The application for zoning permit shall be
signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all
information supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state
that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun or is not
substantially completed within one (1) year or other time frame established at
the time of zoning permit issuance. At a minimum, the application shall contain
the following information, as applicable:
         a.   Name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant;
         b.   Legal description of property;
         c.   Description of existing use;
         d.   Description of proposed use;
         e.   Zoning district and Land Use District;
         f.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape
of the Lot to be built upon;
         g.   The exact size and location of existing Buildings on the Lot, if
any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed Building(s) or alteration;
         h.   Building heights;
         i.   Number of off-street Parking Spaces or loading berths;
         j.   Number of Dwelling Units;
         k.   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
         l.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for, the enforcement of this Title.
      3.   Approval Of Permit, Issuance: Within sixty (60) days after the
receipt of an application for a zoning permit, the Administrator shall either
approve or disapprove the application in conformance with the provisions of
this Title. All zoning permits shall, however, be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one (1) year. One (1) copy of the plans shall be
returned to the applicant by the Administrator after the Administrator shall
have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by
the Administrator's signature on such copy and one (1) copy of plans, similarly
marked, shall be retained by the Administrator. The Administrator shall issue a
placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question,
attesting to the fact that the use or alteration is in conformance with the
provisions of this Title.
      4.   Expiration and Revocation Of Permit: If the work described in any
zoning permit has not begun within one (1) year from the date of issuance
thereof, said permit shall expire. It shall be revoked by the Administrator and
written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. Additionally,
the Administrator may, in writing, suspend or revoke a zoning permit and may
issue a stop work order; upon any violation of any requirement, law,
regulation, code or ordinance related to property for which the zoning permit
has been issued; whenever the permit is found to have been issued in error; or
on the basis of incorrect information having been supplied to the City.
   B.   Certificates Of Occupancy:
      1.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: It shall be unlawful to use or
occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any Building or premises, or both, or
part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued therefor by the Administrator stating that the proposed
use of the Building or land conforms to the requirements of this Title and with
all conditional provisions that may have been imposed.
      2.   Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the Administrator for a period not exceeding six (6)
months during alterations or partial occupancy of a Building pending its
completion.
   C.   Unlawful Acts:
      1.   Failure To Obtain Zoning Permit Or Certificate of Occupancy: Failure
to obtain a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of
this Title.
      2.   Use And Construction Contrary To Plans: Zoning permits or
certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the Administrator authorize only the use and arrangement set forth
in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-7-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
11B-7-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION OF CONDITIONAL USE:
   A.   Purpose: It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of
uses are appearing daily, and that many of these and some other more
conventional uses possess characteristics of such unique and special nature
relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public
facilities that each specific use must be considered individually.
   B.   Interpretation Of Conditional Use: Any use which is permitted as a
conditional use in a district under the terms of this Title shall not be deemed
a nonconforming use in such district, but shall, without further action, be
considered a conforming one.
   C.   Exceptions or waivers of standards within this Title, other than use,
inclusive of "Variances" may be permitted through issuance of a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-3-2: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The Commission/Council shall review the particular facts and
circumstances of each proposed conditional use in terms of the following
standards and shall find adequate evidence showing such use at the proposed
location:
      1.   Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established in
Chapter 2 of this Title for the Land Use District involved;
      2.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objective of this Title;
      3.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
      4.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
      5.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer and Schools; or that the persons
or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able
to provide adequately any such services;
      6.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
      7.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment
and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
      8.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
      9.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural,
scenic or historic feature of major importance. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-3-3: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
   A.   In granting any conditional use, the Council may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this Title. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Title.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-3-4: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Application For Conditional Use Permit: An application for conditional
use permit shall be filed with the Administrator by at least one (1) owner or
lessee of property for which such conditional use is proposed. At a minimum,
the application shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of existing use;
      4.   Zoning district and Land Use District;
      5.   Description of proposed conditional use;
      6.   A plan for the proposed site for the conditional use showing, as
applicable, the location of all Buildings, parking and loading area, traffic
access and traffic circulation, Open Spaces, landscaping, refuse and service
areas, utilities, Signs, yards and such other information as the Commission may
require to determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and
requirements of this Title; and
      7.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property;
the effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on
adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and
other properties in the vicinity; and the relationship of the proposed use to
the Master Land Use Map.
   B.   Supplemental Information: Prior to granting a conditional use permit,
the Council may request studies from the planning staff or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal and/or environmental effects on the
proposed conditional use.
   C.   Procedure For Approval Of Conditional Use Permit:
      1.   Public Hearing, Notice: The Commission shall hold a public hearing
in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The public
hearing before the Commission shall be scheduled to a date within sixty (60)
days of receipt of an application. Within seventy-five (75) days after receipt
of the application, the Commission shall make its recommendation to approve,
conditionally approve or deny the application. Notice shall be provided as
required by Section
11B-7-11 of this Title.
      2.   Action By The Commission and Council: The Commission shall transmit
its recommendation of approval or denial to the Council. Within sixty (60) days
after receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the Council shall approve or
deny the application. The Council shall follow notice and hearing requirements
set forth in Section
11B-7-11 of this Title. If the application is approved or approved with
modifications, the Council shall direct the Administrator to issue a
conditional use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the Council
for approval.
   Upon granting or denying an application, the Council shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
conditional use permit.
      3.   Notice To Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a written decision
has been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request.
   D.   Conditions Of Permit: Upon the granting of a conditional use permit,
conditions shall be attached to said permit including, but not limited to,
those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      3.   Controlling the duration of development;
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off-site public facilities or
services; and
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this Title.
   E.   Transfer Of Permit: A conditional use permit is not transferable from
one Parcel of land to another. Conditional use permits are an entitlement to
the specific property on which the approval was granted and upon any transfer
of title for the property the conditional use permit transfers to the new owner
(s) without further application or approval, provided, however, the new owner
(s) shall be bound by the same conditions of approval applicable to the
conditional use permit that was transferred.
   F.   Effect Of Issuance On Other Conditional Uses: A conditional use permit
shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other
conditional use permits.
   G.   Time Limitations, Extensions:
      1.   Once a conditional use is approved and exercised, said use may
continue without further temporal constraints, provided that the use complies
with its intended purpose, or City approved modifications thereafter, and does
not violate any codes, subject to the following:
         a.   An approved Conditional Use Permit shall be valid for a term
approved and conditioned by the Council, which term may be perpetual;
         b.   An extension of the time limit for an approved conditional use
may be granted by the Council, at its sole discretion, without further notice
and hearing, if the following findings are made:
            (1)   There are no outstanding applicable conditional use permit
violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be
conditioned by the Council to be cured as a condition of the extension of time;
            (2)   The conditional use, as previously approved, remains in the
best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City;
            (3)   There have been no significant changes to this Title between
the date of conditional use approval and the date of the time extension request
that would require substantial modifications to the project;
            (4)   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or
have been discovered on the project site; and
            (5)   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-4: VARIANCES:
11B-7-4-1: AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Council may authorize, in specific
cases, such variance from the terms of this Title as will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this Title would result in unnecessary hardship. No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or Buildings in the same
district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or
Buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this Title would
result in unnecessary hardship.
   B.   Application And Standards For Variance: A variance from the terms of
this Title shall not be granted by the Council unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted to the Administrator and the Council
containing:
      1.   Name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
      4.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or Building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or Buildings in the same Land Use
District;
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same Land Use District under the terms of this Title;
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Title to other lands,
structures or Buildings in the same Land Use District; and
         e.   A variance shall not be granted unless the Council makes specific
findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to the
Council which support conclusions that the above-mentioned standards and
conditions have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-4-2: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
   A.   Under no circumstances shall the Council grant a variance to allow a
use not permissible under the terms of this Title in the Land Use District
involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of
this Title in said Land Use District. In granting any variance, the Council may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Title.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Title.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-4-3: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A VARIANCE:
   A.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a variance, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing in which interested persons shall have an
opportunity to be heard. The public hearing before the Commission shall be
scheduled to a date within sixty (60) days of receipt of an application. Within
seventy-five (75) days after receipt of the application the Commission shall
make its recommendation to approve, conditionally approve or deny the
application. Notice shall be provided as required by Section
11B-7-11 of this Title.
   B.   Action By the Commission and Council: The Commission shall transmit its
recommendation of approval, conditional approval or denial to the Council.
Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the Commission's recommendation, the
Council shall approve or deny the application. The Council shall follow the
notice requirements provided by Section
11B-7-11 of this Title. The Council may approve, conditionally approve or deny
a variance request under the conditions as herein specified and considering
such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this Title. If the
application is approved or approved with modifications, the Council shall
direct the Administrator to issue a variance listing the specific conditions
specified by the Council for approval. Upon making its recommendation to the
Council, and upon granting or denying an application, the Commission or
Council, as applicable, shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
variance.
   C.   Notice To Applicant: Within seven (7) days after a written decision has
been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the action on the request. Such written notice shall provide or be
accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to
request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to Section 67-8003, Idaho Code.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-5: DESIGN REVIEW; ADMINISTRATIVE:
   A.   The design requirements, objectives and consideration found in Section
11B-3-6, of this Title, apply to most development in Avimor and design review
applications are processed as provided herein. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-5-1: ADMINISTRATIVE LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty-five (35) days
prior to action by the Administrator, anyone required to comply with this
Chapter shall submit their application, together with the required fee, to the
Administrator. The Administrator may extend the thirty-five (35) day review
time for design review applications that are unusually large or complicated and
may decrease review times for applications that are minor or do not require
transmittals to other agencies.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the Administrator shall approve the application as
presented, approve the application with supplementary conditions, continue the
application for further review, or deny the application. Within two (2) days
after the Administrator's decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall
provide the applicant written notice of the action on the request. The decision
of the Administrator shall be final unless the Administrator's decision is
appealed timely to the Design Review Board. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-5-2: ADMINISTRATIVE LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal of Administrator Decision to Design Review Board: Administrative
level design review decisions may be appealed to the Design Review Board. An
appeal fee, as may be adopted by resolution of the Council, shall be required
for any appeal. Any such appeal shall be submitted within ten (10) days after
the Administrator's written decision by filing with the Administrator a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Administrator shall
transmit to the Design Review Board, all documents constituting the record upon
which the appeal is based.
   B.   Action By the Design Review Board: Within sixty (60) days after receipt
of the appeal, the Design Review Board shall approve, approve with conditions,
continue for further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an
appeal, the Design Review Board shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   C.   Notice to Appellant: Within seven (7) days after the Design Review
Board's written decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the
appellant written notice of the action on the request. The decision of the
Design Review Board shall be final unless the Design Review Board's decision is
appealed timely to the Council.
   D.   Appeal of Design Review Board Decision to Council: Design Review Board
decisions may be appealed to the Council. An appeal fee, as may be adopted by
resolution of the Council, shall be required for any appeal. Any such appeal
shall be submitted within twenty (20) days after the Design Review Board's
written decision by filing with the Administrator a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds for the appeal. The Administrator shall transmit to the Council,
all documents constituting the record upon which the appeal is based. An appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless the
Administrator certifies to the Council after the notice of appeal is filed with
the Administrator that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay
would, in the Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Council or by a court based upon
an application, with notice to the Administrator showing due cause.
   E.   Action By the Council: Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the
appeal, the Council shall approve, approve with conditions, continue for
further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an appeal, the
Council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   Notice to Appellant: Within seven (7) days after the Council's written
decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the appellant
written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice shall provide
or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to
request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to Section 678003, Idaho Code.
The decision of the Council is final. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-6: DESIGN REVIEW; BOARD LEVEL REVIEW:
11B-7-6-1: BOARD LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty-five (35) days
prior to action by the Design Review Board, anyone required to comply with this
Chapter shall submit their application, together with the required fee, to the
Administrator. The Administrator may extend the thirty-five (35) day review
time for design review applications that are unusually large or complicated and
may decrease review times for applications that are minor or do not require
transmittals to other agencies. At least seven (7) days prior to any scheduled
Design Review Board meeting, all applications to be considered at that meeting
shall be made available to each member of the Design Review Board. The
Administrator shall provide notice of the Design Review Board meeting to the
applicant at least seven (7) days prior to the Design Review Board meeting.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the Design Review Board shall approve the application as
presented, approve the application with supplementary conditions, continue the
application for further review, or deny the application. Within seven (7) days
after the Design Review Board's written decision has been rendered, the
Administrator shall provide the appellant written notice of the action on the
request. The decision of the Design Review Board shall be final unless the
Design Review Board's decision is appealed timely to the Council. (Ord. 895, 4-
25-2023)
11B-7-6-2: BOARD LEVEL DESIGN REVIEW APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal of Design Review Board Decision to Council: Design Review Board
decisions may be appealed to the Council. An appeal fee, as may be adopted by
resolution of the Council, shall be required for any appeal. Any such appeal
shall be submitted within twenty (20) days after the Design Review Board's
written decision by filing with the Administrator a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds for the appeal. The Administrator shall transmit to the Council,
all documents constituting the record upon which the appeal is based. An appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless the
Administrator certifies to the Council after the notice of appeal is filed with
the Administrator that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay
would, in the Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the City Council or by a court based
upon an application, with notice to the Administrator showing due cause.
   B.   Action By the Council: Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the
appeal, the Council shall approve, approve with conditions, continue for
further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an appeal, the
Council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   C.   Notice to Appellant: Within seven (7) days after the Council's written
decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the appellant
written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice shall provide
or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to
request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to Section 678003, Idaho Code.
The decision of the Council is final. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-7: APPEALS; ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
   A.   The Council shall consider administrative appeals where it is alleged
that an error has been made by the Administrator. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-7-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal of Administrator Decision to Council: Appeals to the Council
concerning interpretation or administration of this Title may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the legislative authority
affected by any decision of the Administrator.
   B.   An appeal fee, as may be adopted by resolution of the Council, shall be
required for any appeal. Any such appeal shall be submitted within twenty (20)
days after the Administrator's written decision by filing with the
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The
Administrator shall transmit to the Council, all documents constituting the
record upon which the appeal is based. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action taken unless the Administrator certifies to the
Council after the notice of appeal is filed with the Administrator that by
reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would, in the Administrator's
opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Council or by a court based upon an application, with notice to the
Administrator showing due cause.
   C.   Action By the Council: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
appeal, the Council shall approve, approve with conditions, continue for
further review, or deny the appeal. Upon granting or denying an appeal, the
Council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the appeal;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant or appellant could take to
obtain the result requested.
   D.   Notice to Appellant: Within seven (7) days after the Council's written
decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the appellant
written notice of the action on the request. Such written notice shall provide
or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to
request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to Section 678003, Idaho Code.
The decision of the Council is final. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-8: TITLE AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare
or good zoning practices require, and in accordance with the provisions for
amendments to this Title contained in the Avimor Development Agreement, the
Council may, by ordinance after receipt of recommendation thereon from the
Commission, and subject to procedures provided by law, amend, supplement,
change or repeal the regulations of this Title.
   B.   Application For Amendment: Applications for amendments to this Title
shall contain at least the following information:
      1.   Name, address, phone number and email address of the applicant;
      2.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Administrator showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the Administrator may require;
      3.   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered;
      4.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the purpose
statement of this Title in Section
11B-1-2, and the Avimor Development Agreement, availability of public
facilities, and compatibility with the surrounding area;
      5.   A fee as established by the Council; and
      6.   Letter from the Master Developer signifying the Master Developer's
concurrence, conditional concurrence, or opposition of the application.
   C.   General Procedure For Amendments: This Title shall be amended in the
following manner:
      1.   Request for an amendment to this Title shall be submitted to the
Commission, which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested. Request for an amendment to Chapter 3 of this Title
shall be submitted first to the Design Review Board, which shall evaluate the
request to determine the extent and nature of the amendment requested and make
its recommendation to the Commission.
      2.   Requests shall be reviewed by the Commission and shall be evaluated
to determine if such action shall create a demand for public infrastructure
that is not currently available for the site including, but not limited to,
municipal sewer and water services.
      3.   If the request is in accordance with the purpose statement of this
Title in Section
11B-1-2, availability of public facilities, and compatibility with the
surrounding area and the Avimor Development Agreement, the Commission may
recommend and the Council may adopt or reject the amendment under the notice
and hearing procedures provided in Section
11B-7-11 of this Title.
   D.   Public Hearings, Notice: The Commission, prior to recommending an
amendment to this Title to the Council, shall conduct at least one public
hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall follow the notice requirements provided in
Section
11B-7-11 of this Title. Following the Commission's hearing, if the Commission
makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further
notice and hearing shall be provided before the Commission forwards the
amendment with its recommendation to the Council.
   E.   Action By Commission:
      1.   Recommendation By The Commission: Within sixty (60) days from the
receipt of the proposed amendment, the Commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the Council. The Commission may recommend that the amendment
be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment
requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied. The Commission
shall ensure that any recommendations for amendments are in accordance with the
following findings:
         a.   The proposed amendment is in accordance with the purpose
statement of this Title in Section
11B-1-2, the availability of public facilities, compatibility with the
surrounding area, and consistency with the Avimor Development Agreement;
         b.   The information provided from the agencies having jurisdiction
over Avimor indicate that adequate public facilities exist, or are expected to
be provided, to serve any and all uses allowed on property affected by the
proposed amendment; and
         c.   No nonconforming uses will be created with the amendment.
   F.   Action By Council:
      1.   The Council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment
to this Title as recommended by the Commission, shall conduct at least one
public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the Commission.
Following the Council hearing, if the Council makes a material change from what
was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the Council adopts the amendment.
      2.   Upon granting or denying an application to amend this Title, the
Council shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
amendment.
   G.   Effect Of Amendment Approved: In the event the Council shall approve an
amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made part of this Title upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-9: ZONING; SUB-AREA PLAN; AND SUBDIVISION LAND USE MAP:
   A.   Zoning: All land within the Avimor Planned Development Zoning District
(APD) shall be subject to the provisions of this Title. Prior to annexation of
an unincorporated area, or prior to zoning additional property Avimor Planned
Development (APD), the Council shall request and receive a recommendation from
the Commission on the proposed additions to the Master Land Use Map and/or the
Avimor Development Agreement, if applicable, for the unincorporated area. The
Commission and the Council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures for
map amendments set forth in Section
11B-7-11D of this Title. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of
an ordinance of annexation and/or Avimor Planned Development (APD) zoning, the
Council shall amend the Master Land Use Map and the Avimor Development
Agreement, if applicable, to reflect the annexation.
   B.   Sub-Area Plan: To facilitate regional planning and ensure compliance
with the Master Land Use Map, at least every five (5) years, Master Developer
shall submit a Sub-Area Plan for approval. The Sub-Area Plan will guide future
development and adoption of specific Subdivision Land Use Maps as development
occurs within the applicable Sub-Area Plan. When submitted for approval, Sub-
Area Plans should generally address the area planned to be developed in the
then-current Five-Year Plan. Master Developer may submit a Sub-Area Plan or
plans for approval as frequently as desired and subsequent Sub-Area Plans may
include lands included in prior-approved Sub-Area Plans. Except for the
approved Village One Land Use Map and Boise County Phase 1 Subdivision Land Use
Map, no area may be designated with a Sub-Use District through the approval of
a Subdivision Land Use Map unless that area is included in an approved Sub-Area
Plan.
      1.   Required Information and Materials: In support of a Sub-Area Plan
approval, Master Developer shall submit the following:
         a.   A conceptual plan, or plans, of the land within the applicable
sub-area identifying:
            (1)   The anticipated location, size, estimated number of
residential units, and whether commercial areas are planned within the
individual Sub-Use District(s) within the sub-area;
            (2)   General development sequencing within the sub-area,
recognizing that different areas within a sub-area may be developed
contemporaneously;
            (3)   Anticipated location for regional or community public
facilities, such as schools, emergency service facilities, and public parks;
and
            (4)   Anticipated location of regional pathways and arterial street
and collector streets.
         b.   A slope analysis of the sub-area identifying slopes over twenty-
five percent; recognizing that development of slopes over twenty-five percent
is permitted where significant natural features are preserved and visual
disruption is minimized.;
         c.   A map identifying significant natural features within the sub-
area such as visually sensitive ridgelines and unique topographical or geologic
formations; and
         d.   Approval letter from the Avimor Conservation Director stating the
proposed Sub-Area Plan is in compliance with the habitat management plan and
any conditions of development required pursuant to the habitat management plan.
      2.   Procedure For Approval of Sub-Area Plan:
         a.   Administrative Review: Upon receipt of a request for a new or
amended Sub-Area Plan and receipt of the required information and materials,
the Administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the Commission, which
hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of the date of certification of a
complete application.
         b.   Recommendation By Administrator: The Administrator shall prepare
a recommendation on the Sub-Area Plan to the Commission.
         c.   Review By the Parks, Pathways, and Recreation Commission: The
Administrator may refer the Sub-Area Plan to the City's Parks, Pathways, and
Recreation Commission for review and recommendation.
         d.   Public Notice: The Administrator shall provide notice in
accordance with the requirements of Section
11B-7-11 of this Title.
         e.   Action By Commission/Findings: In reviewing the proposed Sub-Area
Plan, the Commission shall consider the following:
            (1)   General compliance with the Master Land Use Map;
            (2)   General compliance with the Development Plans to preserve
significant natural features and slopes over twenty-five percent, to the
greatest extent possible, recognizing that development of slopes over twenty-
five percent is permitted where significant natural features are preserved and
visual disruption is minimized.
            (3)   General compliance with the Comprehensive Plan's transect
model of development encouraging more intense development clustered along
roadways and flatter areas, recognizing that the Comprehensive Plan is a
guideline and the neighborhood and community centers on the Master Land Use Map
are smaller in scale.
            (4)   Compliance with the Avimor Development Agreement.
      The Commission may recommend approval, conditional approval, disapproval,
or tabling for a period not to exceed thirty-five (35) days. Such action shall
occur within thirty-five (35) days of the date of the regular meeting at which
the Sub-Area Plan is first considered by the Commission.
         f.   Action By Council: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
Commission's recommendation and following the notice requirements as set forth
in Section
11B-7-11 of this Title, the Council shall hold a hearing and make findings as
required in Section 11B-7-9(B)(1)(v). The Council shall approve, approve
conditionally, or disapprove the Sub-Area Plan within thirty (30) days of the
public hearing conducted to consider the Commission's recommendation. Approved
Sub-Area Plans shall be kept on file with the City to govern future development
and allowed uses within the platted area.
      3.   Modifications to Approved Sub-Area Plan. Upon request by Master
Developer, an approved Sub-Area Plan may be modified by the Council as part of
a preliminary plat application so long as the modified Sub-Area Plan meets all
of the approval criteria set forth in 11B-7-9 (B)(1((v)(1)-(4).
   C.   Subdivision Land Use Maps:
      1.   Subdivision Land Use Maps shall be submitted for review and approval
together with preliminary plat applications filed pursuant to Section
11B-11B-3. No development may occur on land without an approved Subdivision
Land Use Map except the following: (i) approved public infrastructure; (ii)
agricultural uses; and (iii) trailhead facilities, such as gravel or improved
trailhead parking, which are permitted where access to Pathways and Trails is
necessary or convienent and, in all locations, identified on the Open Space
Map.
      2.   Approved subdivision land use maps, the Village One Land Use Map,
and the Boise County Phase 1 Subdivision Land Use Map may be amended in
accordance with the notice and hearing provisions for approval of a Subdivision
Land Use Map set forth in Section
11B-11B-3. No party, except the Master Developer seek and amendment of an
approved Subdivision Land Use Map or the Village One Land Use Map. (Ord. 895,
4-25-2023)
11B-7-10: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
   A.   The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses
and a collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals, variances,
conditional use permits, plat approvals and other matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this Title requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the Administrator and may be altered or
amended only by the Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses
have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
   B.   All Avimor applications submitted by the Master Developer that have not
been identified on the City's schedule of fees as adopted by the Council or
that require the City to contract staff specialized to review such materials,
including but not limited to economic analysis, habitat and engineers, shall be
subject the terms of the reimbursement agreement between the City and the
Master Developer, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-11: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Hearings: On every land use action for which notice is provided
below, both the Commission and the Council shall hold a public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. No notice of a
Council hearing shall be given prior to receiving a recommendation from the
Commission or an appeal from the Design Review Board. Following any hearing, if
a material change from what was advertised in the notice and presented at the
public hearing is proposed, further notice and hearing shall be provided before
the final decision is made.
   B.   Neighborhood Meetings: Applicants shall conduct a neighborhood meeting
for annexations, variances, conditional uses, zoning amendments, and
subdivisions.
      1.   Meeting Requirements:
         a.   It shall be the sole duty of the applicant to provide mailed
written notice, in a form deemed appropriate by the Administrator, to all
property owners of record owning property within a three hundred-foot (300')
radius of the exterior boundary of the application property, and to contiguous
homeowners' associations and any neighborhood associations deemed appropriate
by the Administrator. Notice of a neighborhood meeting shall be in addition to,
and not in lieu of, mailed radius notices already required by this Title,
except when notice of a neighborhood meeting is required of two hundred (200)
or more property owners of record, alternate forms of notice may be provided as
deemed appropriate by the Administrator. The neighborhood meeting written
notice shall be provided by mail minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the
scheduled neighborhood meeting.
         b.   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is for the applicant to
provide project information to the property owners of record. Meetings shall be
on a Saturday between ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.,
or on a weekday between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
The meeting shall not be on a holiday, a holiday weekend or the day before or
after a holiday or holiday weekend. The meeting shall be held either on the
application property, or at a location with suitable meeting facilities if such
facilities are within the City of Eagle planning boundary as identified within
the City's comprehensive plan.
         c.   The neighborhood meeting shall be conducted prior to the
submittal of the application.
         d.   Application materials shall include a written verification of the
neighborhood meeting and a dated copy of notice provided to property owners of
record.
   C.   Published And Mailed Notice For Title 11B Text Enactments, Amendments,
And Repeals: At least fifteen (15) days prior to each hearing, notice of the
time and place of the hearing and a summary of the proposed action shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
City. Notice shall also be made available to other papers, radio, and
television stations serving the City for use as a public service announcement.
Notice shall be sent to all political subdivisions providing services within
the City, including school districts, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing.
   D.   Published And Mailed Notice For Master Land Use Map Amendments, Avimor
Development Agreement Amendments, Conditional Use Permit, Variance, and
Subdivision: At least fifteen (15) days prior to each hearing, notice of the
time and place of the hearing and a summary of the request and proposed action
shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation
within the City. Notice may also be made available to other papers, Radio, and
television stations serving the City for use as a public service announcement.
Or fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, additional notice shall be provided
by mail to political subdivisions providing services, and to property owners of
record of the land being considered, of land within a three hundred-foot (300')
perimeter of the exterior boundary of the application property.
   E.   Posted Notice: Anytime notice is required under this Title, the land
being considered shall be posted not less than ten (10) days prior to the
Commission hearing and again not less than ten (10) days prior to the Council
hearing. For Title 11B amendments consisting of changes to more than ten (10)
Parcels of land posted notice shall not be required unless all Parcels under
request for amendment are contiguous and if the Parcels abut a public right of
way. In such cases a minimum of one four foot by eight-foot (4' x 8') plywood
Sign shall be placed adjacent to the right of way. Otherwise, three (3) notices
in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation, with the third
notice appearing a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, shall
be published. The notice shall include a six inch by six-inch (6 x 6") minimum
size graphic representation showing the proposed Title 11B map amendments.
Except as noted herein, posting of the property must be in substantial
compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Signage Requirements:
         a.   The Sign(s) shall consist of four foot by four-foot (4' x 4')
plywood or other Hard Surface mounted on two (2) four inches by four-inch (4" x
4") posts in such a manner that it is perpendicular to the roadway along which
the Sign is posted and the bottom of the Sign is at least three feet (3') above
the ground.
         b.   Centered at the top of the four foot by four-foot (4' x 4') Sign
board(s) in six-inch (6") letters shall be the words "Public Notice". In
addition, each Sign will inform the public of the name of the applicant, and if
applicable, the proposed development, the date, time, place, and nature of the
public hearing and a summary of the proposal to be considered. Each Sign shall
be painted white and the letters shall be painted black and shall appear on
both sides. An example of this Sign is listed below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5f033b8735d159d9f2eafbcbbe63f6f3c126fac9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-815.png]
 
      2.   Location Of Signs: The Sign(s) shall be posted on the land being
considered along each roadway that is adjacent to it. The Signs shall be
located on the property outside of the public right of way, if they can be so
located and remain clearly visible from the roadway; otherwise, the consent of
the owner of the right of way must be obtained and the Sign(s) located therein.
Except as noted herein, or as determined by the Administrator, if the land
being considered consists of more than one Parcel of record, a Sign must be
located upon each Parcel. In the event that the land being considered includes
properties with five hundred feet' (500') or more of road frontage, a Sign
shall be placed on each end of the property roadway frontage. If the property
includes a corner Lot, three (3) Signs maybe posted, one on the corner and one
near each end of the property roadway frontages. Upon finding that adequate
notice will be provided, the Administrator may not require all Signs to comply
with the size requirements of this Section and may not require the posting of a
Sign upon every Parcel.
      3.   Certification: The applicant shall submit a certification to the
City Clerk no later than seven (7) days prior to the hearing as to what, where,
and when Sign(s) were posted. Unless the certification is received by such
date, the hearing will be canceled.
      4.   Sign Removal; Penalty: No later than three (3) days after the
noticed hearing and any continuation thereof, Sign(s) must be removed. A
penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day shall be imposed against each
applicant for late removal of the Signs. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-7-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Complaints Regarding Violations: Whenever a violation of this Title
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be
filed with the Administrator. The Administrator shall properly record such
complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this
Title.
   B.   Penalties: The City Attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever
criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of
this Title. Penalties for failure to comply with or violations of the
provisions of this Title shall be as follows: Violation of any of the
provisions of this Title or failure to comply with any of its requirements
shall constitute an infraction, and be punishable as provided below. The
landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who
commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may be found
guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Council or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Title or of
the Idaho Code.
      1.   Misdemeanor Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any
Section or provision of this Title, without regard to the form of the judgment,
shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to but not exceeding the
maximum penalties set forth in Sections 18-113 and 50-302, Idaho Code, as may
from time to time be amended and/or retitled. Either or both such fine and
imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition, thereto, any person so convicted
shall pay costs as the court may assess.
      2.   Infraction Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any
Chapter or provision of this Title when such offense is specifically designated
as an infraction, and where no other penalty is set forth therein, shall be
subject to fine as set forth in Section 18-113A, Idaho Code, as may from time
to time be amended and/or retitled. Failure to satisfy judgment as ordered by
the court shall be deemed contempt of court punishable as a misdemeanor
pursuant to Idaho Code 18-1801.
      3.   Federally Mandated Programs: When this City is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the City may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses as set forth in Section 50-302, Idaho Code,
as may from time to time be amended and/or retitled.
      4.   License: When a person is convicted or found guilty of a violation
of any Chapter or provision of this Title or any ordinance of the City, any
license previously issued to him/her by the City, and directly related to the
conviction, may be revoked by the court or by the Council. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
11B-8-1: Area Of City Impact
11B-8-1: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
Eagle City Code 8-8 shall apply to property designated within the Avimor
Planned Development Zoning District (APD) to the extent it does not conflict
with the provisions in this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 9
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
11B-9-1: Historic Preservation
11B-9-1: HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
Eagle City Code 8-9 shall apply to property designated within the Avimor
Planned Development Zoning District (APD) to the extent it does not conflict
with the provisions in this Title (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 10
MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
11B-10-1: Minimal Property Maintenance
11B-10-1: MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
Eagle City Code 8-11 shall apply to property designated within the Avimor
Planned Development Zoning District (APD) to the extent it does not conflict
with the provisions in this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 11
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11B-11A-1: Short Title
11B-11A-2: Authority
11B-11A-3: Purpose
11B-11A-4: Applicability
11B-11A-5: Interpretation
11B-11A-6: Rules And Definitions
11B-11A-1: SHORT TITLE:
Chapter 11 of this Title shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision
Ordinance of Avimor. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11A-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are authorized by Title 50, Chapter 13 and Title 67, Chapter
65 of the Idaho Code; and Title 12, Chapter 2 of the Idaho constitution, as
amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11A-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to provide for:
   A.   Harmonious development;
   B.   The coordination of streets and roads within a Subdivision with other
existing or planned streets and roads;
   C.   Adequate Open Space for travel, light, air and recreation;
   D.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
   E.   The avoidance of the scattered Subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services; and
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
   F.   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created, improved and maintained; and
      2.   Centralized water and sewer facilities are required for all
Subdivision and Parcel division applications submitted except the City Council
may permit the use of individual well(s) and septic system(s) upon a
determination that the public health, safety, and welfare will not be
negatively impacted.
   G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any Plats; and
   H.   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approving authorities. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11A-4: APPLICABILITY:
These regulations shall apply to the Subdivision of land within the Avimor
Planned Development Zoning District (APD). (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11A-5: INTERPRETATION:
All Subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval by the
Council and shall comply with the provisions of this Title. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other provisions in City Code, these
regulations shall prevail. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11A-6: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
      1.   The present tense includes the past or future tense; the singular
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;
      2.   The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; and the
word "should" is preferred; and
      3.   The masculine shall include the feminine.
   B.   As used in Chapter 11 of this Title, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Chapter:
ARTERIAL        A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
STREET:
BLOCK:          A group of Lots, tracts or Parcels within well-defined boundaries, usually
                streets.
BUILDING SITE:  An area proposed or provided and improved by grading, filling, excavation or
                other means for erecting pads for Buildings.
CHANNEL:        A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bend and
                banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
COLLECTOR       A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets to
STREET:         other Collector Streets and/or Arterial Streets.
COUNTY          The office of the applicable County Recorder.
RECORDER:
COVENANT:       A written promise or pledge.
CUL-DE-SAC:     A street connected to another street at one end only and provided with a
                turnaround space at its terminus.
CULVERT:        A drain that Channels water under a bridge, street, road or driveway.
                The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the public by
DEDICATION:     ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes as by the recording of a
                Plat. Dedicated land becomes public upon the acceptance by the City.
DITCH:          An open Channel artificially constructed.
DRAINAGE:       Water that runs off the surfaces of a site or development. Synonymous with
                "runoff" as used herein.
DRAINAGE        A natural Channel, Ditch, pipe or other conduit for liquid, naturally or
CHANNEL:        artificially situated to receive Storm Drainage at an inlet point or multiple
                inlet points and then convey such Storm Drainage to an outlet point.
DRAINAGE        An artificially constructed or naturally occurring Drainage Channel, detention or
FACILITY:       retention facility, or partial retention facility.
                A government entity, canal company or special taxing district which maintains a
                Drainage Facility adjacent to the development and agrees, as evidenced by a
                signed and dated public document, to accept a defined quantity of Storm Drainage
DRAINAGE        from the development. This definition also applies to the Local Highway
RECEIVER:       Department, with regard to any runoff from any development to any public street.
                Notice is particularly given that the presence of a natural drainage Channel does
                not relieve the developer from the requirement that any Drainage must be retained
                unless discharged at the predevelopment rate or it is formally accepted by a
                Drainage Receiver.
DRAINAGEWAY:    A drainage Channel or drainage Ditch.
                Driveways shall provide access to no more than three (3) dwellings. Driveways
                providing access to a maximum of eight (8) Single Family Special Lots, as
DRIVEWAYS:      described in Chapter 2 of this Title, may be permitted providing that the
                driveway length does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet and review and
                approval has been received from emergency service providers for the specific
                location and configuration.
EASEMENT:       A grant by a property Owner to specific persons or to the public to use land for
                specific purposes.
ENGINEER:       Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional engineering.
FLOOD:          The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow from a
                river, stream, lake or other body of water.
FLOOD OF 1%     A Flood magnitude which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
ANNUAL CHANCE:  exceeded in any given year.
                The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the Channel of a river, stream,
                lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by water of a Flood
FLOODPLAIN:     of 1% Annual Chance. The Floodplain includes the Channel, Floodway or Floodway
                Fringe, as established pursuant to engineering practices of the U.S. Army Corps
                of Engineers.
                The Channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
FLOODWAY:       be reserved in order to discharge the base Flood without cumulatively increasing
                the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY        That part of the Floodplain which is beyond the Floodway. Such areas include
FRINGE:         those portions of the Floodplain which will be inundated by a Flood of 1% Annual
                Chance.
HIGHWAY:        A street designated as a Highway by an appropriate state or federal agency.
HILLSIDE        Slopes over ten percent (10%) shall be required to conform to the Avimor Grading
SUBDIVISION:    Guidelines and Hillside Development Standards.
IMPROVEMENT:    Any alteration to the land or other physical construction associated with
                Subdivision and Building Site developments.
LOT AREA:       The area of any Lot shall be determined exclusive of street, Highway, alley, road
                or rights of way of record.
                As used in these regulations, Lot Types are as follows:1.   Corner Lot: A Lot
                located at the intersections of two (2) or more streets;2.   Interior Lot: A Lot
LOT TYPES:      other than a Corner Lot with frontage on only one street other than a Corner Lot;
                and3.   Through Lot: A Lot with frontage on more than one street other than a
                Corner Lot.
                Any Subdivision not able to qualify as a Minor Subdivision, including, but not
MAJOR           limited to, Subdivision of two (2) or more Lots, or any size Subdivision
SUBDIVISION:    requiring any new street or extension of the local government facilities, or the
                creation of any public Improvements.
MINOR STREET:   A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
                properties.
                Any Subdivision located in a HMU or MU/C Sub District and does not exceed thirty
                (30) Lots which may include Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s) or Lots located in any
                other Sub- District and does not exceed ten (10) Lots which may include Super Pad
MINOR           (s)/Large Lot(s).The Subdivision must be fronting on an existing street; not
SUBDIVISION:    involving any new street or road, or the extension of municipal facilities, or
                the creation of any public Improvements; and not adversely affecting the
                remainder of the Parcel or adjoining property; and not in conflict with any
                provision or portion of the applicable Preliminary Plat, official map, or this
                Chapter.
                Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe or iron or steel
MONUMENT:       rods, used to identify any tract, Parcel, Lot or street lines, as specified in
                Chapter 50-1303, Idaho Code.
OWNER:          An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having
                any interest, legal or equitable, in the land to be subdivided.
                A conceptual map in, conformance with the Open Space Plan, submitted with each
PARKS,          Preliminary Plat application, for the area being platted, that depicts the
PATHWAYS, AND   location of parks, Pathways, and Trails, roadway crossings, habitat, and
FACILITIES MAP: ownership structure or intent to dedicate such park or pathway facilities if
                known at the time of submittal.
PARTIAL         A constructed basin or underground Storage Vessel built to retain and/or detain a
RETENTION OR    portion of the Storm Drainage it receives until it is absorbed into the soil
DETENTION       strata, and to allow not more than an amount as designated by agreement with an
BASIN:          adjacent Drainage Receiver to pass into an adjacent drainage way or Drainage
                Facility.
PARTIAL RIGHT   A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required street width,
OF WAY:         usually along the edge of a Subdivision or tract of land.
                An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the Subdivider or his
                surety to the City clerk which guarantees that the Subdivider will perform all
PERFORMANCE     actions required by the governing body regarding an approved Plat, and provides
BOND:           that if the Subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an
                approved Plat, the Subdivider or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of
                the bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the approved
                Plat.
                The drawing, mapping or planning of a Subdivision, town site or other tract of
                land or a replatting of such including certifications, descriptions and approvals
PLAT:           including the following:1.   Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by
                drawings of a proposed Subdivision; and2.   Final Plat: The final and formal
                presentation by drawings of an approved Subdivision development, the original and
                one (1) copy of which is filed with the County Recorder.
                A common Lot which provides access to adjacent properties under separate
PRIVATE STREET: ownership and which is not dedicated to or officially accepted by a public
                entity, but not including Driveways as defined in this Title.
RESERVE STRIP:  A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent property which is reserved
                or held in public or private ownership for future street extension or widening.
RIGHT OF WAY:   A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way which normally
                includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or service areas.
                The required distance from a Building on a Lot or parcel to a property line
SETBACK:        required to be left open and unoccupied by Buildings. Improvements such as
                sidewalks, driveways, Parking Lots, walkways, Access Roads, Hardscape and walls
                are allowed to be located within Setbacks.
STORM WATER     A constructed basin or constructed underground Storage Vessel built to retain all
BASIN:          of the Storm Drainage it receives until it is absorbed into the soil strata.
STANDARD        The specifications as specified in Chapter 11 of this Title or as officially
SPECIFICATIONS: adopted by the City.
STATE:          The State of Idaho.
                An earthen basin or tank or vault structure.re employed to store liquid. Earthen
STORAGE VESSEL: basins used to store Storm Drainage may be filled with porous media (usually
                gravel) to attain structural stability, in which case the volume of available
                storage is taken as the volume of the interstitial voids of the porous media.
STORM DRAINAGE: The water running off the surfaces of a site as a result of precipitation on the
                site (including rain, hail meltwater and snow meltwater).
                A Right of Way which provides access to adjacent properties, the Dedication of
STREET:         which has been officially accepted. The term "Street" also includes the terms
                Highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place and other
                such terms.
                A conceptual land use plan for a sub-area of the Master Land Use Map to provide
                development guidance by identifying: (i) the anticipated location and size of
SUB-AREA PLAN   Sub-Use Districts for future development; (ii) general development sequencing;
(SAP):          (iii) significant natural features and slopes greater than twenty-five percent;
                (iv) anticipated locations for regional or community facilities; and (v) the
                anticipated location of regional pathways and arterial street and collector
                streets for regional planning, design, and infrastructure continuity.
                The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust or
                other legal entity that executes the application and initiates proceedings for
SUBDIVIDER:     the Subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The
                Subdivider need not be the Owner of the property; however, he shall be an agent
                of the Owner or have sufficient proprietary rights in the property to represent
                the Owner.
                The result of an act of dividing any Lot, tract or Parcel of land into two (2) or
                more parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, which may
                also include the Dedication of a public Street. Subdivisions shall be divided
                into "Minor Subdivision " and "Major Subdivision", as those terms are defined in
                this Chapter. However, Chapter 11 of this Title shall not apply to any of the
                following:
                1.   An adjustment of Lot lines as shown on a recorded Plat which does not reduce
SUBDIVISION:    the area, frontage, width, depth or Setback of each Building below the minimum
                zoning requirements, and does not increase the original number of Lots in any
                Block of the recorded Plat;
                2.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a
                court decree for the distribution of property;
                3.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined and
                allowed in the Idaho Code; and
                4.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property boundaries
                which does not result in the change of present land usage.
SUBDIVISION     A map submitted by a Subdivider in connection with a Preliminary Plat application
LAND USE MAP:   finally designating the area being platted with specific Land Use Districts and
                SubDistricts.
SURVEYOR:       Any person who is licensed in the State as a public land Surveyor to do
                professional surveying.
                A modification of the requirements of this Chapter as to Lot size, Lot Coverage,
                Lot Width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, Setbacks, or other ordinance
                provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the
VARIANCE:       structure upon Lots, or the size of Lots. A Variance shall not be considered a
                right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a
                showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site and the Variance
                is not in conflict with the public interest.
VICINITY MAP:   A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in relation to a larger
                area. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
 
ARTICLE B. SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11B-11B-1: Application For Subdivision Approval Generally
11B-11B-2: Preapplication Procedure
11B-11B-3: Preliminary Plat
11B-11B-4: Final Plat
11B-11B-5: Fees
11B-11B-6: Record Of Lot; Plat Approval
11B-11B-7: Sale Of Lot; Plat To Be Recorded
11B-11B-8: Parcel Division
11B-11B-1: APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL GENERALLY:
Any person desiring to create a "Subdivision" as herein defined shall submit
all necessary applications to the Administrator. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11B-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Submission Of Pre-application: The Subdivider shall submit a pre-
application to enable the Administrator to review and comment on the proposed
Subdivision.
   B.   Sketch Plan: The pre-application shall include at least one (1) copy of
a sketch plan. The sketch plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of
the proposed Subdivision, in schematic form, and including the following:
      1.   The general layout and approximate dimension of Streets, Blocks,
Open Space and Lots in sketch form; and
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed Subdivision site.
   C.   Subdivision Land Use Map: The pre-application shall include the
proposed Subdivision Land Use Map for the area being platted that shows the
underlying land use designation(s) per the Master Land Use Map and the
applicable Sub-Area Plan, and the proposed Sub-Use District(s) for the area
being platted.
   D.   Action By Administrator: The Administrator shall notify the Subdivider
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of an acceptable pre-
application as to the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal
with this Chapter, shall provide the necessary forms and checklists and shall
comment on the following:
      1.   Compliance of the proposed development with existing local or State
governmental goals and objectives;
      2.   Determination if additional special permits or ordinance conflicts
such as special development permit or Variance, are needed and the manner of
coordinating such permits;
      3.   Consideration of any unique environmental features or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property such as areas that have been designated by the State of Idaho as areas
of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, Floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like; and
      4.   Consideration of other local and State governmental agencies that
the Subdivider should contact before preparing a Preliminary Plat. (Ord. 895,
4-25-2023)
11B-11B-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Application Required:
      1.   Filing Of Preliminary Plat Application and Data: The Subdivider
shall file with the Administrator a complete Subdivision application form and
Preliminary Plat data as required in this Title.
   B.   Combining Preliminary And Final Plat In Minor Subdivisions: The
applicant may request that the Subdivision application be processed as both a
preliminary and Final Plat if all the following exist:
      1.   The proposed Subdivision: (i) is located in a HMU or MU/C Sub-Use
District and does not exceed thirty (30) Lots which may include Super Pad(s)/
Large Lot(s); or (ii) is located in any sub-use district and does not exceed
ten (10) Lots which may include Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s);
      2.   No new Street Dedication or Street widening is involved;
      3.   No major special development considerations are involved such as
development in a Floodplain, hillside development or the like;
      4.   All required information for both preliminary and Final Plat is
complete and in an acceptable form; and
      5.   The proposed Subdivision is not in conflict any provision of this
Title.
A request to combine both Preliminary Plat and Final Plat into one (1)
application shall be acted upon by the Commission upon recommendation of the
Administrator.
   C.   Required Information and Data:
      1.   The Subdivider shall submit to the Administrator at the following:
         a.   Three (3) hard copies and one electronic of the Preliminary Plat,
prepared by an Idaho licensed professional Engineer or land Surveyor, of the
proposed Subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter
stated. Each copy of the Preliminary Plat shall be on good quality paper, shall
have the dimensions of not less than twenty- four inches by thirty-six inches
(24 x 36"), shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred
feet (1"= 100'), shall show the drafting date, and shall indicate thereon, by
arrow, the generally northerly direction;
         b.   Three (3) hard sets and one electronic copy of preliminary
engineering plans (not meant to be cross Chapters or detailed designs) for
Streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other required public Improvements;
however, such engineering plans shall contain sufficient information and detail
to make a determination as to conformance of the proposed Improvements to
applicable regulations, ordinances and standards;
         c.   A written application requesting approval of the Preliminary Plat
that summarizes the Preliminary Plat being proposed and also provides a summary
of the existing development, including number of approved residential Lots,
within the Avimor Planned Development zone; and
         d.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area such as hillside, planned unit
development, Floodplain, hazardous and unique areas of development.
   D.   The following shall be submitted separately:
      1.   The name of the proposed Subdivision;
      2.   The name, address and telephone numbers of the Subdivider or
Subdividers and the Engineer or Surveyor who prepared the plat;
      3.   The name and address of all adjoining Owners of property and
residents within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the
land being considered, whether or not bisected by a public right of way as
shown on record in the county assessor's office;
      4.   The legal description of the Subdivision;
      5.   A Subdivision Land Use Map and a statement setting forth the
underlying Land Use District(s), Sub-Area Plan Sub-Use District designation,
and proposed Sub-Use District(s), within the proposed Subdivision, such
Subdivision Land Use Map shall include the Land Use Districts and any existing
Sub-Use Districts for the adjacent land;
      6.   A Parks, Pathways, and Facilities Map.
      7.   A statement of the proposed uses within the proposed Subdivision
such as residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing, commercial,
office, recreational or agricultural and a designation of any sites proposed
for Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s) or for parks, playgrounds, Schools, Churches,
other public uses, or a combination of all or some;
      8.   A map shall be submitted showing the location of existing Buildings,
water bodies or courses and the location of currently dedicated Streets at the
point where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent; provided, that actual
measured distances shall not be required;
      9.   A Vicinity Map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surrounding area;
      10.   Streets, proposed Street names, rights of way and roadway widths,
including adjoining Streets or roadways;
      11.   Central water and sewer service shall be provided for all Lots
pursuant to 11B-11A-3 F. Provided that cesspools, septic tank, sewage disposal
facility, or hazardous waste disposal facility may be installed or maintained
on the property except as approved by the Avimor Water Reclamation Company.
When there is a conflict between this Chapter and/or other titles the more
restrictive provision shall prevail;
      12.   Lot lines and Blocks showing the dimensions and numbers of each
including Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s);
      13.   Contour lines, shown at five-foot (5') intervals where land slope
is greater than ten percent (10%) and at two-foot (2') intervals where land
slope is ten percent (10%) or less, referenced to an established bench mark,
including location and elevation;
      14.   A site report as required by the appropriate health district where
individual wells or septic tanks are proposed;
      15.   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited to,
storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals, Ditches, Drainages, bridges,
Culverts, water mains, fire hydrants and their respective profiles;
      16.   Any dedications to the public and/or Easements, together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such;
      17.   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in subchapter 11E of this Chapter;
      18.   Approval letter from the Avimor Conservation Director stating the
proposed Preliminary Plat's compliance with the habitat management plan and any
conditions of development required pursuant to the habitat management plan; and
      19.   A copy of any transportation studies or analysis that has been
provided and/or required by another agency, having jurisdiction over the
project, in support or review of this application.
   E.   Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Plat and Subdivision Land Use
Map:
      1.   Administrative Review:
         a.   Certification By Administrator, Public Hearing: Upon receipt of
the Preliminary Plat and all other required data as provided for herein, the
Administrator shall certify the application as complete and shall affix the
date of application acceptance thereon. The Administrator shall schedule a
public hearing before the Commission, which hearing shall be held within sixty
(60) days of the date of certification of a complete application.
         b.   Review By Other Agencies: The Administrator shall refer the
Preliminary Plat application and Subdivision Land Use Map to as many
governmental agencies as deemed necessary. Such agencies may include the
following:
            (1)   Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
            (2)   The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or
districts and drainage districts;
            (3)   The superintendent of the school district; and
            (4)   Other agencies having an interest in the proposed
Subdivision.
         c.   Recommendation By Administrator: The Administrator shall provide
that any transmittal as provided in this Chapter will be returned within
fifteen    (15) days. At the end of the fifteen (15) day period, the
Administrator shall prepare a recommendation on the Preliminary Plat and
Subdivision Land Use Map to the Commission. All agency responses shall be
supplied by the Administrator to the Commission.
         d.   Review By the Parks, Pathways, and Recreation Commission: The
Administrator may refer the Parks, Pathways, and Facilities Map component of
the Preliminary Plat application to the City's Parks, Pathways, and Recreation
Commission for review and recommendation. Where the Parks, Pathways, and
Facilities Map is in general conformity with the Open Space Plan and with the
design and location standards set forth in Section
11B-11D-7 of this Title, the Parks, Pathways, and Recreation Commission shall
provide a recommendation of approval. The Parks, Pathways, and Recreation
Commission shall provide its recommendation prior to the hearing before the
Commission.
      2.   Public Notice: The Administrator shall provide notice in accordance
with the requirements of Section
11B-7-12 of this Title.
      3.   Action By Commission:
         a.   Commission's Findings: In determining the acceptance of a
proposed Subdivision and Subdivision Land Use Map, the Commission shall
consider the objectives of Chapter 11 of this Title and the following:
            (1)   The availability of, or an approved plan to complete, public
services to accommodate the proposed development, including, but not limited
to, compliance with Title 6, Chapter 5 of City Code for areas that are serviced
by Eagle City Water; and
            (2)   Whether the proposed Subdivision Land Use Map: (i) is in
compliance with the Master Land Use Map and Table 2.2, setting forth the
allowed Sub-Use Districts within each Land Use District; (ii) is in compliance
with the applicable Sub-Area Plan; (iii) provides for a set of uses and
development standards that would be compatible with existing adjoining property
uses.
         b.   Action On Preliminary Plat and Subdivision Land Use Map: The
Commission may recommend approval, conditional approval, disapproval or tabling
for a period not to exceed thirty-five (35) days. Such action shall occur
within thirty-five (35) days of the date of the regular meeting at which the
Plat is first considered by the Commission. The action, and the reasons for
such action shall be stated in writing by the Administrator and forwarded to
the applicant. The Administrator shall also forward a statement of the action
taken and the reasons for such action together with a copy of the Preliminary
Plat and Subdivision Land Use Map to the Council for its action. Upon granting
or denying a Preliminary Plat, the Commission shall specify:
            (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the
application;
            (2)   The reasons for recommending approval or denial; and
            (3)   The actions if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval of the Preliminary Plat.
         c.   Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the
Commission's conclusion is favorable to the Subdivider's request for the
Subdivision to be considered as both a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, then a
recommendation shall be forwarded to the Council in the same manner as herein
specified for a Final Plat. The Commission may recommend that the combined
application together with the associated Subdivision Land Use Map be approved,
approved conditionally or disapproved.
      4.   Action By Council: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
Commission's recommendation and following the notice requirements as set forth
in Section
11B-7-12 of this Title, the Council shall hold a hearing and make findings as
required in Section 11B-11B-3-3(D)(3) of this Title. The Council shall approve,
approve conditionally or disapprove the Preliminary Plat and related
Subdivision Land Use Map within thirty (30) days of the public hearing
conducted to consider the Commission's recommendation. Approved subdivision
land use maps shall be kept on file with the City to govern future development
and allowed uses within the platted area.
   F.   Approval Period:
      1.   Failure to file an application with and obtain the certification of
the acceptance of a Final Plat by the Administrator within three (3) years
after the date on which action was taken by the Council shall cause all
approvals of said Preliminary Plat to be null and void.
      2.   Up to a twelve (12) month extension of the time limit on the
approved Preliminary Plat may be granted by the Council, at its sole
discretion, if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding City Code or Plat approval violations
pursuant to this Title on the subject property. If such violations exist, they
may be conditioned by the Council to be cured as a condition of the extension
of time;
         b.   The Preliminary Plat, as previously approved, remains in the best
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this Chapter 11 between
the date of Preliminary Plat approval and the application date of the time
extension request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates that the Final Plat application will be filed within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated timing for the filing of the Final Plat application within the
year.
      3.   The Council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      4.   This Chapter does not limit the number of extensions the Council may
grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in 11B-11B-3-E-2 of
this Chapter are met. Nothing in this Chapter requires the Council to grant any
extension of an approval period.
      5.   Preliminary Plats with approved phasing plans do not need time
extensions, so long as the construction of Improvements do not cease for more
than one (1) year in any given phase.
      6.   In the event that the development of the Preliminary Plat has an
approved phasing plan it will be constructed in an orderly and reasonable
manner. If a Final Plat is submitted within successive intervals of one (1)
year, it may be considered for final approval without resubmission for
Preliminary Plat approval. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11B-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Filing Of Final Plat: After the approval or conditional approval of the
Preliminary Plat, the Subdivider may cause the total Parcel or any part thereof
to be surveyed and a Final Plat prepared in accordance with the approved
Preliminary Plat. Such Final Plat shall still be in Substantial Conformance
with the approved Preliminary Plat as determined by the Administrator. The
Subdivider shall submit to the Administrator the following:
      1.   Three (3) hard copies and one (1) electronic copy of the Final Plat;
and
      2.   Three (3) hard copies and one (1) electronic copy of the final
engineering construction drawings for Streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and
other public Improvements.
   B.   Contents: The Final Plat shall include and be in compliance with all
items required under Title 50, Chapter 13, Idaho Code and shall be prepared in
accordance with the specifications set forth in Chapter 50-1304, Idaho Code.
The Final Plat shall include at least the following:
      1.   A written application for approval of such Final Plat as stipulated
by the Council;
      2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed Final Plat;
      3.   Such other information as the Administrator or Council may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said Final Plat;
      4.   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of Chapter 11 of
this Title;
      5.   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards;
      6.   The Plat shall show Building Sites on each Lot (except Super Pad(s)/
Large Lot(s)) adjusted to Setback requirements; and
      7.   The Plat shall identify Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s) and note that such
Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s) are not buildable until replatted.
   C.   Procedure For Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   Review By Administrator:
         a.   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the Final Plat, and compliance with
all other requirements as provided for herein, the Administrator shall certify
the application as complete and shall affix the date of acceptance thereon.
         b.   Resubmission Of Final Plat: The Administrator shall review the
Final Plat for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved
Preliminary Plat. If the Administrator determines that there is substantial
difference in the Final Plat, the allowed Variance as outlined above, then that
which was approved as a Preliminary Plat or conditions which have not been met,
the Administrator may require that the Final Plat be submitted to the
Commission and Council in the same manner as required in the Preliminary Plat
process.
         c.   Submission To The Council: Upon the determination that the Final
Plat is in compliance with the Preliminary Plat and all conditional
requirements have been met, the Administrator shall place the Final Plat on the
Council agenda within forty-five (45) days from the date that a Final Plat
application was received and acknowledged by the Administrator.
      2.   Agency Review: The Administrator may transmit one (1) copy of the
Final Plat, or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to the
departments and agencies as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with the
preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review shall also include the construction standards of Improvements,
compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all Improvements and
the legal review of the Performance Bond.
   D.   Council Action: The Council, at its next meeting following receipt of
the Administrator's report, shall approve, approve conditionally, disapprove or
table the Final Plat for additional information.
   E.   Conditional Approval Of Final Plat: With respect to financial assurance
to be provided to the City, the approval of all final Subdivision plats shall
be conditioned on the accomplishment of one of the following:
      1.   The construction of Improvements required by this Chapter shall have
been completed by the Subdivider (except for Super Pad(s)/Large Lot(s)) and
approved by the Council; and
      2.   Financial assurance acceptable to the Council shall have been filed
in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, surety bond, irrevocable bank
letter of credit, or surety deemed acceptable by the City.
   F.   Approval Period: The Final Plat shall be filed with the County Recorder
within one (1) year after the date of written approval by the Council.
Otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless the Subdivider,
prior to said expiration date, applies for an extension of time and such
extension is granted by the Council.
      1.   A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of the
approved Final Plat may be granted by the Council, at its sole discretion, if
the following findings are made:
         a.   There is no outstanding City Code or Plat approval violations
pursuant to this Title on the subject property. If such violations exist, they
may be conditioned by the Council to be cured as a condition of the extension
of time;
         b.   The Final Plat, as previously approved, remains in the best
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this Chapter 11 between
the date of Final Plat approval and the application date of the time extension
request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates how recordation of the Final Plat will occur within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress for completion of the Final Plat within the year.
      2.   The Council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This Chapter does not limit the number of extensions the Council may
grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set in this Chapter are met.
Nothing in this Chapter requires the Council to grant any extension of an
approval period.
   G.   Required Certificates: The following certifications and signatures
shall be included on the Final Plat prior to recording by the County Recorder:
      1.   Certification and signature of the Council verifying that the
Subdivision has been approved.
      2.   Certification and signature of the City clerk and the City Engineer
verifying that the Subdivision meets the requirements of the City and has been
approved by the Council.
      3.   Certification of the sanitation restriction on the face of the Plat
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   H.   Record Of Final Plat: Upon approval of the Final Plat by the Council,
posting of financial assurance with the City pursuant to subchapter D of this
Chapter, and the inclusion of those certifications and signatures on the Final
Plat as set forth in this Chapter. The Subdivider shall furnish proof to the
Administrator that the Final Plat has been recorded. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11B-5: FEES:
At the time of submission of an application for a Preliminary Plat, and Final
Plat, a fee, as established in the official fee schedule of the City, shall be
paid. There shall be no additional fee for the combining of the preliminary and
Final Plats and there shall be no fee for a pre-application. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
11B-11B-6: RECORD OF LOT; PLAT APPROVAL:
No Final Plat shall be filed with the County Recorder or Improvements made on
the property except for grading pursuant to the Avimor Grading Guidelines and
Hillside Development Standards, until the Plat has been acted upon and approved
by the Council. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11B-7: SALE OF LOT; PLAT TO BE RECORDED:
No Lots shall be sold using a Lot and Block legal description until the Plat
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11B-8: PARCEL DIVISION:
Any time that an Original Parcel of land is divided or partitioned into not
more than two (2) Parcels, thereby creating an additional Parcel for the
transfer of ownership or development, the following application process and
procedures shall be followed:
   A.   Application: An application for Parcel division on a form provided by
the Administrator shall be submitted to the Administrator and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following information:
      1.   Name, address, telephone number of the applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property and proof of ownership or agency;
      3.   Description of existing use;
      4.   Zoning district;
      5.   Description of Parcels after proposed division;
      6.   Description of proposed use; and
      7.   Documentation of the permission of the Owner of the Parcel to be
divided.
   B.   Procedure: Prior to approving an application under this Chapter, the
Council shall make the following findings:
      1.   The minimum requirements under this Title for acreage, Density, Lot
Area and Setback lines have been complied with; and
      2.   The proposed Parcel division is in the public interest and will not
adversely impact adjoining property interests.
   C.   Notice: Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the
Administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on
the request. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
ARTICLE C. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11B-11C-1: Minimum Standards Required
11B-11C-2: Streets And Alleys
11B-11C-2-1: Location And Design
11B-11C-2-2: Street Widths
11B-11C-2-3: Intersections
11B-11C-2-4: Street Names
11B-11C-2-5: Private Streets And Alleys
11B-11C-3: Pedestrian Walkways
11B-11C-4: Easements
11B-11C-5: Planting Strips And Reserve Strips
11B-11C-6: Public Sites And Open Spaces
11B-11C-7: Water System
11B-11C-8: Fences
11B-11C-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All Plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11 of this Title, and
all Subdivisions, Improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth in this Subchapter C; provided, however, any higher standards adopted
by the City after the date of this Title shall not apply to this Title unless
the standards are federally mandated. Any changes adopted by the Local Highway
Department or the Idaho Transportation Department or health agency shall
prevail over those set forth herein and the City may amend this Title to
incorporate such standards without concurrence from the Master Developer. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
11B-11C-2-1: LOCATION AND DESIGN:
Street and road location and design shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Street Location And Arrangements: When an official Street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, Streets within a Subdivision
shall substantially conform to such approved plans.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor Streets shall be so arranged as to discourage use
by through traffic.
   C.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement
of Streets in new Subdivisions shall be such that said Streets extend to the
boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said
Streets into adjacent areas, and shall have a Cul- De-Sac or temporary Cul-De-
Sac if stub Street is longer than one hundred and fifty (150) feet in length. A
reserve Street may be required and held in public ownership.
   D.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to
topography so as to result in usable Lots, safe Streets and acceptable
gradients.
   E.   Public/Private Alleys: Alleys may be provided in multiple-family
dwelling or commercial Subdivisions unless other provisions are made for
service access and off-street loading and parking.
   F.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-De-Sac Streets shall not be more than three
thousand feet (3,000') in length and shall terminate with an adequate circular
turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') of right of way
including a landscape island with a minimum radius of ten feet (10'). A minimum
of forty feet (40') of paved surface shall be provided between the landscape
island and the outside edge of the Street as measured from the face of curb of
the island to the face of curb located on the outside edge of the Street. All
Cul-De-Sac Streets shall include bulb-outs every seven hundred fifty feet
(750') to allow for emergency vehicles to turn around. No more than thirty (30)
Lots, without Eagle Fire Departments written approval, shall be located on any
Cul-De-Sac Street between bulb-outs or beyond the final bulb-out. Exceptions to
the requirements set forth in this paragraph may be considered by the Council
if approved by the fire department and the Highway district having
jurisdiction.
   G.   Half Streets: Half Streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with Chapter 11 of this Title. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
borders on an existing half or partial Street, that has been previously
dedicated, the other part of the Street shall be dedicated within such tract.
   H.   Driveways: Driveways shall provide access to no more than three (3)
dwellings. Driveways providing access to a maximum of eight (8) Single Family
Special Lots, as described in Chapter 2 of this Title, may be permitted
providing that the driveway length does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet
and review and approval has been received from emergency service providers for
the specific location and configuration. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-2-2: STREET WIDTHS:
   A.   Street and road right of way widths, grade, alignment, and so forth,
shall conform to the adopted master street and circulation map and shall be
approved by the Local Highway Department and/or other agency having
jurisdiction.
   B.   Notwithstanding subchapter A of this Chapter, access from a frontage
road onto an Arterial Street shall comply with Local Highway Department
requirements. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-2-3: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Angle Of Intersection: Angles of Street and driveway intersections
shall be approved by the Highway district having jurisdiction.
   B.   Grade Of Intersection: The grade should be designed to two percent (2%)
intersection slopes. However, in any event shall not exceed five (5) percent in
slope through the intersections. In any event the intersection must be designed
to meet ADA requirements.
   C.   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all Street and
driveway intersections shall be approved by the Highway district having
jurisdiction.
   D.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) Streets shall cross at any one
intersection. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-2-4: STREET NAMES:
The naming of Streets shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   A Street name shall not duplicate any existing Street name within the
county except where a new Street is a continuation of an existing Street.
Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing
Street names shall not be used.
   B.   All new Streets shall be named as follows, unless the applicable Street
naming committee or emergency service provider request otherwise:
      1.   Streets having a predominately north-south direction shall be named
"avenue", except for section line Streets which shall be named "road";
      2.   Streets having a predominately east-west direction shall be named
"Street", except for section line Streets which shall be named "road";
      3.   Meandering Streets having a predominately north-south direction
shall be named "way";
      4.   Meandering Streets having a predominately east-west direction shall
be named "drive";
      5.   Cul-De-Sacs having a predominately north-south direction shall be
named "place"; and
      6.   Cul-de-sacs having a predominately east-west direction shall be
named "court". (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-2-5: PRIVATE STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Private Streets and private alleys may be permitted, subject to the following:
   A.   Compliance: The City Council must find that all proposed Private
Streets or private alleys are in compliance with each of the following
criteria:
      1.   Unique or special circumstances exist with respect to the proposed
use, design, location, topography, or other features of the development or its
surroundings such that Private Streets and or private alleys will serve to
enhance the overall development;
      2.   Safe and effective movement of both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, sidewalks, and parking is provided;
      3.   Adequate access for service and emergency vehicles is provided-where
applicable;
      4.   Access and good transportation planning to adjacent property and to
the area travel networks is not adversely affected;
      5.   Adjacent property will not be landlocked by the site layout;
      6.   Other than to provide Emergency access, the Private Streets and
private alleys do not connect one public Street to another, in a manner
encouraging travel through the development served by the Private Street or
alley; provided, however, that in order to provide secondary access, a Private
Street or Alley may have more than one connection to a public Street and/or may
be connected to more than one public Street if access thereto is controlled by
automatic gates or other control devices approved by the City Council;
      7.   The use or alignment of the Private Streets or alleys do not
interfere with the continuity of public Streets;
      8.   An appropriate mechanism has been established for the repair and
maintenance of the Private Streets and alleys, including provisions for the
funding thereof; and
      9.   Private Streets shall provide access to no more than twenty percent
(20%) of the Lots within the area being platted.
   B.   Construction And Design Standards: Private Streets and private alleys
shall conform to the following construction and design requirements:
      1.   All Private Streets and private alleys shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the Ada County Highway District's design and
structural standards for Streets and alleys, unless specifically modified in
this Title or as may be amended by the City Council;
      2.   Sidewalks shall be required in accordance with this Title. However,
alternative sidewalk and landscape strip designs may be approved by the City
Council based upon a finding made by the Council that characteristics of the
development justify the alternate design;
      3.   All Private Streets shall contain paved travel lanes a minimum of
twelve feet (12') in width and private alleys shall contain paved travel lanes
a minimum of ten feet (10') in width. Private Streets shall provide for the
safe, convenient, and effective movement of both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. Private alleys shall provide for the safe, convenient, and effective
movement of vehicular traffic. Vertical curbing shall be provided for Private
Streets that are less than thirty-four feet (34') in width and private alleys
in accordance with subsection
11B-11D-3 of this Chapter;
      4.   The design Engineer shall identify on the construction drawings for
the review and approval by the City Engineer, all traffic Signs needed for the
project, including, but not limited to, designated parking and "no parking"
areas, speed, stop, and such other Signs as are required for safe pedestrian
and vehicle travel;
      5.   All Private Streets and private alleys shall, during the progress of
construction, be inspected and tested, at the expense of the Owner or
developer, by a qualified inspector in order to ensure compliance with the
construction and design standards set forth in this Chapter, the construction
drawings as prepared by the registered professional Engineer, and good
engineering and construction practices. Reports of such inspections and tests
shall be submitted, together with a certification of such compliance, for the
review and approval by the City Engineer;
      6.   All dead-end Private Streets and private alleys shall dead-end at
one of the following approved turnaround areas:
         a.   A Cul-De-Sac designed in accordance with the provisions of
Section
11B-11C-2-1-F of this Chapter and shall be subject to the approval of the Eagle
Fire Department and City Engineer;
         b.   A hammerhead/tee type turnaround or as may be otherwise approved
by the Eagle Fire Department and the City Engineer;
         c.   Such other turnaround area as may be approved by the Eagle Fire
Department, City Engineer, and City Council;
         d.   Private Streets and private alleys not exceeding one hundred and
fifty (150) feet may terminate with no turn-around if approved by Eagle Fire
Department; or
         e.   For private alleys, Emergency access/connections may be made
beyond the one hundred and fifty (150) feet maximum length allowing the
connection of a dead-end private Alley to an adjacent dead end Private Street
or private Alley utilizing materials such as concrete, pavers, grass pavers, or
other like materials deemed acceptable to support emergency vehicles and as
approved by City Council and Eagle Fire Department. Any Emergency access/
connections that direct emergency vehicles through a pedestrian space such as a
courtyard, plaza, pathway, or sidewalk shall be clearly signed to identify
through traffic access patterns for use by emergency vehicles only. Any private
Alley exceeding one hundred and fifty (150) feet shall provide an adequate
turnaround for service vehicles without the use of the Emergency access/
connection.
      7.   The design of all Private Streets and private alleys and related
Storm Drainage facilities shall be prepared by a licensed professional Engineer
in the State in Substantial Conformance with engineering and design standards
in effect at the time of preparation of the design. Construction drawings,
together with a certification of such conformity, shall be submitted for the
review and approval by the City Engineer. No part of this Chapter shall be
construed as allowing a Private Street or private Alley that are not in
conformance with current engineering and design standards;
      8.   If any provision of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with any
other applicable provision of this Chapter, the provision which establishes the
higher and/or more restrictive standard shall prevail, unless specifically
determined otherwise by the City Council;
      9.   Curb and gutter shall be required in accordance with subsection
11B-11D-4 of this Chapter;
      10.   For all private alleys providing fire apparatus access, the minimum
centerline radius and the interior radii shall be approved by Eagle Fire
Department. For all other private alleys, the minimum centerline radius and
interior radii shall follow good engineering practice and shall consider access
for service vehicles;
      11.   Private alleys may be allowed to serve as the sole means of
vehicular access to a residential dwelling in instances where a pedestrian
pathway within a common Lot or an easement is designed to provide secondary
access to the front of the residential dwelling; and
      12.   Where private alleys provide the sole means of vehicular access to
a residential dwelling, clear address wayfinding signage shall be located
throughout the Subdivision for use by Emergency Services and individual
Building addresses shall be included adjacent to each garage door within the
Alley or as approved by Eagle Fire Department.
   C.   Access And Maintenance Requirements: Provisions shall be made for the
future maintenance of and access to Private Streets and private alleys as
follows:
      1.   A plan and schedule for the future repair and maintenance of the
Private Street, private alley, and associated drainage facilities for the
period of the expected lifetime thereof and a cost estimate therefor prepared
by a licensed professional Engineer in the State, together with a proposed
method for funding the same, including, but not limited to, the creation and
maintenance of a reserve fund for that purpose, shall be submitted with the
Final Plat application for review and approval by the City Engineer and City
Council.
      2.   The location of Private Streets and private alleys shall be clearly
depicted on the face of the Plat and notes shall be included on the face of the
Final Plat which shall:
         a.   Act to convey to each Lot Owner within the Subdivision to be
served by the Private Streets or private alleys the perpetual right of ingress
and egress over the described Private Streets or private alleys;
         b.   Provide that such perpetual easement shall run with the land; and
         c.   Provide that the restrictive covenant for maintenance of the
Private Street or private alleys cannot be modified and the homeowners'/
property Owners' Association or other entity cannot be dissolved without the
express consent of the City.
      3.   A restrictive Covenant for repair and maintenance of the Private
Streets or private alleys shall be recorded at the time of recording the Final
Plat which said Covenant shall create a homeowners'/property Owners'
Association or substantially similar entity and make provision for the
perpetual maintenance of the Private Streets or private alleys in accordance
with the approved plans. Said restrictive Covenant shall also provide that the
said Covenant shall run with the land and that the said Covenant cannot be
modified and that the homeowners'/property Owners' Association or other entity
cannot be dissolved without the express consent of the City. The said
restrictive Covenant shall be reviewed and approved by the City attorney prior
to certification and signing of the Final Plat by the City Engineer.
      4.   The Council may, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion, order
the Owners or the entity responsible for the maintenance of any Private Streets
or private alleys approved in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter to
undertake such repair and maintenance activities as it may determine is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and make such
expenditures from the funds reserved therefor as may be required thereby; and
the Owner or responsible entity shall, as a condition of approval of any such
Private Street, be deemed to have agreed to comply with any such order and to
reimburse the City all of its costs, including attorney fees, incurred in
obtaining or enforcing any such order. Any order entered by the Council may be
enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction and the City shall be entitled to
recover its costs and attorney fees incurred in connection therewith.
   D.   Waiver: The City Council may waive or modify any of the enumerated
standards or requirements of this Section when the Private Street or private
Alley has been determined to be an integral element of the overall plan and
scheme of the development or will serve to enhance the overall development;
provided, however, that any such waiver shall not be injurious to public health
or safety.
   E.   Conflict: If any provision of this Chapter is found to be in conflict
with any other applicable provision of this Title, the provision which
establishes the higher and/or more restrictive standard shall prevail, unless
specifically determined otherwise by the City Council. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-3: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Right of way for pedestrian walkways in the middle of long Blocks may be
required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to
Schools, parks or shopping areas. The pedestrian easement shall be a minimum of
ten feet (10') wide. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Unobstructed utility easements, where required, shall be provided along
front lot lines, rear lot lines and/or side lot lines not to exceed the
required Setbacks.
   B.   Unobstructed Drainageway Easements shall be provided in conjunction
with the utility easement alongside lot lines or as required by the Council.
Total easement width, including the utility easement, shall not be less than
ten feet (10'), except that lesser easement widths, to coincide with respective
Setbacks, may be considered as part of the Plat.
   C.   All-natural drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or be improved
in a manner which will improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the
Channel. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-5: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and Reserve Strips shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Planting Strips/Buffer Areas: Planting strips/buffer areas shall be
required to be placed next to incompatible features such as Highways,
commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties
and to provide noise mitigation for those residents. Such planting strips/
buffer areas shall be as required by Chapter 3 of this Title. The landscape
strip/buffer area shall not be a part of the normal Street right of way and
shall comply with all landscape/buffer area requirements within Chapter 3 of
this Title.
   B.   Reserve Strips:
      1.   Private Reserve Strips: Privately held Reserve Strip access to
Streets shall be prohibited.
      2.   Public Reserve Strips: A one-foot (1') reserve may be required to be
placed along half Streets which are within the Subdivision boundaries and shall
be deeded in fee simple to the applicable Highway authority for future Street
widening. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-6: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and Open Spaces shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the Subdivision.
   B.   Open Space: The minimum amount of Open Space that must be set aside for
Open Space within Avimor shall be as follows: For every two (2) acres of
developed land within each Preliminary Plat (excluding Developed Open Space
areas), the Master Developer will place one (1) acre of unfragmented habitat
land, which may be owned and/or controlled by a third party. The Master
Developer has already set aside 640 acres of unfragmented habitat land adjacent
to the Avimor development area in a permanent conservation easement-400 acres
provide habitat mitigation for the entire Village One Area in accordance with
original Ada County approvals; 240 acres will offset developed acres in future
Preliminary Plats within Avimor. With each Preliminary Plat, the Master
Developer will designate Open Space areas that equal or exceed 20% of the
developed land within the Preliminary Plat. By full build out, Avimor will
include total Open Space areas that equal or exceed 50% of the Avimor acreage
overall. The 20% per Preliminary Plat and 50% overall Open Space requirements
may be satisfied with designated improved or unimproved Open Space areas within
Avimor together with all lands placed into a permanent Open Space.
   C.   Ownership And Management Of Open Space:
      1.   Ownership Of Open Space: The applicant must identify the Owner of
the Open Space who is responsible for maintaining the Open Space and facilities
located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the Owner, membership in the
association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the
Subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the Owner,
the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection
of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the Open Space and
any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the Owner.
      2.   Management Plan: Applicant shall submit a plan for management of
Developed Open Space and common facilities (plan) that:
         a.   Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and
operation of the Open Space and any facilities located thereon, including
provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long term capital Improvements;
         b.   Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for
maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the Developed Open Space and
outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided;
         c.   Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the Council;
and
         d.   Provides for enforcement of the plan.
      3.   Temporary Maintenance By City; Corrective Action: In the event the
party responsible for maintenance of the Developed Open Space fails to maintain
all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Eagle may
assume temporary responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises
and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance.
The costs of such maintenance shall be charged to the Owner, homeowners'
association, or to the individual property Owners that make up the homeowners'
association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs
shall become a lien on all Subdivision properties. The exercise by the City of
Eagle of its right to assume temporary maintenance responsibility to take
corrective action shall not relieve the property Owner of their maintenance
responsibility nor should it be construed as the City assuming permanent
responsibility for such maintenance. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-7: WATER SYSTEM:
The provision of a public water system shall conform to the following
standards:
   A.   All Subdivisions within the Eagle City water service area, shall comply
with Title 6, Chapter 5 of City Code except as provided in this Title, or the
Avimor Master Water and Pressure Irrigation System Plan. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11C-8: FENCES:
   A.   If any fencing is required, per the landscape plan, adjacent to
improved Open Spaces and on the Street side of all Corner Lots shall be an open
fencing style such as wrought iron or other similar decorative style, durable
fencing material as required in Chapter 3 of this Title. High maintenance and/
or unsightly fencing shall not be permitted per Chapter 3. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
ARTICLE D. REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11B-11D-1: Improvements Required
11B-11D-2: Monuments
11B-11D-3: Streets And Alleys
11B-11D-4: Curb And Gutter
11B-11D-5: Street Signs
11B-11D-6: Streetlights
11B-11D-7: Pathway And Trail Regulations
11B-11D-8: Underground Utilities
11B-11D-9: Water Supply And Sewer Systems
11B-11D-10: Storm Drainage; Flood Controls
11B-11D-11: Fire Hydrants And Water Mains
11B-11D-12: Landscape Buffer Areas
11B-11D-13: Construction Of Improvements
11B-11D-14: Construction Plans
11B-11D-15: Guarantee Of Improvements
11B-11D-16: Inspections
11B-11D-17: Failure To Complete Public Improvement Construction
11B-11D-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Every Subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
Improvements in accordance with the following conditions and specifications.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-2: MONUMENTS:
Monuments shall be set in accordance with Chapter 50-1303, Idaho Code. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-3: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
All public and Private Streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards and specifications adopted by the Local Highway Department
or the Idaho Transportation Department, whichever the case may be. (Ord. 895,
4-25-2023)
11B-11D-4: CURB AND GUTTER:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Vertical or Ribbon curb and gutter shall be constructed on collector
and Arterial Streets.
      2.   Rolled curb and gutter, or other treatments acceptable to the Local
Highway Department, may be required on minor Streets.
      3.   All construction shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Local Highway Department.
   B.   Driveways, Curb Cuts: All driveway openings and curbs shall be as
specified by the Local Highway Department. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-5: STREET SIGNS:
Street name Signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations at each
Street in accordance with the local standards. A per Street Sign fee shall be
paid by the Subdivider, if applicable. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-6: STREETLIGHTS:
The Master Developer or Subdividers within Avimor shall be required to install,
at the Master Developer's or Subdivider's expense, streetlights that are not
the obligation of the Local Highway Department in accordance with
specifications and standards set by Chapter 3 of this Title. After installation
and acceptance by the Administrator, the homeowners' association shall pay the
cost of maintenance and power and assume ownership of the streetlights that are
not the obligation of the Local Highway Department. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-7: PATHWAY AND TRAIL REGULATIONS:
Eagle City Ordinance No. 897 governing pathway and trail regulations, together
with Resolution 23-19 governing construction standards for pathways and trails
shall apply to property designated within the Avimor Planned Development Zoning
District (APD) to the extend it does not conflict with the provisions in this
Title.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023; amd. Ord. 895A, 7-25-2023)
11B-11D-8: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Underground utilities are required. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-9: WATER SUPPLY AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Construction; Extension: All public water supply or sewer systems
(serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be constructed in
accordance with any adopted local plans and specifications. If the Master
Developer is constructing a new public water supply system and a new sewer
system in Avimor, except within the Veolia Service Area, the City shall be the
exclusive municipal supplier of water to lands within Avimor. The City may
allow connection to the City-owned water system in Avimor if it is deemed to be
in the best interest of the City.
   B.   Approval Of Plans: All water and sewer plans shall be submitted to the
Idaho Department of Environmental Quality or its authorized agent for approval
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   C.   Pressurized Irrigation Facilities:
      1.   Irrigation water for all residential Dwelling Units shall be
provided with water from the municipal system or from available non-potable
water, as outlined herein.
         a.   Plans and documents shall be submitted with the application for a
Preliminary Plat in accordance with Section
11B-3-7-H of this Title.
      2.   Development areas that are not provided with a separate pressured
irrigation system shall be provided with a connection to potable or non-potable
water system with the approval of the City, City Engineer The following
standards shall apply to individual irrigation connections to the system.
         a.   The installation of a DEQ approved reduced pressure backflow
(RPB) prevention assembly or an air gap separating the irrigation system and
the potable water system will be required on the property side of the domestic
water meter.
         b.   The RPB prevention assembly shall be installed, owned, and
maintained by the property Owner. Failure to properly maintain the RPB will
result in a shutoff of water supply to the property until fully mitigated in
accordance with City shutoff policy.
         c.   The property Owner shall have the RPB inspected by an
appropriately licensed inspector and in accordance with State requirements
annually and shall provide the results of a passing inspection to the City.
Failure to complete the required inspection will result in a shutoff of water
service until completed.
         d.   Irrigation water may consist of a combination of potable or non-
potable water, treated effluent, and ground water as identified within the
Avimor Water and Pressure Irrigation System Study. All development which is
required to be served by a separate pressurized irrigation system must be
constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with this Chapter and in
accordance with the approved Avimor Master Water and Pressure Irrigation Plan
that may be amended from time to time. The Avimor irrigation system shall be
served by acquired water rights, surface water, or treated effluent in
accordance with the Avimor Master Water and Pressure Irrigation Plan that may
be amended from time to time. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-10: STORM DRAINAGE; FLOOD CONTROLS:
   A.   Adequate Storm Drainage System: An adequate Storm Drainage system to
accommodate storm water runoff from the public rights of way shall be required
in all Subdivisions. The requirements for each particular Subdivision shall be
established by the Local Highway Department and/or the Idaho Transportation
Department, and construction shall follow the specifications and procedures
established by said Local Highway Department or Idaho Transportation
Department.
   B.   Curb, Gutter And Pavement Design: Curb, gutter and pavement design
shall be such that water on roadways is prevented from flowing off the roadway
except as approved by the Local Highway District.
   C.   Natural Drainageway Treatment: Natural Drainageways shall be riprapped
or otherwise stabilized below Drainage and Culvert discharge points for a
distance sufficient to convey the discharge without Channel erosion.
   D.   Deposit Of Waste Material Prohibited: Waste material from construction,
including soil and other solid materials, shall not be deposited within the
100-year Floodplain.
   E.   Drainageways Or Hydraulic Structures In Major Waterways: Drainageways
or hydraulic structures in major waterways (defined as draining a basin area of
10 acres or more) shall be designed for the 100-year Flood or to accommodate
the runoff projected in the soil conservation service hydrology guide for
residential development of the Boise front, whichever is greater. In minor
waterways (defined as draining a basin area of less than 10 acres), such
structures shall be designed for the 50-year Flood or to accommodate the runoff
projected in the soil conservation service hydrology guide for residential
development of the Boise front, whichever is greater.
   F.   Storm Water Basins: Storm Water Basins consistent with the Avimor
Master Drainage Plan, shall be designed in connection with the Final Plat and
implemented with a flow control system that achieves the following objectives:
(1) minimize downstream impacts by not increasing pre-development flows from
land development activities; (2) accommodate pre-development flows from
upstream land by providing adequate conveyance facilities through the project
site; (3) designed in accordance with the Eagle Drainage Standards and
consistent with the Avimor Master Drainage Plan as approved by the City; and
(4) provide a mechanism to insure that all facilities shall be maintained on an
ongoing basis in order to perform as designed. As part of construction
drawings, a stormwater drainage plan shall be developed and approved by the
City Engineer that promotes each of these objectives.
   G.   Sediment Retention Facilities: These facilities shall be constructed
and maintained downstream from development consistent with best management
practices. Any such facility used shall provide for the removal of surface
debris and contaminants, as well as sediment retention.
   H.   Completion And Operation Deadline: The overall Drainage system shall be
completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during
construction.
   I.   Alterations Of Major Drainageways: Alterations of major Drainageways
shall be prohibited except for approved road crossings and Drainage structures
or as provided for in Chapter 3 of this Title.
   J.   Natural Or Improved Open Channel Drainageways: Natural or improved open
Channel Drainageways shall be preserved or provided for in major waterways;
except, that at road crossings, conduits may be permitted. Minor waterways
shall be permitted to be enclosed in conduits.
   K.   Reservation Of Right To Require: The City reserves the right to require
installation of hydrologic measuring devices in Drainageways within any
development at public expense.
   L.   Drainage System Plans: Drainage system plans and/or the construction
plans shall show how Lots will be graded so that all runoff runs either over
the curb, or to a Drainage easement, and that no runoff shall cross any Lot
line onto another Lot except within a Drainage easement. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-11: FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATER MAINS:
Adequate fire protection shall be required in accordance with the appropriate
fire department standards. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-12: LANDSCAPE BUFFER AREAS:
Landscape buffer areas, in accordance with Section
11B-3-7 this Title, shall be required for the protection of residential
properties from Streets classified as collectors, arterials, freeways/
expressways, waterways, or other features. Subdivision plats shall show the
location of all buffer areas. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-13: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Required Improvements are those Improvements subject to City regulation and
approvals as required in Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-14: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the Subdivider of every proposed Subdivision
to have prepared by a registered Engineer a complete set of construction plans,
including profiles, cross chapter, specifications and other supporting data,
for all required public Streets, utilities and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved
with the Preliminary Plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with the Final
Plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public
agencies and all construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
public agencies' standards or specifications. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-15: GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
In lieu of the actual installation of the "required Improvements" prior to the
City clerk signing the Final Plat, the Council may permit the Subdivider to
provide a surety/financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination of
the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond the
requirements of any other agency responsible for the administration, operation
and maintenance of the applicable public Improvement:
   A.   Cash Deposit, Certified Check, Certificate Of Deposit, or other method
accepted by the City of Eagle Or Surety Bond : A cash deposit, certified check,
certificate of deposit, Surety Bond, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit,
in the amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated
construction costs of the "required Improvements" contained within the Final
Plat or public Right-of-Way shall be provided by the Owner/Subdivider and held
by the City until said construction is complete. Construction cost estimates
for the "required Improvements" contained within a Final Plat or public right
of way shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrator prior to City
acceptance of said surety. The surety initiation and extension fees shall be
established by resolution of the Council.
   In the case of cash deposits or certified checks, the Subdivider may provide
for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the certified
check, to the extent of the cost of the completed portion of the "required
Improvement", in accordance with a previously entered into agreement. In the
case of a certificate of deposit or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, the
surety shall be reduced accordingly as construction of the "requirement
Improvements" subject to such surety is completed. Within thirty (30) days from
the City's approval of any such "required Improvement", the City shall release
such surety, in whole or part, as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
   B.   Completion Time: All required Improvements shall be completed within
one (1) year from the date of acceptance of the surety/financial guarantee of
performance by the City. The Administrator may authorize a delay in the
completion of the "required Improvements" if at a minimum, the surety is
extended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no final occupancy permit will be
issued for any residence or business, whichever is applicable, until the
sidewalk, sod, automatic irrigation, and street trees have been installed along
the frontage of the Lot that said residence/business is located upon. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-16: INSPECTIONS:
Before approving a Final Plat and construction plans and specifications for
"required Improvements", the City may require an agreement between the
Subdivider and the Council to provide for checking or inspecting the
construction and its conformity to the submitted plans. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11D-17: FAILURE TO COMPLETE PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION:
In the event the Subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work
within the period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for
the completion of "required Improvements", it shall be the responsibility of
the Council to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish
this, the Council shall appropriate the cash deposit, certified check, other
methods accepted by the City, and as may be included in a written agreement
between the Council and the Subdivider. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
ARTICLE E. SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11B-11E-1: Purpose And Summary Of Provisions
11B-11E-2: Supplementary Provisions
11B-11E-3: Hillside Subdivisions
11B-11E-4: Subdivision Within A Floodplain
11B-11E-5: Condominium Subdivisions
11B-11E-1: PURPOSE AND SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this Subchapter E is to identify types of subdivisions that
normally may pose special concerns. This Subchapter E outlines the plan
submittal requirements and design standards that shall be taken into
consideration when acting on Hillside Subdivisions, subdivisions within a
floodplain, and condominium subdivision. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11E-2: SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Subchapter E are in addition to the plan requirements,
design standards and Improvement standards that are required by Subchapters B,
C and D of Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11E-3: HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS:
All Hillside Subdivision developments in Avimor shall proceed in accordance
with the Avimor Grading Guidelines and Hillside Development Standards. (Ord.
895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11E-4: SUBDIVISION WITHIN A FLOODPLAIN:
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 11 of this Title, any Subdivision
within the designated Floodplain of the City shall comply with ECC Title 10.
(Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11E-5: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
Any person desiring to create a condominium Subdivision as defined by and in
accordance with Title 55, Chapter 15, Idaho Code shall submit all necessary
applications to the Administrator for review and approval. (Ord. 895, 4-25-
2023)
ARTICLE F. SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11B-11F-1: Administration
11B-11F-2: Vacations And Dedications
11B-11F-3: Variances
11B-11F-4: Enforcement And Penalties
11B-11F-5: Appeals
11B-11F-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The Council shall appoint an Administrator to carry out the provisions as
herein specified and to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Administrator
shall receive and process all Subdivision applications. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11F-2: VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Application For Vacation Or Dedication: Any property Owner desiring to
vacate an existing Subdivision, public right of way or easement shall complete
and file an application with the Administrator. These provisions shall not
apply to the widening of any Street that is shown in the Avimor Master Street
Plan or the Dedication of Streets, rights of way or Easements to be shown on a
recorded Subdivision.
   B.   Administrative Action:
      1.   Action By Administrator: Upon receipt of the completed application,
the Administrator shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon, shall
place the application on the agenda for consideration at the next regular
meeting of the Commission which is held not more than fifteen (15) days after
the date of acceptance.
      2.   Recommendation By Commission: The Commission shall review the
request and all agency responses and within thirty (30) days of the meeting at
which the issue was on the agenda, shall make a recommendation to the Council
for either approval, conditional approval or denial.
      3.   Action By Council:
         a.   Vacations: When considering an application for vacation
procedures, the Council shall establish a date for a public hearing and give
such public notice as required by law. The Council may approve, deny or modify
the application. Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated, the
Council shall provide adjacent property Owners with a quitclaim deed for the
vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
         b.   Dedications: When considering an application for Dedication
procedures, the Council may approve, deny or modify the application. When a
Dedication is approved, the required Street Improvements shall be constructed
or a bond furnished assuring the construction prior to acceptance of the
dedication. To complete the acceptance of any Dedication of land, the Owner
shall furnish to the Council a deed describing and conveying such lands to be
recorded with the County Recorder.
         c.   Decision: The Council shall review the request and all agency
responses and Commission recommendation, and within thirty (30) days of the
meeting at which the issue was on the agenda either approve, conditionally
approve or deny the request.
   C.   Dedication Of Streets: Within a proposed Subdivision, arterial and
Collector Streets, as shown on the applicable preliminary, shall be dedicated
to the public in all cases. In general, all other Streets also shall be
dedicated to public use and Emergency ingress and egress where Local Highway
Department is established. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11F-3: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The Commission may recommend to the Council a Variance from
the provisions of Chapter 11 of this Title on a finding that undue hardship
results from the strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements
hereof or that application of such provisions or requirements is impracticable.
   B.   Standards For Variances: No Variance shall be favorably acted upon by
the Council unless there is a finding, upon recommendation by the Commission,
as a result of a public hearing, that all of the following exist:
      1.   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property that the strict application of the provisions of Chapter 11 of this
Title would clearly be impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases, the
Subdivider shall first State his reasons in writing as to the specific
provision or requirement involved.
      2.   Strict compliance with the requirements of Chapter 11 of this Title
would result in extraordinary hardship to the Subdivider because of unusual
topography, other physical conditions or other such conditions which are not
self-inflicted, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the
achievement of the objectives of Chapter 11 of this Title.
      3.   The granting of the specified Variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the
property is situated.
      4.   Such Variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code.
      5.   Such Variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of Chapter 11 of this Title.
   C.   Variances For Signs:
      1.   Applicability: Sign Variances may be granted to the height and
display surface standards, to increase the number of allowed Signs, to allow
relocation of a Sign, and to allow structural alterations, or other design
items.
   D.   The Council may authorize, in specific cases, such Variance from the
terms of this Title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Title
would result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring
lands, structures or Buildings in the same district and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures or Buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for issuance of a Variance. Variances shall not be granted
on the grounds of convenience or profit, but only where strict application of
the provisions of this Title would result in unnecessary hardship.
   E.   Application And Standards For Variance: A Variance from the terms of
this Chapter shall not be granted by the Council unless and until a written
application for a Variance is submitted to the Administrator and the Council
containing:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of nature of Variance requested; and
      4.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested Variance
conforms to the following standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or Building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or Buildings in the same district;
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this Title;
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant or a previous Owner; and
         d.   That granting the Variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Title to other lands,
structures or Buildings. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
11B-11F-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement:
      1.   No Subdivision Plat required by Chapter 11 of this Title or the
Idaho Code shall be admitted to the public land records of the County or
recorded by the County Recorder until such Subdivision Plat has received final
approval of the Council.
      2.   No public board, agency, Commission, official or other authority
shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the construction of any of
the public Improvements required by Chapter 11 of this Title until the Final
Plat has received the approval by the Council.
      3.   No permits for construction of any structure shall be issued on any
Parcel or Lot until it has been determined such Parcel or Lot meets the
requirements of Chapter 11 of this Title. Except for Community Centers, Common
Lots, Pools, or any other construction having to do with Non-Dwelling Units, as
defined in Chapter 1 of this Title.
      4.   The City attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal
action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of Chapter
11 of this Title.
   B.   Violations And Penalties: Violations of any of the provisions of this
Title or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. The landowner, tenant, Subdivider, builder, public official or any
other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Council or any other public official or private
citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent
any violation of Chapter 11 of this Title or of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 895, 4-
25-2023)
11B-11F-5: APPEALS:
   A.   Final Decision Appeal: Any final decision by the Administrator may be
appealed to the Council. Within fourteen (14) days following the
Administrator's written decision the appealing party shall file a written
notice of appeal with the City clerk before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. or close
of business, whichever occurs later, specifically identifying which
requirements are appealed to the Council including all reasons, factual and
legal, why the decision of the Administrator should be overturned or modified.
   B.   Action By The Council: Within twenty (20) days from receipt of the
written notice of appeal, the Administrator shall set a hearing date for the
appeal to be heard by the Council. The Administrator and the City attorney
shall provide the appellant and the Council with a written response to the
notice of appeal, including any other documents filed by the appellant, at
least three (3) days prior to the appeal hearing. After hearing the appeal, the
Council may approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or deny the appeal
as presented. Within fourteen (14) days after a written decision has been
rendered by the Council, the Administrator shall provide the appellant with
written notice of the decision. (Ord. 895, 4-25-2023)
CITY CODE of
EAGLE, IDAHO
1985
Code current through:
Ord. 950, passed 7-22-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Eagle, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 950, passed July 22, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 954
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAGLE, ADA COUNTY IDAHO TITLE 4 “PUBLIC HEALTH AND
SAFETY” AMENDING CHAPTER 2 “GARBAGE AND RUBBISH”, ADDING A SEVERABLITY CLAUSE
AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, during the 2025 Idaho Legislative Session amendments were made to
Idaho State Code with the adoption of SB 1073 that negated the exclusivity
rights for solid waste franchise holders for containers that are temporary and
project-specific as defined by city ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Council desires to clearly define what temporary
project specific means in the City of Eagle to address the new legislation; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
EAGLE, ADA COUNTY, IDAHO:
Section 1: Title 4 Chapter 2 Section 1 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION is hereby
amended, in part to read as follows with underline text to be added and strike
through text to be deleted.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city,
acting in its governmental capacity, for the protection and preservation of the
health, welfare, morals, safety and cleanliness of the city and all of its
provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Customer from removing
garbage or rubbish from Customer’s own premises at any time provided such
removal does not create a public nuisance.
Section 2: Title 4 Chapter 2 Section 2 DEFINITIONS: is hereby amended, in part
to read as follows with underline text to be added and strike through text to
be deleted.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
SOLID WASTE: Solid waste means all materials discarded for disposal, including,
but not limited to: putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid waste,
garbage, trash, rubbish, demolition and construction waste, industrial waste,
vegetable solid and semisolid waste, dead animal remains in amounts not to
exceed ten (10) pounds, reusable or recyclable materials, bulky waste, and
other discarded matter.
TEMPORARY PROJECT-SPECIFIC: Temporary project-specific activity is defined as
an activity lasting occurring at a property for ninety (90) consecutive days or
less in duration, and limited once per calendar year. The temporary project-
specific activity generates solid waste and that necessitates a container of
ten (10) to forty (40) cubit yards in size, for collection and removal of such
waste or materials.
Section 3: Title 4 Chapter 2 Section 3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE STORAGE REGULATIONS:
is hereby amended, in part to read as follows with underline text to be added
and strike through text to be deleted.
Section 3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE REGULATIONS
   A.   Preparation Of Garbage: All garbage, before being deposited in the
receptacles required by this section, shall be drained of surplus liquids and
water.
   B.   Compulsory Use of Receptacle Requirements: Excluding individuals that
self-haul, all residential owners and/or occupants; all commercial owners and/
or occupants; and all persons undertaking, providing, or allowing the provision
of construction contractor or landscaper services; within the City of Eagle;
shall pay for, and shall be provided solid waste and recyclable materials
collection services by the franchisee, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter for temporary project-specific activity. Such services shall be
provided in the manner and by the means as may be established by the written
franchise agreement and all applicable City ordinances and resolutions. Each
such householder, head of a family, tenant or proprietor or operator shall
deposit all "garbage", "rubbish" and “solid waste” as defined in section 4-2-
2 of this chapter, accumulating upon such premises in such receptacles as fast
as the same accumulates.
C. Temporary Project-Specific Service: Any person may contract with a solid
waste collection provider of the person’s choosing for the use of solid waste
collection containers and collection services for a temporary project-specific
service, as such term is defined in this chapter. The following shall apply to
temporary project-specific service:
a.   The owner of a property on which a temporary project is occurring shall be
presumed to be responsible for carrying on or allowing the carrying on of
temporary project service.
b.   The owner of a property on which a temporary project is occurring shall
carry on or allow the carrying on of such temporary project for no longer than
ninety (90) days. If a project or undertaking is of a duration longer than
ninety (90) days, the owner shall utilize or require the person carrying on the
temporary project to utilize, solid waste collection services provided by the
City Franchisee.
c.   Entities providing solid waste collection services for temporary project-
specifics shall collect temporary project-specific waste at least once every
thirty (30) days, unless greater frequency is appropriate, at the City’s
discretion, considering protection of the environment and public health and
safety.
d.   One (1) temporary project-specific activity may occur per property per
calendar year.
e.   All temporary project-specific containers shall have clearly readable
identification, on at least two sides, using font at least two inches (2”) in
height, with the company name and an active phone number at which the entity
providing the container and/or collection services may be reached.
f.   No person shall use a temporary project-specific container to contain
household solid waste, prohibited waste, or putrescible waste (waste that can
decay and stink or become putrid).
g.   No person shall place solid waste not generated by the temporary project-
specific in a temporary project-specific container.
h.   Wheeled carts shall not be used as temporary project-specific containers.
   C.   Placement Of Receptacles: It shall be unlawful for any person to place
any receptacle containing, or designed or used for garbage or rubbish, upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, public place or open lot in the city except, only
where premises are not situated adjacent to an alley, the owner or occupant of
such premises may place receptacles containing garbage or rubbish upon the
sidewalk or street adjacent to such premises in such manner as not to interfere
with the free use of such sidewalk or street for an unreasonable period of
time.
   D.   Unauthorized Interference With Receptacle: It shall be unlawful for any
person, other than the city, its agents or employees, or a person holding a
permit or license for such purpose, or having a contract with the city for such
purpose, to interfere in any manner with any receptacle containing garbage or
rubbish, or any form of refuse, or to remove any such receptacle from the
location where the same was placed by the owner thereof, or to remove any of
the contents of such receptacle, excluding providers of temporary project-
specific services.
Section 4: Title 4 Chapter 2 Section 4 FRANCHISE REQUIRED: is hereby amended,
in part to read as follows with underline text to be added and strike through
text to be deleted.
4-2-4: FRANCHISE REQUIRED AND EXEMPTIONS:
 
A. Franchise Required: No person shall engage in the business of collecting,
gathering, hauling, conveying, or transporting garbage,  rubbish, solid waste
or recyclable materials upon the streets or alleys of the city without first
obtaining a franchise therefor from the city, except as provide in this
Chapter.
B. Exceptions: 1.   Self-Haul Residential: The owner or occupant of a residence
where solid waste is generated may collect, convey and dispose of such solid
waste without a franchise or license. The self-haul of solid waste shall not be
allowed to create a nuisance or litter.
2.   A civic, community, benevolent, or charitable nonprofit organization may
collect, convey, and/or market recyclable materials for recycling, for the
purpose of raising funds for that organization without a franchise, license, or
contract with the city, so long as the receptacle used for such purpose is
neither a franchisee owned wheeled cart or container, nor identical in volume
and design to a wheeled cart or container available from the franchisee.
3.   Self-Haul Construction or Landscaper: A construction contractor or
landscaper who produces incidental volumes of solid waste in the course of
construction, demolition, or landscaping may collect, convey, and dispose of
such solid waste from the premises upon which it was generated without a
franchise, license, or contract with the city, so long as the receptacle used
for such purpose is neither a franchisee owned wheeled cart or container, nor
identical in volume and design to a wheeled cart or container available from
the franchisee.
4.   Subject to this chapter, any person may contract with a solid waste
collection provider of the person’s choosing for the use of solid waste
collection containers and collection services for a temporary project-specific
activities.
Section 5: Title 4 Chapter 2 Section 6 FRANCHISE CONDITIONS: is hereby amended,
in part to read as follows with underline text to be added and strike through
text to be deleted.
B. Vehicle Construction And Condition: All vehicles used in collecting,
gathering, hauling, conveying, or transporting garbage or rubbish shall be
constructed in a manner that will prevent any portion of the garbage or rubbish
from leaking, spilling, falling, or blowing out of said vehicles onto any
highway, street, alley, or other public or private place. All vehicles shall be
equipped with watertight, leakproof bodies and provided with tightfitting
covers, which shall remain closed at all times except when actually depositing
garbage or rubbish in the conveyance or removing garbage or rubbish from it.
All vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and
shall be disinfected at regular intervals of not less than once every two (2)
weeks. All vehicles shall be subject to inspection at reasonable hours by
thethe City.
Section 6: Title 4 Chapter 2 Section 9 VIOLATION AND PENALTY: is hereby
amended, in part to read as follows with underline text to be added and strike
through text to be deleted.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
Section 7: The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable
and if any provision of this act or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration
shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of this ordinance.
 
Section 8: This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage, approval, and publication as required by law. In lieu of publication
of the entire ordinance, a summary thereof in compliance with Section 50-901A,
Idaho Code, may be published.
 
Approved and adopted this 26 day of August, 2025.
 
CITY OF EAGLE
Ada County, Idaho
 
 
                                                                             .
BRAD PIKE
MAYOR
 
                                                                             .
ATTEST:
TRACY E. OSBORN, CMC
CITY CLERK
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 957
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAGLE, ADA COUNTY, IDAHO, AMENDING TITLE 6, “PUBLIC
WAYS AND PROPERTY”, CHAPTER 5 “WATER SYSTEM”, SECTION 5 “APPLICATION FOR
SERVICE”, PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
WHEREAS, the City of Eagle, Idaho, is a municipal corporation organized and
operating under the laws of the State of Idaho; and
 
WHEREAS, the City of Eagle, Idaho, desires to change the method of refunding
water customer deposits; and
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
EAGLE, Ada County, Idaho;
 
Section 1: That Title 6, Chapter 5, Section 5 “Application for Service” be and
is hereby amended, in part, to read as follows with underline text to be added
and strike-through text to be deleted:
 
6-5-5: INITIATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Initiation of Service: To initiate water service the applicant shall
contact the city and provide the location of premises to be served, the date
applicant desires services to begin, purpose for which services are to be used,
the address for mailing of the billings and such other information as the water
department may reasonably require. With the request to initiate service the
applicant agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the water department.
The request for service does not bind the water department to provide service.
   B.   Deposits: A deposit will be included in the customer’s first water bill
for the establishment of water service. The deposit will be noted on the
customer’s account. The City will not pay interest on any deposits.
      1.   Deposit Requirements: With each application for water service to be
supplied through the water system of the city, there may be a deposit required
by the city clerk, or its designee, a sum in cash, the amount to be determined
by resolution of the city council upon the  passage of this chapter and
reviewed at least annually and updated by resolution of the council.
      2.   Deposit:
a) Application of Deposit: Deposits will be applied to the account after the
City has received twelve (12) consecutive on-time payments.
b) Discontinuation of Service: In the event the service is discontinued, the
deposit will be applied to the closing bill and any amount in excess of the
closing bill will be refunded to the account holder.  
 
Section 2: If any part of this ordinance shall be held unconstitutional or
void, such part shall be deemed separable, and its invalidity shall not affect
the remaining parts of the ordinance.
 
Section 3: The City Clerk is instructed to immediately forward this ordinance
to the codifier of the official municipal code for proper revision of the code.
 
Section 4: This ordinance, or a summary thereof in compliance with Idaho Code
§50-901A, shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City, and
shall be in full force and take effect immediately upon its passage, approval,
and publication.
 
 
Approved and adopted this 14 day of October, 2025.
 
CITY OF EAGLE
Ada County, Idaho
 
BRAD PIKE
MAYOR
 
ATTEST:
 
TRACY E. OSBORN
CITY CLERK
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 956
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING EAGLE CITY CODE, TITLE 8 “ZONING”, CHAPTER 8 “AREA OF
CITY IMPACT”, TO MODIFY THE EAGLE AREA OF IMPACT BOUNDARY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
IDAHO CODE 67-6526; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE
DATE.
 
WHEREAS, the City of Eagle, Idaho is a municipal corporation organized and
operating under the laws of the State of Idaho; and
 
WHEREAS, on December 17, 2008, the Ada County Board of County Commissioners
adopted Ordinance 718 which was the most recent county-approved impact area for
the City of Eagle;
 
WHEREAS, on September 15, 2025, the Eagle Planning and Zoning Commission held a
public hearing in accordance with Idaho Code 67-6509 and Eagle City Code
Section 8-7-8, and made a recommendation to the Mayor and Council to modify the
Eagle Area of Impact Boundary;
 
WHEREAS, on October 14, 2025, the Eagle City Council held a public hearing in
accordance with Idaho Code 67-6509 and Eagle City Code Section 8-7-8, to modify
the Eagle Area of Impact Boundary as shown on the attached map (Exhibit “A”);
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Eagle, Idaho as follows:
 
Section 1:   That Eagle City Code Chapter 8, be, and the same hereby is,
amended to read as follows with underline text to be added and strike-through
text to be deleted:
 
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
 
SECTION:
 
8-8-1 : Eagle Area Of City Impact Boundary
8-8-2 : Annexation To Occur Only In Area Of City Impact (Rep. by Ord. 444, 6-8-
2004)
8-8-3 : Applicable Plan Policies And Ordinances
8-8-4 : Amendment Of Plan Policies And Ordinances
8-8-5 : Zoning Within The Eagle City Area Of City Impact
8-8-6 : Renegotiation Of Plan Policies And Chapter Application Provisions
8-8-1: EAGLE AREA OF CITY IMPACT BOUNDARY:
   A.   The Eagle area of city impact is the area designated on the Eagle area
of city impact boundary map dated July 8, 2004 September 10, 2025, incorporated
herein by reference and as may be amended from time to time, copies of which
are available at the Eagle city hall and the Ada County development services
department.
   B.   In case a property under single ownership is divided by the boundary
line of the Eagle area of city impact, if such line divides such property so
that one or both of the parts has a depth of three hundred feet (300') or less,
such part may be included in the jurisdiction within which the remainder and
larger portion of the property is located.
   C.   The city shall not annex the land designated in ordinance 275.
 
8-8-2: ANNEXATION TO OCCUR ONLY IN AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
8-8-3: APPLICABLE PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   The Eagle comprehensive plan, as adopted and amended by the city on
September 14, 2004 November 14, 2017, by resolution 04-15 17-24, shall apply
within the Eagle area of city impact,. adopted on June 22, 2004, by ordinance
475 and as may be amended from time to time. Subsequent amendments to the
aforesaid Eagle comprehensive plan shall apply within the Eagle area of city
impact if the city and the county so agree.
   B.   The Ada County comprehensive plan, as adopted by Ada County on June 17,
1996, by resolution 882, and hereby amended, shall apply within that part of
the amended Eagle area of city impact identified in ordinance 475 separate from
the Eagle area of impact identified in ordinance 461.
   CB.   Applications for subdivision development in the Eagle area of city
impact shall be evaluated for conformance to the design and improvement
standards contained in title 9, chapter 3, and sections 9-4-1 through 9-4-1-
12 of this code.
   DC.   All subdivision plats situated within the area of city impact shall be
submitted to the city for their recommendation.
   ED.   The Ada County zoning ordinance shall be used to implement this
chapter.
   F.   The following additional standards shall be used to ensure
compatibility between the Eagle comprehensive plan and the Ada County zoning
ordinance:
      1.   "Density" shall be defined as the ratio of the total number of
dwelling units within a development divided by the total area. Fractional
densities which are greater than the density shown on the corresponding
comprehensive plan land use map designation will not be allowed. Floodway areas
and lands used for public uses such as schools and public service facilities
shall be excluded from the total land area used for calculating residential
densities. 
E. Applications for conditional use permits, master site plans, master site
plan modifications, private streets, parcel divisions/one time divisions,
expansions or extensions of nonconforming uses, planned unit developments,
subdivisions, and rezones within the Eagle area of impact shall occur as a
result of a request for annexation to the city of Eagle; however, Ada County
may consider such applications in those exceptions where annexation is not
approved by the city of Eagle or where the parcel on which such application is
filed is not contiguous to the city of Eagle, and therefore cannot be annexed.
 
8-8-4: AMENDMENT OF PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   All applications to Ada County (the "county") or to the city for
amendments to their respective comprehensive plans and implementing ordinances
which apply within the Eagle area of city impact shall be sent by the entity
receiving such application to the other entity. A separate referral process
shall be adopted by resolution by each entity, regarding procedures and time
period for, and the effect of, sending such amendments, and such resolution may
be amended from time to time upon mutual agreement in writing by the county and
the city.
   
B.   All county applications for planned developments, subdivisions, rezones
and conditional use permits within the Eagle area of city impact shall be sent
to the city of Eagle, in accordance with the referral process established
pursuant to subsection A of this section.
 
8-8-5: ZONING WITHIN THE EAGLE CITY AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   A.   County zoning districts shall be in accordance with the adopted plan
policies identified in section 8-8-3 of this chapter.
8-8-6: RENEGOTIATION OF PLAN POLICIES AND CHAPTER APPLICATION PROVISIONS:
   A.   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), the city of Eagle or
the board of Ada County commissioners may request, in writing, the
renegotiation of any provision of this chapter at any time. Within thirty (30)
days of receipt of such written request by either party, a meeting between the
two (2) jurisdictions shall occur.
   B.   While renegotiation is occurring, all provisions of this chapter shall
remain in effect until this chapter is amended or a substitute ordinance is
adopted by the city of Eagle and Ada County, in accordance with the notice and
hearing procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, or until a
declaratory judgment from the district court is final. Provided, however, that
this chapter or stipulated portions thereof shall be of no further force and
effect if both jurisdictions so agree by mutually adopted resolution.
 
Section 2: The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable
and if any provision of this act or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration
shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of this ordinance.
 
Section 3: That this ordinance, or a summary thereof in compliance with Section
50-901A, Idaho Code, shall be published once in the official newspaper of the
City, and shall take effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and
publication.
 
DATED THIS 14 th day of October, 2025.
 
CITY OF EAGLE
Ada County, Idaho
 
__________________________________
BRAD PIKE,
MAYOR
 
ATTEST:
 
                                                                    .
TRACY OSBORN,
CITY CLERK
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 103
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE CITY CODE OF EAGLE, IDAHO
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Eagle, Idaho, an
Idaho Municipal Corporation:
   Section 1. CITY CODE TO BE ACCEPTED BY COURTS. From and after the date of
passage of this Ordinance, the City Code of the City of Eagle, Idaho, prepared
by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a
general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the
direction of the governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts of
the State of Idaho without question as the Official Code and Law of the City as
enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2. ADOPTION OF CITY CODE AND SUPPLEMENTATION -- MAINTENANCE OF
OFFICIAL, CERTIFIED COPIES. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual
codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous
supplement service, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and
permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of the
Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the
proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies of which shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3. CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED ORDINANCES. All ordinances of
a general nature included in this Official City Code shall be considered as a
continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have
been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any
interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said
Official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy
ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation
ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed
or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to
be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4. ALTERATION OR TAMPERING WITH CITY CODE -- PENALTY.
   (a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or
amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert
or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented
thereby.
   (b) Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished
as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of Eagle, Idaho.
   Section 5. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby
repealed.
   Section 6. SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable and if any provisions of this Ordinance or the
application of such provision to any person or circumstance is declared invalid
for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance.
   Section 7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall become effective upon its
passage, approval and publication in the manner provided by law.
   PASSED by the City Council and APPROVED by the Mayor this fourteenth day of
February, 1986.
                         
   CAROL HALEY
   Mayor
ATTEST:                                            
      BARBARA MONTGOMERY
      City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official code of Eagle. This code of ordinances shall
be known and cited as the EAGLE CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by
authority of the city council and shall be kept up to date as provided in
section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the city clerk, acting for said
city council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title
in any legal document. (1985 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1985 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(1985 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain this code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(1985 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1985 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as
this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this code
shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only. (1985 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to
the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as practicable.
If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
   B.   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1985 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Interpretation; Rules Of Construction
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-1: INTERPRETATION; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   In the construction of this code and all ordinances amendatory hereof
or supplementary hereto the following rules shall be observed unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council
or repugnant to the context of the ordinance:
      1.   Intent To Defraud: Whenever, by any of the provisions of this code,
an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it is
sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person, association or body
politic, or any combination of persons. (Ord. 7)
      2.   Authority Of Licensee; Boards And Officers: Words prohibiting
anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority
from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such board or officer
power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be done. (Ord. 1, 5-24-
1971)
      3.   Catchlines: The catchlines of the several sections of this code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern,
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines,
are amended or reenacted.
   B.   Whenever any word in any sections of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The word "ordinance"
contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this
code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection" or words of like
import for organizational and clarification purposes only. (1985 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Unless more specifically defined elsewhere in this code, whenever the following
words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BUSINESS DAY: A working day, as further defined in this section.
CITY: The city of Eagle, county of Ada, state of Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Eagle.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Eagle.
DAY: A calendar day.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Eagle".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act
or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: When a crime punishable by imprisonment in the state prison is
also punishable by fine or imprisonment in a county jail, in the discretion of
the court, it shall be deemed a misdemeanor for all purposes after a judgment
imposing a punishment other than imprisonment in the state prison.
Whenever the words "misdemeanor", "petty misdemeanor" or "violation" are used
in this code, these terms or any of them shall be construed to mean misdemeanor
and shall be punished, unless otherwise provided, in section
1-4-1 of this code.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT AND NEGLIGENTLY: These terms import a want of
such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as
a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICER: Shall include officers and boards in charge of departments and members
of such boards. The word "clerk", "treasurer", or other such title shall mean
city clerk, city treasurer, or other city officer as the use may be applicable.
Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this
shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of Eagle".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANTS: As applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to person who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WORKING DAY: A calendar day, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and City-recognized
holidays.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark.
(Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 946, 2-11-2025)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Intent To Defraud
1-4-4: Liability For Penalties
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section
or provision of this code, without regard to the form of the judgment, shall be
subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to but not exceeding the maximum
penalties set forth in sections 18-113 and 50-302, Idaho Code, as may from time
to time be amended and/or retitled. Either or both such fine and imprisonment
may be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay
costs as the court may assess. (Ord. 703, 9-24-2013)
   B.   Infraction Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section
or provision of this code when such offense is specifically designated as an
infraction, and where no other penalty is set forth therein, shall be subject
to fine as set forth in section 18-113A, Idaho Code, as may from time to time
be amended and/or retitled. For a first offense the infraction penalty shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00). For a second offense within a one (1) year period from
the date of conviction, the penalty shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). For
a third and subsequent offense(s) within a one (1) year period from the date of
initial conviction, the penalty shall be a misdemeanor violation as specified
within Section
1-4-1 (A) of this code.
      1.   Failure To Appear On Citation Or Summons: If the defendant fails to
appear before the clerk and/or court at or before the time stated in an
infraction citation or summons, the court shall enter default judgment against
the defendant for the infraction as provided by law without giving further
notice to the defendant.
      2.   Failure To Appear After First Appearance: If a defendant fails to
appear at the time fixed by a trial date notice or continuance notice served on
the defendant as provided by law, the court shall enter default judgment
against the defendant for the infraction without giving further notice to the
defendant.
      3.   Notice Of Default Judgment: If a default judgment is entered against
a defendant for an infraction pursuant to law, the clerk shall mail a notice of
judgment to the defendant at the address stated in the citation advising the
defendant that the defendant must pay the judgment by a date certain which
shall not be less than fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice. Where
applicable, the notice shall state that failure to pay the judgment will result
in suspension of his/her driver's license. (Ord. 727, 10-14-2014)
   C.   Failure To Obey Citation For Misdemeanor Or Infraction:
      1.   In addition to the aforementioned penalties provided herein, it
shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court at the time
promised on a misdemeanor or infraction citation or to fail to appear at the
time indicated on a misdemeanor or infraction citation served upon the
defendant or to fail to appear at the time indicated on a misdemeanor or
infraction summons served upon the defendant, regardless of the disposition of
the underlying charge upon which such citation or summons was originally
issued.
      2.   The duty to appear in court at the time indicated in a misdemeanor
or infraction citation or summons may be complied with by an appearance by
counsel in the manner prescribed by rule of the supreme court.
      3.   Violation of the provisions of this subsection C shall be a
misdemeanor.
   D.   Federally Mandated Programs: When this city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses as set forth in section 50-302, Idaho Code,
as may from time to time be amended and/or retitled.
   E.   License: When a person is convicted or found guilty of a violation of
any section or provision of this code or any ordinance of the city, any license
previously issued to him/her by the city, and directly related to the
conviction, may be revoked by the court or by the city council. (Ord. 703, 9-
24-2013; amd. Ord. 851, 9-14-2021)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalties provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Where no other penalty is specifically set forth therein, any
person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where a duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this chapter. Whether misdemeanor or infraction, a separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code. (Ord. 695, 5-14-2013)
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the city attorney may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same
person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any
act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there
shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 7)
1-4-3: INTENT TO DEFRAUD:
Whenever by any of the provisions of this code an intent to defraud is required
in order to constitute any offense, it is sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person, association or body politic or corporate whatsoever. (Ord.
7)
1-4-4: LIABILITY FOR PENALTIES:
   A.   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of this code
prohibit the commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited thing or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned or aiding or abetting therein, shall be guilty
of the offense described and liable to the penalty prescribed for the offense.
(Ord. 7)
   B.   Liability Of Officers And Employees: No provision of this code
designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to
make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a
failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the city council to impose
such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly
expressed in the section creating the duty. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election, Term Of Office, Vacancies
1-5-2: Meetings Of The Council
1-5-3: Salaries
1-5-4: Mayor
1-5-5: Duties Of Council Members
1-5-6: Passage And Veto Of Ordinances
1-5-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
   A.   Qualification, Terms, Installation 1 : Any person shall be eligible to
hold Office of Council person of the City who is at the time of election, and
remains a qualified elector under the Constitution and laws of the State. Each
Council person elected at a general City election, except as otherwise
specifically provided, shall hold office for a term of four (4) years, and
until his/her successor is elected and qualified. Council persons elected at
each general City election shall be installed at the first meeting in January
following election. The manner of conducting that meeting shall be as herein
set forth and not otherwise: the incumbents shall meet and conduct such
business as may be necessary to conclude the fiscal matters of the preceding
year; the newly elected shall then subscribe to the oath of office, be
presented certificates of election, assume the duties of their position, and
conduct such business as may be necessary, one item of which shall be the
election of a member as President of the Council.
   B.   Vacancies, Appointment 2 : A vacancy on the Council shall be filled by
appointment made by the Mayor, with the consent of the Council, which appointee
shall serve only until the next general City election, at which such vacancy
shall be filled for the balance of the original term. (1985 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-702.
2 2. IC § 50-704.
1-5-2: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
   A.   Time And Place: The time and place of the regular Council meetings
shall be held at the Eagle City Hall on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each
month, at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. of said day. (Ord. 758, 10-11-2016)
   B.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the
public, except as provided in Idaho Code section 67-2345 et seq. (Ord. 129, 1-
12-1988)
1-5-3: SALARIES:
Commencing January 1, 2026 the annual salaries of the Mayor, and the City
Council shall be as follows:
   A.   Mayor: The Mayor shall receive an annual salary in the sum of ninety-
six thousand and forty-three dollars ($96,043.00).
   B.   Council Members: Each member of Council shall receive an annual salary
in the sum of sixteen thousand seven hundred ninety-three dollars ($16,793.00).
(Ord. 814, 6-11-2019, eff. 1-1-2020; amd. Ord. 901, 8-8-2023, eff. 1-1- 2024;
Ord. 950, 7-22-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
1-5-4: MAYOR:
   A.   Power And Duties:
      1.   Work Hours: The efficient and faithful discharge of the duties of
the Office of Mayor shall be a full time elected position.
      2.   Chief Administrator: The Mayor shall be the chief administrative
official of the City, preside over the meetings of the City Council, work
collaboratively with the City Council President, or Pro Tem to set the City
Council meeting agenda and determine the order of business subject to such
rules as the council may prescribe, have a vote only when the council is
equally divided, have the superintending control of all of the officers and
affairs of the city, preserve order, and take care that the ordinances of the
city, and the provisions of the Idaho state law governing municipal
corporations are complied with.
      3.   Special Meetings: The mayor shall have the power to call special
meetings of the city council; the call and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the city clerk. One-half (1/2)
plus one of the members of the full council shall also have the power to call
special meetings of the city council; the call and object, as well as the
disposition thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the city clerk.
      4.   Communication With City Council: The mayor shall, from time to time,
communicate to the city council such information and recommend such measures
as, in the mayor's opinion, may tend to the improvement of the finances, the
protection, the health, the security, the ornament, the comfort and the general
welfare and prosperity of the city.
      5.   Membership On Committees And Commissions: The mayor shall be an ex
officio member of all committees and commissions existing under this code.
      6.   Complaints: The mayor shall examine the grounds of all complaints
against any of the officers of the city to determine existence of a violation
or neglect of duty and report the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for
the removal of said officer, to the council.
      7.   Officer's Expiration Of Term, Resignation Or Removal: The mayor
shall require that every officer, on the expiration of his/her term of office
or resignation or removal from the same, deliver to his/her successor all
monies, books, paper, maps, plats, furniture, fixtures, apparatus, machinery,
tools and instruments and appurtenances belonging to the city.
      8.   To Sign Contracts, Borrow Money: The mayor is authorized and
empowered to sign his/her name officially for and on behalf of the city on all
contracts including deeds, bonds, bills, notes, obligations and other
agreements, documents and papers to which the city is a party, and to require
that the conditions in the said instruments are faithfully performed, and to
borrow money on the credit of the city when authorized by the council.
      9.   Accounts And Reports Of Officers: The mayor shall have the power,
when s/he deems it necessary, to require any officer of the city to exhibit
his/her accounts or other papers and to make reports to the council in writing,
touching any subject or matter s/he may require pertaining to his/her office.
      10.   May Require Aid: The mayor is hereby authorized to call on every
male inhabitant in the city over eighteen (18) years of age and under the age
of fifty (50) years, to aid in enforcing the laws.
      11.   Additional Powers: The mayor shall perform all of the duties
required of mayors under the provisions of chapters 3 and 6, title 50, Idaho
Code, and such other duties as may be reasonably required by the city council
of the city.
   B.   Police Powers, Jurisdiction 1 : The mayor shall have such jurisdiction
as may be vested in him/her by ordinance over all places within five (5) miles
of the corporate limits of the city, for the enforcement of any health or
quarantine ordinance and regulation thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all
matters vested in him/her by ordinance, except taxation, within one mile of the
corporate limits of the city and over such properties as may be owned by the
city without the corporate limits.
   C.   Term Of Office: The term of the mayor of the city shall be four (4)
years. (Ord. 525, 8-16-2005; amd. Ord. 914, 12-12-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-606.
1-5-5: DUTIES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
   A.   The City Council President, or Pro Tem in their absence, shall review
and approve all City Council meeting agendas in collaboration with the Mayor.
   B.   The members of the city council, the legislative and policy making
branch of the government of the city, shall devote so much of their time to the
duties of their office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may
require. They shall attend all meetings of the council unless lawfully excused
therefrom, and perform all duties by the nature of their office they should
reasonably perform such as the passing of ordinances, resolutions and the
overseeing of improvements and work done for the city according to the
character of committees upon which they may severally be appointed. (Ord. 7;
amd. Ord. 914, 12-12-2023)
1-5-6: PASSAGE AND VETO OF ORDINANCES:
The mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the city
council; provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the mayor may be passed over
his/her veto by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the council
elected notwithstanding the veto, and should the mayor neglect or refuse to
sign any ordinances and return the same with his/her objection, in writing, at
the next regular meeting of the council, the same shall become a law without
his signature. (Ord. 7; amd. 1985 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Appointment Of Officers
1-6-2: Terms Of Office, Removal
1-6-3: Bonds
1-6-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
   A.   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a City
Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, City Engineer, Police Chief, department
supervisors and any other officers and supervisors as may be deemed necessary
by the Council for the efficient operation of the City.
   B.   The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall make
appointments to all City offices now existing in the City which have not been
in this chapter specifically named and which may be hereafter created from time
to time by the City Council.
   C.   The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint
and duly swear in a Code Enforcement Officer granting such officer the
authority to issue criminal citations for violations of this Code.
   D.   Mayor’s Office Appointees: The Mayor, with the consent of the Council,
may appoint up to three (3) auxiliary positions to assist the Mayor. (Ord. 557,
9-12-2006; amd. Ord. 773, 3-28-2017; Ord. 837, 12-8-2020; Ord. 913, 12-12-2023)
1-6-2: TERMS OF OFFICE, REMOVAL:
All appointive officers, department supervisors, and all employees covered in
subsection
1-6-1(D) shall hold office for the term for which they were appointed and
qualified if a term is enumerated; provided, that any appointive officer or
department supervisor may at any time be removed by the action of the Mayor for
any reason deemed sufficient, but such removal shall be by and with the
affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the Council
holding office, or if there is a vacancy in the Council, by a majority of those
Council Members holding office; provided that the Council, by unanimous vote of
all of its members may, upon their own initiative, remove any appointive
officer or department supervisor. If an appointive officer or department
supervisor has entered into an employment or similar professional services
agreement with the City that sets forth the method of termination of said
agreement, said agreement shall be followed in lieu of this section. Nothing in
this section waives any benefits or obligations an appointive officer,
department supervisor, or the City may have in the Personnel Policy Manual
except to define the method of termination. (Ord. 591, 11-20-2007; amd. Ord.
837, 12-8-2020; Ord. 913, 12-12-2023)
1-6-3: BONDS:
In the event the several offices herein named are not covered under the City's
public entity multiline insurance policy's errors and emissions liability, then
the several offices herein named shall give bonds to the City with two (2) or
more sufficient sureties in the penal sums as follows; provided, an officials
bond may be furnished at the expense of the City in lieu of personal bonds:
 
City Clerk         $50,000.00
City Treasurer     50,000.00
Deputy City Clerk  50,000.00
 
(Ord. 418, 3-12-2002)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Duties
1-6A-1: DUTIES:
In addition to those duties set forth in section 50-207, Idaho Code, and this
code, the city clerk shall have the following duties:
   A.   Custodian Of Seal And City Records: The city clerk shall be custodian
of the city seal and affix the same to documents as provided in section
1-11-1 of this title. The city clerk shall also be the custodian of all public
records, ordinances, resolutions and orders of the city council, and such other
papers and documents as may be delivered into his/her custody.
   B.   Attend Council Meetings, Ordinance Duties: The city clerk shall attend
all sessions of the city council, keep a correct journal, and shall keep in a
separate book a record of ordinances passed by the city council and of the
titles of such ordinances. All ordinances not published in a book form shall be
carefully indexed alphabetically. The city clerk shall see that each ordinance
is published as required by law, and he or she shall keep on file the proof of
such publication.
   C.   Reports:
      1.   Monthly Report: The city clerk shall prepare and present to the city
council at its regular meeting each month a full and complete statement of the
financial transactions of his office during the month preceding, which said
statement shall set forth all receipts for licenses issued; money received with
applications for licenses which are to come before the city council; and all
other funds received by him or her as city clerk. Said report shall give a
detailed explanation of disbursements, including a statement of the aggregate
of warrants of each fund issued, of warrants redeemed during the month and
warrants outstanding against each fund at the close of each month.
      2.   Annual Report: The city clerk shall also, at the close of each
fiscal year, present to the city council an annual report covering the
operations for the entire year, which said report shall also contain a
description of the bonds issued and sold during the year, and the terms of
sale; and shall itemize each and every expense thereof.
      3.   Additional Reports: The city clerk shall also make such additional
reports and furnish such other data from the records and files of his/her
office as may be requested by the mayor or city council.
   D.   Books, Records And Warrants: The city clerk shall keep such books and
permanent records of the transactions and business of his/her office as may be
necessary to accurately disclose all transactions and business of his/her
office. S/he shall also countersign all warrants and keep a "Warrant Register
and Abstract of Expenditures" showing the numbers and amounts of warrants
issued and the person to whom issued, the date redeemed, the interest paid, and
the several funds against which each of said warrants is drawn.
   E.   Claims Against City: The city clerk shall file and audit all claims
against the city and shall submit the same to the council at the next regular
meeting or when ordered by the council to do so.
   F.   Issue Licenses: The city clerk shall issue all licenses, a duplicate of
which shall be kept on file, but no license shall be issued to any person
unless fees and charges fixed by ordinance shall have first been paid, for
which payment the city clerk shall issue a receipt in duplicate. The city clerk
shall endorse upon the receipt and duplicate receipt the number of the license
issued and the number of the application for license. The duplicate of such
receipt so issued shall be kept on file with the duplicate license.
   G.   Bonds: The city clerk shall keep a record of outstanding bonds of the
city showing the number and amount of each and for what and to whom said bonds
were issued, and when any of said bonds are purchased or paid or canceled, said
records shall show the fact, and in his/her report at the close of each fiscal
year s/he shall describe particularly the bonds issued and sold during the year
and the terms of sale and shall itemize each and every expense thereof.
   H.   Turn Money Over To City Treasurer: Within ten (10) days after the
filing of his/her monthly report as provided in subsection C of this section,
the city clerk shall deposit with the city treasurer all funds collected by
him/her during the preceding month, less refunds of money paid on application
for licenses which are disallowed by the city council. (Ord. 7)
   I.   Copies Of City Records, Fee 1 : It shall be the duty of the city clerk
to furnish any city officer with a certified copy of any record, paper or
public document on file in his/her office, or in his/her custody, for the use
of such officer in the discharge of his/her official duties, and s/he shall
also furnish a certified copy of any such record, paper or document to any
person not an officer of the city upon the payment in advance of reasonable
copying charges as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 7; amd.
1985 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-8-5 of this title.
ARTICLE B. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Duties
1-6B-1: DUTIES:
In addition to specific duties set forth in section 50-204, Idaho Code, and
this code, it shall be the duty of the city attorney:
   A.   To prosecute and defend in all courts all actions on behalf of the city
on account of official acts;
   B.   To take appeals or sue outright of error on behalf of the city or any
office aforesaid, with the consent and approval of the mayor, and make the
necessary bonds in the name of the city;
   C.   To advise the city council, or its committees, or any city officer, on
such legal questions as may arise in relation to the business of the city;
   D.   To attend the meetings of the city council; and
   E.   Having personal knowledge of the violation of any city ordinance or
upon receiving the reliable information of any such violation, to institute the
necessary steps to pursue the matter criminally or civilly on behalf of the
city. (Ord. 7; amd. 1985 Code)
ARTICLE C. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-6C-1: Duties
1-6C-1: DUTIES:
In addition to the duties set forth in sections 50-208 and 50-1011, Idaho Code,
and this code, the city treasurer shall have the following duties:
   A.   Collect And Deposit Funds:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to receive and safely
keep in designated depositories 1  as required by law, all monies or funds
belonging to the city which may come into his/her hands and to disburse the
same upon an appropriation by ordinance or resolution of the city council after
audit and allowance by the council of claims therefor and upon warrant of the
mayor, countersigned by the city clerk, and not otherwise. Securities belonging
to the city, incapable of deposit in a checking account, shall be kept by the
city treasurer in a safety deposit box in some banking institution designated
by the city council. All bonds or securities delivered to the city treasurer by
a designated depository of city funds as security for such funds shall be
deposited with the county auditor or other public official as may be provided
by law.
      2.   The city treasurer shall receive and all officers or other persons
shall forthwith pay to the city treasurer, except as otherwise provided by
ordinance, all monies due the city on any account whatsoever.
   B.   Receipts For Money Received: The city treasurer shall execute and
deliver to every city officer or other person paying money or funds, other than
water rentals, into the treasury, a receipt therefor, specifying the date of
payment, the amount thereof and upon what fund or account the same is received.
The city treasurer shall issue such receipts from blank books, which books
shall contain a duplicate of the receipt delivered to the person making
payment, and such duplicate shall be delivered to the city clerk.
   C.   Books And Accounts: The city treasurer shall keep in suitable book or
books, a full and accurate account of city monies and funds received by him/
her, showing the date of the receipt thereof, the person from whom received and
on what account and to what fund the same is credited, with the date of
disbursement, the person to whom disbursed, on what account and against what
fund.
   D.   Delivery Of Warrants And Paid Vouchers: All warrants or orders paid and
redeemed and all vouchers shall be delivered to the city clerk immediately upon
payment or redemption and such redeemed warrants shall have written or stamped
on the face thereof the word "Paid".
   E.   Reports To Council: The city treasurer shall, at the end of each and
every month and at other times when required by the mayor or city council,
render an account under oath, showing the condition of the treasury at the date
of such account, including in said statement the balance of money in the
treasury with a detailed statement of the specified amount in each designated
depository and of the amount and class of security held to guarantee each
deposit. Such account shall also contain a statement of receipts and
disbursements and of all warrants redeemed and paid by him/her, which said
warrants, with all vouchers held by him/her, shall be filed with his/her said
accounts in the clerk's office. The mayor or any member of the city council
shall have free access to any and all books or papers in the office of the city
treasurer for the purpose of inspection or examination. (Ord. 7)
   F.   Publication Of Quarterly Reports: It shall be the duty of the city
treasurer to cause to be published for at least one insertion in the official
newspaper of the city of Eagle 2  during the months of January, April, July and
October of each and every year, a full statement of the receipts and
expenditures of the city, giving the source from whence received, to what
purpose applied and to whom paid. (Ord. 311, 11-12-1997)
   G.   Books And Papers To Successors: The city treasurer shall deliver to
his/her successor in office all books, monies, papers and other property
pertaining to his/her office. (Ord. 7)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-1 of this title.
2 1. See section
  1-11-2 of this title.
ARTICLE D. DEPUTY CITY CLERK/TREASURER
SECTION:
1-6D-1: Appointment
1-6D-2: Duties
1-6D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor, with consent of the city council, may appoint a deputy city clerk/
treasurer and a senior deputy city clerk/treasurer. (Ord. 582, 9-18-2007)
1-6D-2: DUTIES:
The mayor and/or city clerk are hereby authorized to swear in a deputy city
clerk/treasurer and senior deputy city clerk/treasurer to perform, during the
absences of the city clerk/treasurer, those duties of the city clerk/treasurer
as the mayor or city clerk/treasurer directs him/her to perform. (Ord. 582, 9-
18-2007)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Authorized Depositories For City Funds
1-7-2: Claims Against City
1-7-3: Warrants
1-7-4: Fee Schedule For Land Use Planning Actions
1-7-5: Fee Schedule For City Fees
1-7-1: AUTHORIZED DEPOSITORIES FOR CITY FUNDS:
   A.   Designation: Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-1013, the City
Treasurer is hereby ordered, required and directed to keep monies belonging to
or in the care of the City in the following depositories: any federally insured
banking institution located within the City Limits of the City of Eagle or the
Idaho State Treasurer’s Office (Local Government Investment Pool) as so
authorized by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
   B.   Depository Collateralization: Any federally insured banking institution
chosen by the City shall fully collateralize all amounts over the established
FDIC limit. (Ord. 7; amd. Ord. 894, 1-24-2023)
1-7-2: CLAIMS AGAINST CITY:
All claims against the City must be filed with the City Clerk, in writing, and
by him presented to the Council for its auditing, with a full account of the
items, verified by the oath of the claimant or his/her agent that the same is
correct, reasonable and just and that it, nor any part thereof, has not been
paid, and no claims or demands shall be audited or allowed unless presented and
verified as provided for in this section. (Ord. 7)
1-7-3: WARRANTS:
   A.   Each City warrant shall show the fund upon which the same is drawn and
if against any fund based upon an appropriation, shall show the amount
appropriated to such fund and the amount expended therefrom after deducting the
amount of such warrant. (Ord. 7)
   B.   Outstanding warrants shall be called for payment in their order
whenever the City Treasurer shall have on hand in the fund upon which such
warrants are drawn, an amount sufficient to pay said warrants. (Ord. 417, 3-12-
2002)
   C.   Every fund in the hands of the City Treasurer shall be paid out in the
order in which the warrants are presented for payment. In the absence of
sufficient funds, the City Council may, by resolution, order payment of claims
by money borrowed by either:
      1.   Register warrants as provided in section 31-2125, Idaho Code, or
      2.   By issuing its tax anticipation notes as provided in section 63-
3102, Idaho Code, or
      3.   Short term borrowing not involved with the tax effort in
anticipation of approved Federal or State grants 1 . (Ord. 7; amd. 1985 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-1018.
1-7-4: FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE PLANNING ACTIONS:
   A.   Fee Schedule Established: The City Clerk or their designee, at the time
of the filing of a land use application, petition, or receipt of an area of
impact referral, shall collect the fee and/or deposit established by resolution
of the City Council together with a deposit for any direct costs incurred by
the City to review such requests by architects, engineers, attorneys, or other
professionals and contractors the City deems necessary to enable the City to
process said application, petition, or referral in an informed manner.
   B.   Payments And Deposits For Direct Costs:
      1.   Billing For Costs: The City shall bill all applicants and/or
landowners for all costs incurred by the City in obtaining a review of the
application, petition or referral by architects, engineers, attorneys, or other
professionals and contractors the City deems necessary to enable the City to
process such application, petition or referral for compliance with this Code,
applicable State and Federal laws, applicable conditions of approval (new or
existing), and/or other final action including implementation of City
decisions.
      2.   Requirement Of A Cash Deposit: Where required, all applicants or
landowners shall provide a deposit to the City Clerk, or their designee, in
cash. The cash deposit shall be collected at the time of application for any
land use action. Cash deposits shall be held for the time period in which the
application is under consideration and until such time as the implementation of
any final action on the application is complete. The amount of the deposit and
the procedures shall be further set forth by resolution approved by the City
Council which may be amended any time.
         a.   Payment: The cash deposit shall be considered as a payment on the
account and be drawn down based on the invoices received by the City for the
costs incurred to process any application, petition and/or referral described
in this title. Minimum balances shall be retained pursuant to a fee resolution
of the City Council upon the passage of this chapter and by resolution approved
by the City Council which may be amended any time.
         b.   Contest Of Invoices Sent By The City: Where there is any defect
or claim of impropriety in an invoice submitted for payment for the review and
processing of any application, petition or referral, the applicant shall
contact the City Clerk in writing within ten (10) working days of receiving the
invoice. The written contest shall specify the date, services rendered, and
rationale for any invoice, partial or in full. An error in the City's invoice,
if corrected within five (5) working days of being contacted by the applicant,
shall not delay the applicant's timely payment. Any invoice, or portion of an
invoice, that is not contested as described in this section is considered
final, due and owing.
         c.   Release Of Deposit Balance: Within sixty (60) days after final
City action and completion of implementation of said final action, the City
will release any unused funds from the account to the applicant or landowner of
record, minus any outstanding fees. Completion of the implementation of a final
action shall be determined solely by the City Clerk's Office in conjunction
with the Zoning Administrator or its designee.
   C.   Payment Of Fees Prior To Action By The City: Until all required fees
established by this section have been paid in full, no final action shall be
taken by the City on any application, petition, or referral to which this
section applies.
   D.   Refunds: Fees charged pursuant to subsection A of this section shall
not be refundable.
   E.   Waivers: The City Council may, upon receipt of a written request from
the applicant, prior to the City deeming any application, petition, or referral
complete for processing, approve a waiver or payment plan for the required fees
and/or direct costs incurred in obtaining a review only upon clear
representation that the applicant has:
      1.   The inability to pay at the time of application such that the
applicant is considered in forma pauperis, and
      2.   The public interest would suffer by assessment of collection of the
fee(s). (Ord. 747, 12-15-2015, eff. 3-1-2016)
1-7-5: FEE SCHEDULE FOR CITY FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule Established: The City Council may establish fees for
processing applications, licenses, and requests as required by this Code and
for other matters pertaining to the enforcement of the provisions of this Code.
Unless a fee is specifically identified and established in this Code, all City
fees may be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 784, 9-26-
2017)
CHAPTER 8
CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Conduct Of Public Hearings
1-8-2: Notice Required
1-8-3: Order And Rules Of Public Hearings
1-8-4: Records Maintained
1-8-5: Copies Of Official Records
1-8-1: CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS:
All public hearings conducted pursuant to chapter 65, title 67 of the Idaho
Code shall comply with the standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 80, 8-31-
1982)
1-8-2: NOTICE REQUIRED:
Prior to the conduct of a public hearing as specified herein, proper notice of
said public hearing shall be given as required by chapter 65, title 67, Idaho
Code. (Ord. 80, 8-31-1982)
1-8-3: ORDER AND RULES OF PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Order Of Events: Public hearings shall follow the order of events set
forth below:
      1.   Explanation of subject of hearing;
      2.   Presentation by applicant;
      3.   Testimony from audience in favor of and/or against proposal;
      4.   Questioning of involved parties by participants of the hearing;
      5.   Closure or oral testimony from applicant and audience;
      6.   Discussion of hearing subject among city council or commission
members. Questions may also be directed to city staff during this period;
      7.   Conclusion of hearing process.
   B.   Oral Testimony:
      1.   Time Limitations: The presiding officer may limit the time allotted
to presentation of oral testimony at a public hearing. Any such allocation of
time shall provide for a reasonable opportunity for proponents and opponents of
an issue to be heard.
      2.   Standards For Oral Testimony: Oral testimony made at a public
hearing shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   Testimony should directly address the subject at hand.
         b.   Testimony should not be repetitious with other entries into the
record.
         c.   Testimony should not be personally malicious.
         d.   Testimony shall comply with any time restrictions established by
the presiding officer.
If oral testimony fails to comply with the aforementioned standards, the
presiding officer may declare such testimony to be out of order and require it
to cease. (Ord. 80, 8-31-1982)
   C.   Standards For Written Testimony: Written testimony submitted for
inclusion in the record of any public hearing shall comply with the following
standards:
      1.   Written testimony must be submitted to the city clerk no less than
five (5) working days prior to the day on which the public hearing is
scheduled.
      2.   Written testimony shall include the signature and address of the
submitter.
      3.   Written testimony should address the issue at hand.
      4.   Written testimony should not be personally malicious.
      5.   The presiding officer shall require an oral acknowledgment of such
written testimony having been submitted.
      6.   If written testimony fails to comply with the aforementioned
standards, the presiding officer may declare such testimony inadmissible. (Ord.
419, 3-26-2002)
   D.   Rules By Presiding Officer: All rulings shall be decided by the
presiding officer of any board conducting a public hearing with right of appeal
to the council by any member present.
   E.   Robert's Rules Of Order: Robert's rules of order shall govern the
conduct of all public hearings in which the rules are applicable, and in which
they are not inconsistent with the bylaws, special rules of order of the city
council or of any board or commission or the laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord.
80, 8-31-1982)
1-8-4: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
The respective clerks of the city council and planning and zoning commission
holding public hearings pursuant to chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, shall
maintain records of the proceedings in the following manner:
   A.   Transcribable, verbatim recordings of the proceedings shall be
maintained for six (6) months from the date of the hearing.
   B.   Originals of written exhibits to the hearing record and copies of
applications shall be maintained for three (3) years from the date of the
hearing.
   C.   Minutes which catalog the occurrences of the public hearing shall be
maintained as required by pertinent sections of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 80, 8-31-
1982)
1-8-5: COPIES OF OFFICIAL RECORDS:
Copies of material submitted for inclusions in the official record of a public
hearing shall be available to interested parties upon payment of the usual
charges for research and copying made by the city 1 . (Ord. 80, 8-31-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 1-6A-1I of this title.
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Supervision Of Administration Of Election Laws By Ada County Clerk
1-9-2: Registration Of Electors
1-9-3: Method Of Nomination; City Clerk To Furnish Printed Forms
1-9-4: Time And Manner Of Filing Declarations
1-9-5: Notice Of Candidate Filing Deadline
1-9-6: Canvassing Votes; Determining Results Of Election
1-9-7: Tie Votes
1-9-8: Failure To Qualify Creates Vacancy
1-9-9: Certificates Of Election
1-9-10: Application Of Campaign Reporting Law
1-9-11: Initiative And Referendum
1-9-12: Recall Election
1-9-13: Runoff Election
1-9-14: Expenses Associated With Conducting An Election
1-9-1: SUPERVISION OF ADMINISTRATION OF ELECTION LAWS BY ADA COUNTY CLERK:
The Ada County clerk is the chief elections officer and shall exercise general
supervision of the administration of the election laws in the city for the
purpose of achieving and maintaining a maximum degree of correctness,
impartiality, efficiency and uniformity. The Ada County clerk shall meet with
and issue instructions to election judges and clerks prior to the opening of
the polls to ensure uniformity in the application, operation and interpretation
of the election laws during the election. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-2: REGISTRATION OF ELECTORS:
All electors must register before being able to vote at any municipal election.
The Ada County clerk shall be the registrar for all city elections and shall
conduct voter registration for the city pursuant to the provisions of chapter
4, title 34, Idaho Code. To be eligible to register to vote in city elections,
a person shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, a citizen of the United
States and a resident of the city for at least thirty (30) days next preceding
the election at which he desires to vote, or a resident of an area annexed by a
city pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011; amd. Ord.
857, 9-14-2021)
1-9-3: METHOD OF NOMINATION; CITY CLERK TO FURNISH PRINTED FORMS:
Candidates for elective city offices shall be nominated by declaration. The
declaration shall contain the name and address of the person and the office and
the term for which he is being nominated. There shall be no mention relating to
party or principal of the nominee. The completed declaration of candidacy shall
be accompanied by: a) a petition of candidacy signed by not less than five (5)
registered qualified electors; or b) a nonrefundable filing fee of forty
dollars ($40.00) which shall be deposited in the city treasury.
It shall be the duty of the Eagle city clerk to furnish upon application a
reasonable number of regular printed forms, as herein set forth, to any person
or persons applying therefor. The forms shall be of uniform size as determined
by the Eagle city clerk. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-4: TIME AND MANNER OF FILING DECLARATIONS:
All declarations of candidacy for elective city offices shall be filed with the
Eagle city clerk, not earlier than eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on the eleventh
Monday nor later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the ninth Friday, immediately
preceding election day. Before a candidate files a petition of candidacy with
the Eagle city clerk, the petition signatures shall be verified by the Ada
County clerk in the manner described in section 34-1807, Idaho Code, except
that the Eagle city clerk shall stand in place of the secretary of state.
Before any declaration of candidacy and filing fee or petition of candidacy
mentioned in section 50-407, Idaho Code, can be filed, the Eagle city clerk
shall ascertain that it conforms to the provisions of chapter 4, title 50,
Idaho Code. The Eagle city clerk shall not accept any declarations of candidacy
after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the ninth Friday immediately preceding
election day. Write in candidates shall be governed by section 34-702A, Idaho
Code, but shall file the declarations required in that section with the Eagle
city clerk. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-5: NOTICE OF CANDIDATE FILING DEADLINE:
Not more than fourteen (14) nor less than seven (7) days preceding the
candidate filing deadline for an election, the Eagle city clerk shall cause to
be published in the official newspaper a notice of the forthcoming candidate
filing deadline. The notice shall state the name of the city, the date of the
election, the offices up for election, that declarations of candidacy are
available from the Eagle city clerk, and the deadline for filing such
declarations with the Eagle city clerk. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-6: CANVASSING VOTES; DETERMINING RESULTS OF ELECTION:
The Ada County commissioners, within ten (10) days following any election,
shall meet for the purpose of canvassing the results of the election. Upon
acceptance of tabulation of votes prepared by the election judges and clerks,
and the canvass as herein provided, the results of both shall be entered in the
minutes of city council proceedings and proclaimed as final. Results of
election shall be determined as follows: in the case of a single office to be
filled, the candidate with the highest number of votes shall be declared
elected; in the case where more than one office is to be filled, that number of
candidates receiving the highest number of votes, equal to the number of
offices to be filled, shall be declared elected. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-7: TIE VOTES:
In case of a tie vote between candidates, the Eagle city clerk shall give
notice to the interested candidates to appear before the council at a meeting
to be called within six (6) days at which time the Eagle city clerk shall
determine the tie by a toss of a coin. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-8: FAILURE TO QUALIFY CREATES VACANCY:
If a person elected fails to qualify, a vacancy shall be declared to exist,
which vacancy shall be filled by the mayor and council. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-9: CERTIFICATES OF ELECTION:
A certificate of election for each elected city official or appointee to fill
such position shall be made under the corporate seal by the Eagle city clerk,
signed by the mayor and the Eagle city clerk, and presented to such officials
at the time of subscribing to the oath of office. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011)
1-9-10: APPLICATION OF CAMPAIGN REPORTING LAW:
The provisions of Title 67 Chapter 66 of Idaho Code, are applicable to all
elections. The Ada County Clerk oversees campaign finance reporting in
accordance with Idaho State Code. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011; amd. Ord. 857, 9-14-
2021)
1-9-11: INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM:
Petitions for initiative or referendum shall conform with the requirements of
Title 34, Chapter 18 of Idaho Code. (Ord. 857, 9-14-2021)
1-9-12: RECALL ELECTION:
Recall elections shall be conducted in accordance with Title 34, Chapter 17 of
Idaho Code. (Ord. 857, 9-14-2021)
1-9-13: RUNOFF ELECTION:
   A.   Mayor: A majority of the votes for any candidate running for the office
of mayor shall be required for election to that office. In the event that no
candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, there shall be a runoff
election between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes
cast. Such runoff election shall be conducted as in the general election in a
manner and at such time, within thirty (30) days of the general election, as
prescribed by the city and shall be exempt from the limitations upon elections
provided in sections 34-106 and 50-405, Idaho Code. The ballot shall be
prepared by the Ada County clerk not less than twenty two (22) days preceding
the runoff election. The designation of polling places shall be made by the Ada
County commissioners not less than twenty (20) days preceding any runoff
election and sample ballots shall be printed not less than eighteen (18) days
preceding the runoff election. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011; amd. Ord. 857, 9-14-2021)
1-9-14: EXPENSES ASSOCIATED WITH CONDUCTING AN ELECTION:
   A.   After an election has been ordered, all expenses associated with
conducting municipal general and special elections shall be paid from the Ada
County election fund as provided by section 34-1411, Idaho Code.
   B.   Expenses associated with conducting runoff elections shall be paid by
the city adopting runoff elections pursuant to the provisions of section 50-612
or 50-707B, Idaho Code, or both. (Ord. 653, 2-8-2011; amd. Ord. 857, 9-14-2021)
CHAPTER 10
BOUNDARIES OF CITY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Boundaries Of City Established
1-10-2: Annexations
1-10-3: Exclusions
1-10-1: BOUNDARIES OF CITY ESTABLISHED:
The boundaries of the city are described as follows:
Beginning at the section corner common to sections 8, 9, 16 and 17, Township 4
North Range 1 East, Boise Meridian, Ada County, Idaho; thence southward along
the section line 660 ft. to a point; thence West to the Center line of that
branch of the Boise River north of Eagle Island; thence northwesterly following
the meander line of the river to the mouth of Dry Creek; thence northeasterly
following Dry Creek to its intersection with the north line of said section 8,
on the Floating Feather Road; thence easterly along the section line to the
section corner common to sections 5, 6, 8 and 9, 4 North, 1 East; thence
southward along the section line to the quarter corner common to sections 8 and
9; thence eastward along the quarter section line to the center of section 9;
thence southward along the quarter section line to the south line of section 9;
thence westerly along the section line to the point of beginning, and as such
boundaries are amended by ordinances duly passed in accordance with this code
and the provisions of Idaho law.
(Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 6; 1985 Code)
1-10-2: ANNEXATIONS:
Whenever any land lying contiguous or adjacent to the city shall be or shall
have been laid off into lots or blocks containing not more than five (5) acres
of land in each when lawfully subdivided or platted or not; or whenever any
person has sold or begun to sell such contiguous or adjacent lands in tracts
not exceeding five (5) acres; or whenever the owner or his agent on such
contiguous and adjacent lands shall request annexation in writing to the
council, the city council, by ordinance, may declare the same, by proper legal
description, a part of the city; provided, that a showing must be made that the
area to be annexed can reasonably be used for orderly development of the city
and not connected to the city only by a shoestring or strip of land upon a
public highway. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
1-10-3: EXCLUSIONS:
Subject to the limitations set forth in section 50-225, Idaho Code, the
boundaries of the city may be altered and any territory included therein may be
excluded by ordinance of the city council on its own motion or upon the written
petition of any owner or proprietor of lands included in the territorial limits
of the city upon the reasonable showing that the exclusion will not interfere
with the orderly development of the city and the rights, obligations and duties
of other land owners and the residents of the city. Should any lands be so
excluded, a copy of the ordinance, certified by the city clerk, shall be filed
as provided in section 63-2215, Idaho Code for the county recorder and county
assessor within ten (10) days following the effective date of the ordinance.
(Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
CHAPTER 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Corporate Seal
1-11-2: Official Newspaper
1-11-3: Authorization Of FBI National Criminal History Records Checks
1-11-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Design: The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form with
inner and outer circles of a regular bead border design. The outer circle shall
be one and one-half inches (1 1/2") in diameter and the inner circle shall be
one inch (1") in diameter. It shall bear upon the upper portion of space
between the two (2) circles the words "City Of Eagle" in gothic style type, and
upon the lower portion of the space between the two (2) circles the words
"State Of Idaho" in gothic style type. Upon the space within the inner circle
and upon the upper portion of the space within the inner circle shall be the
word "corporate" and upon the lower portion of the space within the inner
circle shall be the word "Incorporated 1971" in gothic style type. Upon and
across the center of the space within the inner circle shall be the word "Seal"
in roman style type. (Ord. 341, 4-13-1999)
   B.   Adoption Of Seal: The seal described in subsection A of this section is
hereby adopted as the Corporate Seal of the City.
   C.   Custodian Of Seal: The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the
Corporate Seal of the City and shall affix said seal imprint upon all official
City documents, records and licenses. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
1-11-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50-213, Idaho Code, the “Valley Times”
and the "Idaho Statesman" are hereby designated the official newspaper of the
City and such ordinances, notices and publications as are required by law to be
given publication in the newspaper shall be published in said “Valley Times” or
"Idaho Statesman". (Ord. 767, 1-10-2017; amd. Ord. 845, 4-13-2021)
1-11-3: AUTHORIZATION OF FBI NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECKS:
   A.   Definition Of Applicant: The term "applicant", for purposes of this
section, shall include applicants for city employment, continued city
employment or contractors with the City of Eagle. All applicants offered a
position with the City shall be required to obtain a national criminal history
records check prior to their first day.
   B.   Determine Suitability Of Applicant: In order to evaluate the
suitability of an applicant, the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall require the
applicant to provide information and fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal
history information from the Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and shall have the Idaho State Police or the Federal Bureau of
Investigation perform a criminal background investigation.
   C.   Applicant Consent Required: The City Clerk or Deputy Clerk, shall
obtain the written consent of the applicant for the criminal background
investigation and if the applicant does not execute the consent, the
application shall be denied.
   D.   Authorization Of FBI National Criminal History Records Checks: Pursuant
to section 67-3008, Idaho Code, and congressional enactment Public Law 92-544,
the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall submit a set of fingerprints obtained from
the applicant and the required fees to the Idaho State Police and Federal
Bureau of Investigation, for a criminal records check of state and national
databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by this
section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police. The City of
Eagle Police Department, specifically the Chief of Police is authorized to
receive criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and from the
Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of evaluating the suitability
of applicants and the Chief of Police shall recommend approval and/or denial of
the application based on this information and relay that recommendation to the
City Clerk or Deputy Clerk. As required by state and federal law, further
dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited.
   E.   No Amendment Without FBI Approval: This section shall not be amended
without prior written approval from the Federal Bureau of Investigation. (Ord.
845, 4-13-2021)
CHAPTER 12
CODE OF ETHICS AND CIVILITY
SECTION:
1-12-1: Statement Of Purpose
1-12-2: Ethics
1-12-3: Rules Of Civility; Rules Of Decorum At Public Meetings
1-12-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This section seeks to promote mutual respect, civility and orderly conduct
among City of Eagle elected officials, employees, and members of the public. It
is not intended to deprive any person of his or her right to freedom of
expression or free speech, but only to maintain, to the extent possible and
reasonable, a safe, productive, and harassment-free workplace for City staff
and a safe and non-threatening environment for visitors, customers and other
members of the public.
The City discourages hostile, intimidating, or otherwise disruptive actions and
encourages professional, respectful, and courteous communication, seeking to
embrace respectful disagreement and dissent as democratic rights that are
inherent components of an inclusive public process and tools for forging sound
decisions. (Ord. 932, 7-9-2024)
1-12-2: ETHICS:
All City of Eagle elected officials and employees are subject to the
regulations and penalties set forth in the State of Idaho's Transparent and
Ethical Government statute, Title 74 , Chapter 4 of Idaho Code. (Ord. 932, 7-9-
2024)
1-12-3: RULES OF CIVILITY; RULES OF DECORUM AT PUBLIC MEETINGS:
   A.   Rules of Civility.
      1.   All interactions between City staff, City elected officials and
members of the public will be conducted in a respectful manner.
      2.   Threats, including threats of violence, will not be tolerated.
      3.   Members of the public will refrain from behavior that disrupts or
threatens to disrupt City of Eagle government operations, including any of the
following:
         a.   Insulting, demeaning, intimidating, or offensive remarks or other
communications;
         b.   Harassment or intimidation of any City of Eagle staff, elected
official, or other member of the public;
         c.   Willful destruction or damage of property;
         d.   Conduct that threatens or provokes a violent reaction;
         e.   Continually disruptive behavior in the lobbies, offices or
meeting rooms of Eagle City Hall or other facilities where official City
business is being conducted by City officials or staff;
         f.   Repetitive calls, visits or correspondence to City offices or
staff with an associated pattern of disruptive behavior, including verbal or
physical aggression and/or threats, regarding an issue for which City officials
or staff have already provided pertinent information or instructions.
      4.   Enforcement. The rules of civility set forth above shall be enforced
in the following manner:
         a.   Warning: Any City of Eagle official or employee who is directly
affected by or witnesses behavior that disrupts or threatens to disrupt City of
Eagle government operations may direct the person engaging in such behavior to
immediately remove themselves from the premises or otherwise cease such
behavior.
         b.   Resisting Removal or Failing to Cease Behavior: Any person who
resists removal or an order to leave the premises or to cease such behavior
shall be charged with a violation of Idaho Code § 18-7008(8).
   B.   Rules of decorum at public meetings.
      1.   Decorum.
         a.   City of Eagle public meetings, including meetings of the City
Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, and any other City commission,
committee or board (hereinafter "Board" to describe any of the preceding or
like bodies), shall be conducted in an orderly manner to ensure that the public
has an opportunity to be heard and that the deliberative process of the Board
is retained at all times. A City Council meeting or other like Board meeting is
a governmental process with a governmental purpose. The Council/Board has an
agenda to be addressed and dealt with and is not to be prevented from
accomplishing its business in a reasonably efficient manner; order will be
maintained, and the rules of decorum will be enforced.
         b.   General public oral communications, such as a public forum (Town
Hall, Workshops, et al.) or other general public comment periods, may be
offered to the public at City Council and other Board meetings. Aside from
official public hearings, these public comment opportunities during the Board's
business meeting are not required by law or regulation and are at the
discretion of the presiding officer.
         c.   The presiding officer of the Board shall be responsible for
maintaining the order and decorum of meetings and shall, at the commencement of
the meeting, recite aloud the rules and procedure for public participation
during the meeting, or a summary thereof. The presiding officer of the meeting
shall be responsible for enforcing the rules of decorum during the meeting.
      2.   Rules of Decorum. During a public meeting, the following rules of
decorum shall be observed:
         a.   Board Members. The members of the Board shall preserve order and
decorum, and a member shall not by conversation or other means delay or
interrupt the Board's proceedings or disturb any other member while speaking.
Board members shall not communicate electronically with one another or any
member of the public using a mobile phone, computer or other such device about
any City business during the meeting.
         b.   City Staff Members. Employees of the City shall observe the same
rules of order and decorum as those which apply to the members of the Board.
         c.   Persons Addressing the Board. General public oral communications
are not a substitute for any item that can be handled during the normal
business hours of the municipal government. The primary purpose of such oral
communication during a meeting is to allow citizens the opportunity to address
the Board as a whole regarding matters that cannot be handled during the
regular business hours of the City government. Each person who addresses the
Board shall exercise self-control, shall do so in an orderly manner, shall
focus on the issues and avoid personalizing debate, and shall not make
personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks to any member of the
Board, staff or general public. General public oral communication opportunities
are not to be used for the purpose of conveying political rhetoric, i.e. for
political campaigning or the venue to convey support or opposition of a
political candidate or another. Any person who conducts themselves in such a
manner or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any meeting shall, at the
discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the Board, be barred from
further audience before the Board during that meeting.
         d.   Members of the Public. No member of the public shall engage in
disorderly or boisterous conduct, including the utterance of loud, threatening
or abusive language, whistling, speaking out of turn, applause or clapping
(when not led by the presiding officer), the display of signs (cardboard, paper
or otherwise), stamping of feet or other similar acts which disturb, disrupt or
otherwise impede the orderly conduct of any meeting. Any person who conducts
themselves in such a manner or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any
meeting shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the
Board, be barred from further audience before the Board during that meeting.
         e.   Addressing the Board. A person wishing to address the Board
during the meeting shall submit a request on a public comment form or otherwise
follow the process provided. No person shall address the Board without first
being recognized by the presiding officer . The following procedures shall be
observed by persons addressing the Board:
            (1)   Each person speaking shall have up to three (3) minutes to
address the Board, which time shall be kept and noted by the presiding officer
and/or clerk. The presiding officer may, at his or her discretion, limit or
extend the time for public comment at the meeting, as time permits. Any
extension or limit shall be applied equally and fairly to all members of the
public. During official public hearings only, and only upon prior approval of
the presiding officer, a member of the public in attendance may gift their time
to another member of the public in attendance. This may be allowed one time
only for both the person gifting their time and for the person who receives it.
This procedure is applicable only during official public hearings and shall not
be utilized for any other public comment period.
            (2)   When called by the presiding officer the individual who
wishes to speak shall introduce themselves, stating their name and address. If
speaking during the general oral communications or public forum portion of the
meeting, the person speaking shall also state the subject on which they wish to
comment.
            (3)   During general public comment portions of the meeting, any
subject which is deemed irrelevant or repetitious by the presiding officer, or
majority of the Board shall be immediately concluded.
            (4)   All remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a whole and
not to any single member thereof, unless in response to a question from such
member. The person speaking shall address only the Board and shall not address
members of City staff or other members of the audience.
            (5)   No question may be asked of a member of the City Council or
of City staff. Public hearings and other opportunities afforded for public
comment are for comments only.
            (6)   Once the meeting is underway, members of the public are not
to approach the dais, the clerk or any other staff member situated at the front
of the room near the dais, as this disrupts the meeting and the work that is
being undertaken by these staff members.
      3.   Enforcement. The rules of decorum set forth above shall be enforced
in the following manner:
         a.   Warning. The presiding officer shall request that a person who is
breaching the rules of decorum cease such conduct. If, after receiving a
warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in such conduct, the
presiding officer shall order that person to leave the meeting.
         b.   Removal. The presiding officer may request law enforcement who
are in attendance, or direct City Staff to initiate contact with law
enforcement to carry out all orders and instructions of the presiding officer
for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum during the meeting, including
removal of any such person from the proceedings.
         c.   Resisting Removal. Any person who resists removal by the
presiding officer shall be charged with a violation of Idaho Code § 18-7008(8).
      4.   Adjournment. If a meeting is disturbed or disrupted in such a manner
as to make it infeasible or improbable to restore order, the meeting may be
adjourned or continued by the presiding officer or a majority of the Board, and
any remaining business may be considered at the next meeting.
   C.   Trespass and Penalty.
      1.   Notice of Trespass. Any person who violates the provisions of the
Rules of Civility in the lobbies, offices or meeting rooms of Eagle City Hall
or other City owned or operated facilities or property where official City
business is being conducted by City officials, or violates the Rules of Decorum
during a public meeting, may be trespassed from City facilities and/or from
City meetings for a period not to exceed 12-months from the date of the
incident. In all such cases, such person shall receive a written notice, signed
by the Mayor, identifying the conduct giving rise to the trespass, and further
providing that such person may enter City property for emergency purposes only,
r to access emergency personnel, or to access polling locations and may only
contact City employees by U.S. Mail, email or other means acceptable to the
City.
      2.   Right to Appeal.
         a.   Any person trespassed from City property or facilities has the
right to appeal said trespass order by submitting a statement to the City
Clerk's office by email, U.S. Mail or other means acceptable to the City within
ten (10) calendar days of the date of the trespass order, which statement shall
be forwarded to and considered by the Mayor and City Council. The Mayor and
City Council will consider and make a decision based on information presented
by City staff and the statement submitted by the appellant. If no statement is
received by the City Clerk's office within 10 calendar days of the date of the
trespass order, no appeal will be considered.
         b.   Any person trespassed from a City public meeting has the right to
appeal said trespass order by submitting a statement to the City Clerk's office
by email, U.S. Mail or other means acceptable to the City within ten (10)
calendar days of the date of the trespass order, which statement shall be
forwarded to City Council and considered during their next available regular
meeting or at a special meeting of the Council. No oral/verbal testimony will
be allowed; Council will consider and make its decision based on information
presented by City staff and/or members of the applicable City commission,
committee or board and the statement submitted by the appellant. If no
statement is received by the City Clerk's office within 10 calendar days of the
date of the trespass order, no appeal will be considered.
         c.   The right to appeal under subsections a and b, above, is not
applicable to any citations for trespass under Title 18, Idaho Code.
      3.   Access to Meetings. Any person trespassed from City property or from
attendance at City meetings shall have the right to attend such meetings by
electronic means if offered by the City; provided that the same Rules of
Civility and Rules of Decorum shall apply to attendance at such meetings.
      4.   Criminal Trespass/Penalty. Any person who resists removal or an
order to leave the premises or to cease disruptive behavior may be guilty of a
misdemeanor under Idaho Code § 18-7008(8), punishable as provided by Idaho law.
This penalty provision is not intended to supplant any provision of Idaho law
which may render additional or more serious punishment for threats against
public officials or public servants as proscribed by Title 18, Idaho Code.
Nothing contained herein shall preclude a person trespassed from entering upon
City property in case of an emergency purposes only or to access emergency
personnel. (Ord. 932, 7-9-2024)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Definitions
2-1-2: Appointment, Membership And Qualifications
2-1-3: Term Of Office, Vacancies And Removals
2-1-4: Organization
2-1-5: Duties
2-1-6: Expenditures And Expense Payment Schedule
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
APPOINTIVE MEMBERS: All members of the commission.
COMMISSION: The Eagle planning and zoning commission created by this chapter.
GOVERNING BOARD: The city council. (Ord. 68, 1-13-1980)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENT, MEMBERSHIP AND QUALIFICATIONS:
The commission shall consist of from three (3) to twelve (12) members who shall
be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council.
All members must have been residents of the county for at least two (2) years,
and must reside within the county while serving on the commission. Persons
residing within the Eagle impact area shall be entitled to representation on
the city planning and zoning commission. Such representation shall as nearly as
possible reflect the proportion of population living within the city as
compared to the population living within the Eagle impact area. To achieve such
proportional representation, membership on the city planning and zoning
commission may exceed twelve (12) persons. Members shall be selected without
respect to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation. (Ord.
206, 7-21-1992)
2-1-3: TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
The term of office for appointive members shall be three (3) years. Said terms
shall be staggered in such a manner that not more than thirty five percent
(35%) shall expire in any one year. All vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments and members may be removed after public hearing
by a majority vote of the governing board. (Ord. 68, 1-13-1980)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The commission shall elect its own chairman, vice chairman
and secretary and create and fill such offices as it may determine necessary
for the proper conduct of the affairs and business of the commission.
   B.   Meetings: Meetings of the commission shall be held when duly called by
the chairman by written or oral notice. At least one regular meeting shall be
held each month for not less than nine (9) months in a year. All meetings shall
be open to the public. A majority of voting members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.
   C.   Rules For Conduct Of Business: Written rules consistent with this
chapter and the laws of the state of Idaho for the transaction of business of
the commission shall be adopted.
   D.   Records Kept: Written records of meetings, hearings, resolutions,
findings, studies, permits and actions shall be maintained and open to the
public. (Ord. 68, 1-13-1980)
2-1-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to:
   A.   Conduct a planning process designed to prepare, implement, review and
update a comprehensive plan that includes all lands within the governing
board's jurisdiction;
   B.   Hold public hearings prior to recommending the comprehensive plan,
changes to the plan and ordinances, special use permits, rezone applications,
planned unit development proposals and variance applications, and zoning
ordinance amendments;
   C.   Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the planning
process;
   D.   Recommend subdivision and zoning ordinances;
   E.   Recommend changes to a comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance prior to
annexation of an unincorporated area;
   F.   Recommend a map, a governing plan and ordinances for an area of city
impact that is within the unincorporated area of the county; and
   G.   Such other duties as are required by Idaho law and this code. (Ord. 68,
1-13-1980)
2-1-6: EXPENDITURES AND EXPENSE PAYMENT SCHEDULE:
Any expenditures of the commission (exclusive of gifts) shall be within the
amounts appropriated and set aside by the city council for the commission. Each
member of the commission shall receive payment for their actual and necessary
expenses and per diem in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each regular
commission meeting attended and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each special
meeting attended. No commission member may receive in excess of one thousand
three hundred dollars ($1,300.00) during any fiscal year. The city council
reserves the right to refuse to appropriate such expenditures or reduce them in
any budget year. Whereby this expense payment schedule may be amended by
resolution of the city council at any time. (Ord. 396, 7-24-2001)
CHAPTER 2
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Created, Membership, Qualifications
2-2-2: Terms Of Office, Vacancies
2-2-3: Organization
2-2-4: Duties, Jurisdiction, And Authority
2-2-5: Expense Payment Schedule
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED, MEMBERSHIP, QUALIFICATIONS:
The board shall be composed of up to seven (7) members. Three (3) members shall
constitute a quorum. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council. Members of the board shall be appointed with proper
representation from such fields as architecture, landscape architecture,
design, business, engineering, and a citizen at large. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
2-2-2: TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
The members of the board shall take office as of the date of their appointment,
confirmation, and qualification. The term of the appointment shall be for three
(3) years. All members shall be eligible for reappointment. In the event of a
vacancy of a position on the board, the Mayor shall appoint a new member, with
the consent of the City Council, for the balance of the unexpired term. (Ord.
667, 2-14-2012)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall designate a chairman from its membership and shall adopt public
meeting procedures pursuant to law. Three (3) members shall constitute a
quorum. The board shall meet on the second and fourth Thursday of each calendar
month, unless a holiday occurs at which time the meeting shall be rescheduled
to the next regularly scheduled meeting date. The City Clerk shall keep the
minutes of all official meetings. All meetings shall be opened to the public.
Minutes shall be typed by the City Clerk or designee, with copies approved at
the next regularly scheduled meeting. All board documents shall be made
available to the public subject to the public records laws. (Ord. 667, 2-14-
2012)
2-2-4: DUTIES, JURISDICTION, AND AUTHORITY:
It shall be the responsibility of the board to protect property rights and
values, enhance important environmental features of the City, and to ensure
that the general appearance of buildings and structures, along with development
of the land, shall not impair or preclude the orderly and harmonious
development of the community.
The board shall review all development proposals within the Design Review
District. Within this district, the board, with input from the Zoning
Administrator, shall regulate landscaping and beautification laws, review
building design, and review site planning, signs, grading, development. This
includes, but is not limited to, the regulation and restriction of the type of
building, number of stories, size of building, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, or use of buildings and structures. The board shall ensure
compliance with the requirements of the respective Design Review Overlay
Districts, City of Eagle Comprehensive Plan, and relevant ordinances.
Additionally, the Zoning Administrator may act on behalf of the board where
allowed by this Code.
Lack of a quorum of board members shall require review of pending business by
the board during the next scheduled board meeting. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
2-2-5: EXPENSE PAYMENT SCHEDULE:
Each member of the Design Review Board shall receive payment for actual and
necessary expenses in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each regular
board meeting attended and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each special board
meeting attended. No board member may receive in excess of one thousand three
hundred dollars ($1,300.00) during any fiscal year. The City Council reserves
the right to refuse to appropriate such expenditures or reduce them in any
budget year. Whereby this expense payment schedule may be amended by resolution
of the City Council at any time. (Ord. 396, 7-24-2001)
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Board Created, Appointment, Terms And Vacancies
2-3-2: Organization
2-3-3: Powers And Duties
2-3-4: Compensation
2-3-1: BOARD CREATED, APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND VACANCIES:
There is hereby created and established a board to be known as the Eagle
library board, to consist of five (5) members as a board of library trustees,
who, as their terms of office expire, shall be appointed by the council for
terms of five (5) years.
All vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the council, which
appointments shall be for the residue of the term only. (Ord. 25)
2-3-2: ORGANIZATION:
Said board of trustees shall elect from their members a president who shall
serve for a term of one year and until his or her successor is elected, and
shall adopt such rules for the transaction of business as may be necessary.
The board shall meet for business purposes at least once a month, and at such
other times as it may appoint, in a place to be provided for the purpose. A
majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. (Ord. 25)
2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   General: It shall be the duty of the board of trustees of the library
to have and they shall have control of the expenditure of all monies collected
for the library fund 1 , subject to the approval of the council, and such
monies shall be drawn from the city treasury upon vouchers properly
authenticated by the board of library trustees, with the approval of the
council. Said board of trustees shall have the supervision, care and custody of
the room or building constructed, leased or set apart for library purposes, and
they may, with the approval of the council, lease and occupy or purchase or
erect on purchased ground, any appropriate building; provided, that not more
than one-half (1/2) of the income in any one year can be set apart in said year
for such purchase of building. Said board of trustees may appoint a librarian
and such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
maintenance of such library, and may fix their salaries and prescribe rules for
their conduct. The board shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and
regulations for their own guidance and for the government of the library and
reading room as may be expedient, subject to the approval of the city council.
   B.   Library Supervision: The board shall take charge of the public library
and reading rooms, and the branches thereof, and of all real and personal
property thereunto belonging, or what may be acquired by loan, purchase, gift,
devise or otherwise, when not inconsistent with the terms and conditions of the
gift, devise or bequest.
   C.   Additional Powers: The board, by a majority vote of all its members to
be recorded in its minutes with ayes and nays, shall have power:
      1.   To appoint a librarian and such assistants as may be necessary.
      2.   To make and enforce all rules, regulations and bylaws necessary for
the administering, government and protection of the library and reading rooms
and branches thereof, and all property belonging thereto, or that may be loaned
thereto.
      3.   To administer any trust declared or created for such library and
reading rooms and branches thereof, and provide memorial tablets and niches to
perpetuate the memory of those persons who may make valuable donations thereto.
      4.   To define the powers and prescribe the duties of all officers and
assistants and for good and sufficient cause, remove any officer or assistant.
      5.   To purchase books, journals, publications and other personal
property. (Ord. 25)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-3-1 of this code.
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of the library board and the officers thereof shall serve without
salary or any compensation whatsoever. (Ord. 25)
EA424   2-4.txt ()
CHAPTER 4
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Creation, Term And Qualifications
2-4-2: Appointment, Vacancies, And Removal
2-4-3: Refusal To Confirm Appointments
2-4-1: BOARD CREATION, TERM AND QUALIFICATIONS:
All boards, commissions or committees providing advice to, or acting on behalf
of, the city and not otherwise specifically set forth in this code shall be
created by resolution of the council. Such resolution shall include the term of
the board, commission, or committee, the number and qualifications, if any, of
the members and the term of office of each member. (Ord. 286, 1-28-1997)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT, VACANCIES, AND REMOVAL:
Members of boards, commissions and committees created by the council shall be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the council. All
vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, and
members may be removed by a majority vote of the council. (Ord. 286, 1-28-1997)
2-4-3: REFUSAL TO CONFIRM APPOINTMENTS:
If the city council shall refuse to confirm any nomination, the mayor shall
then, within ten (10) days thereafter, nominate another person to fill the
board, commission, or committee position and the mayor may continue to nominate
until the mayor's nominee is confirmed. If the mayor fails to make another
nomination for the same position within ten (10) days after the rejection of a
nominee, the city council shall appoint a suitable person to fill the office
during the term. The affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members
of the full council shall be required to confirm any nomination made by the
mayor. (Ord. 286, 1-28-1997)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-5-1: Committee Created
2-5-2: Term Of Office And Vacancies
2-5-3: Organization
2-5-4: Duties
2-5-1: COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is hereby created a Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee for the
City, which committee shall be known and designated as the Eagle City
Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee. (Ord. 337, 11-24-1998)
2-5-2: TERM OF OFFICE AND VACANCIES:
The Committee shall consist of not fewer than five (5) members appointed by the
Mayor with the confirmation of the City Council. Two (2) members shall be
active in the business of development, building or real estate. Persons living
within the area of City impact shall be entitled to representation on the
Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee. Such representation shall as nearly
as possible reflect the proportion of population living within such area of
City impact. Upon the appointment as herein provided, the members of the
Committee shall meet and draw lots for the terms of office which shall be as
near as possible for an equal number of terms for two (2), and four (4) years,
and thereafter, at the expiration of any terms of office, appointment to such
office shall be for the period of four (4) years. If a vacancy shall occur
during any unexpired term, the Mayor, with confirmation of the Council, shall
appoint a member for the balance of such unexpired term. (Ord. 337, 11-24-1998)
2-5-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Chairman: The Committee shall meet and appoint one (1) of its members
as Chairman of the Committee, who shall hold office as such Chairman for such
term as the Committee shall so designate, and the Committee may elect a Vice
Chairman who shall act as Chairman in the absence of the Chairman of the
Committee.
   B.   Clerk Of Committee: The Committee shall have authority to designate a
Clerk, who may be an officer or employee of the City, and who shall act as such
Clerk or Secretary to the Committee and shall keep an accurate record of all
proceedings of said Committee, and shall file, when ordered by the Committee,
with the Council, a report of all transactions of the Committee. (Ord. 337, 11-
24-1998)
   C.   Meetings: A majority of the appointive members of the Committee shall
be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Committee shall hold a minimum of one (1) meeting annually, and at such other
times as may be called by the Chairman or by the Mayor or City Council. (Ord.
771, 3-14-2017)
   D.   Rules For Conduct Of Business: Written rules consistent with this
chapter and the laws of the State for the transaction of business of the
Committee shall be adopted.
   E.   Records Kept: Written records of meetings, hearings, resolutions,
findings, studies, permits and actions shall be maintained and open to the
public.
   F.   Compensation: The members of the Committee shall serve and act without
compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed
by the Council and the City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment
and supplies to enable the Committee to properly transact and perform its
business. (Ord. 337, 11-24-1998)
2-5-4: DUTIES:
   A.   The Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity and is established
to:
      1.   Assist the City in adopting land use assumptions;
      2.   Review the Capital Improvements Plan, and proposed amendments, and
file written comments;
      3.   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the Capital Improvements
Plan;
      4.   File periodic reports, at least annually, with respect to Capital
Improvements Plan and report to the Mayor and Council any perceived inequities
in implementing the plan or imposing the development impact fees; and
      5.   Advise the Mayor and Council of the need to update or revise land
use assumptions, Capital Improvements Plan and development impact fees.
   B.   The Mayor and Council shall make available to the Committee, upon
request, all financial and accounting information, professional reports in
relation to other development and implementation of land use assumptions, the
Capital Improvements Plan and periodic updates of the Capital Improvements
Plan.
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any
authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the City,
but all the departments and officials of the City shall cooperate with the
Committee for the purpose of coordinating the efforts and functions of all
departments, commissions, and boards of the City for the development of all
public facilities of the City. (Ord. 337, 11-24-1998)
CHAPTER 6
EAGLE ARTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Definition
2-6-2: Committee Created
2-6-3: Conflicts; Term Of Office And Vacancies
2-6-4: Organization And Administration
2-6-5: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2-6-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
 
COMMITTEE: The Eagle Arts Advisory Committee. (Ord. 887, 10-11-2022)
 
2-6-2: COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is hereby created a City of Eagle Arts Advisory Committee. The Eagle Arts
Advisory Committee shall consist of one (1) City Staff Designee as identified
by the Mayor, and three (3) additional members who shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to approval and confirmation by the City Council. Members shall
serve without compensation and shall serve solely in an advisory role under the
authority of the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 887, 10-11-2022)
2-6-3: CONFLICTS; TERM OF OFFICE AND VACANCIES:
   A.   Conflicts Of Interest: Each Committee member shall make every effort to
avoid any conflict of interest. To that end, no organization, which may be a
recipient of City funding, shall have on its board or staff more than one
individual who is also presently serving as a member of the Committee. While
serving on the Committee, no member may participate in a vote or decision on
any matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which that member has an
interest, including situations where the member is reasonably likely to receive
a direct economic effect or consequence, as a result of the vote or decision in
question. This includes, but is not limited to, a Committee member's own
business or corporate interests, and those business or corporate interests of
their immediate family. Where the interest of a Committee member in the subject
matter is remote or incidental, the member may participate in the vote or
decision. Otherwise, the Committee member shall disqualify himself/herself from
any action or determination on the subject matter in question.
   B.   Term Of Office; Vacancies: The members of the Committee shall take
office as of the date of their appointment. Appointment shall be for staggered
three (3) years terms. All members shall be eligible for reappointment, and
vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term.
All members of the Committee serve in a voluntary capacity. As such, they are
subject to removal by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. (Ord.
887, 10-11-2022)
2-6-4: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Chairperson: The Committee members shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-
Chairman from among the Committee members. The Chairman shall preside at all
meetings of the Committee. The Vice-Chairman shall, in the absence of the
Chairman, perform the duties of the Chairman. The authority of both the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be limited to those enumerated in this
chapter.
   B.   Authority: The Eagle Arts Advisory Committee is solely a recommending
body to City Council, and therefore its authority is limited. The Committee
shall only have the power to make whatever rules are necessary for the
execution of its duties as set forth in this chapter. The Committee shall have
no authority over the operations or employees assigned to the Committee.
   C.   Meetings: All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and
shall follow the requirements of Idaho's Open Meeting Law. In order to transact
any Committee business at a meeting, a quorum of Committee members is required
to be present. A quorum is constituted by the presence of a majority of
presently appointed Committee members. The Committee shall meet at least semi-
annually and provide minutes of such meeting to the City Clerk. The Committee
may also hold meetings at such other times as may be called by the City staff
designee, Chairman, Mayor or City Council.
   D.   Records Kept: Accurate minutes and other appropriate written records of
its resolutions, proceedings and actions will be kept. Upon their approval, all
records and minutes shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
   E.   Assistance Of Other Parties: The Committee may recommend to the Mayor
the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the services of
technical experts or other persons, to assist the commission in its functions.
The Committee cannot enter into any contracts, hire employees, or in any way
bind the City of Eagle by contract or action. (Ord. 887, 10-11-2022)
2-6-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Committee is solely a recommending body to the Mayor and City Council. The
Committee cannot enter into any contracts, hire employees, or in any way bind
the City of Eagle by contract or action. The Committee shall only have the
authority to execute its duties as enumerated in this chapter. The Committee
shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Identify short and long term goals to be presented to the Mayor and
City Council on an annual basis advising the City Council on ways in which City
government might further the accessibility and enjoyment of the arts to the
public.
   B.   Annually, recommend art programs to the City Council to pursue offering
via city sponsored community programming.
   C.   Review and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the
aesthetic aspects of public art, designs or public monuments under
consideration to be accepted or commissioned by the City.
   D.   Serve on jury panels to review art submittals for city-initiated
projects and galleries and provide recommendations to City Council for
consideration.
   E.   Annually, review grant funding requests from artistic and cultural
organizations, and/or individual artist for events/activities to take place
within the City of Eagle.
   F.   Present recommendations for City Council consideration for the proposed
allocation of public monies for public programs furthering the arts in the City
of Eagle.
   G.   Advise the City Council on the availability and adequacy of facilities
and space utilized for the presentation of cultural activities. (Ord. 887, 10-
11-2022)
CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
2-7-1: Historic Preservation Commission
2-7-2: Organization And Administration
2-7-3: Powers, Duties, And Responsibilities
2-7-4: Acquisition Of Property
2-7-5: Criteria For Selection Of Historic Properties, Landmarks And Districts
2-7-6: Procedures For Designation Of Historic Districts
2-7-7: Designation Of Historic Properties Or Historic Landmarks
2-7-8: Procedure For Designation Of Historic Property Or Landmark
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 9 of this code.
2-7-1: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   There is hereby created a historic preservation commission which shall
consist of the Historic Preservation Officer, or their designee, three (3)
additional members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
city council. Each shall be voting members on the Commission. Members shall
serve without compensation and shall serve solely in an advisory role under the
authority of the mayor and city council.
   B.   All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest,
competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. Experience in the
disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, urban planning,
archaeology, engineering, law, or other historic preservation related
disciplines would be helpful.
   C.   The members of the commission shall take office as of the date of their
appointment and qualification. Appointments shall be for three (3) to five (5)
years. All members shall be eligible for reappointment and vacancies shall be
filled by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. (Ord. 157, 10-24-
1989; amd. Ord. 306, 9-9-1997; Ord. 391, 5-8-2001; Ord. 739, 8-25-2015; Ord.
832, - -2020)
2-7-2: ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Authority: As the commission is solely a recommending body, its
authority is limited. The commission shall only have the power to make whatever
rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this
chapter. The historic preservation commission shall have no authority over the
operations or employees assigned to or doing work for the Eagle historical
museum.
   B.   Chairperson: The commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman
from among the commission members. The chairman shall preside at meetings of
the commission. The vice chairman shall, in the absence of the chairman,
perform the duties of the chairman. The authority of the chairman and vice
chairman is limited to those enumerated in this chapter.
   C.   Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public,
and follow the requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws. In order to transact
any commission business at a meeting, a quorum of committee members is required
to be present. A quorum is constituted by the presence of a majority of
presently appointed commission members. The commission shall meet at least
semiannually and provide minutes of such meetings to the city clerk. The
commission shall also hold meetings at such other times as may be called by the
Historic Preservation Officer, commission chairperson, the mayor or city
council.
   D.   Records Kept: The commission shall keep accurate minutes and other
appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. Upon
their approval, all records and minutes shall be submitted to the city clerk.
   E.   Assistance Of Other Parties: The commission may recommend to the mayor
the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the services of
technical experts or other persons, to assist the commission in its functions.
(Ord. 623, 4-14-2009; amd. Ord. 832, - - 2020)
2-7-3: POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
As the Eagle historic preservation commission is solely a recommending body,
its authority is limited. The commission shall only have the authority to
execute the duties so enumerated in this chapter. The commission shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   B.   Recommend the acquisition, by the city, of fee simple and lesser
interest in historic properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by
purchase, bequest, or donation.
   C.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
   D.   Recommend that the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of
historic properties be made subject to rights of public access and other
covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property.
   E.   Draft and submit to the city council for approval, contracts with the
state or federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other
organization for the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation in
accordance with this chapter. As the participation of the commission is purely
advisory, it cannot enter into contracts, hire employees, or in any way bind
the city of Eagle to any contract or action.
   F.   Cooperate with the federal, state, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
   G.   Participate in the planning processes undertaken by the city of Eagle
by making recommendations concerning historic preservation and the historic
museum to the city council.
   H.   Recommend ordinances to the city and otherwise provide information for
the purposes of historic preservation in the city.
   I.   Recommend educational and interpretive programs on historic
preservation and historic properties in the city.
   J.   Recommend the nomination of properties within the city's jurisdiction
to the National Register of Historic Places. Participate in the review of those
nominated properties and provide comments to the state historic preservation
office.
   K.   Prepare and submit budgetary recommendations to the city council for
annual expenditures necessary to the continuation and development of public
programs furthering historic preservation; however, the participation of the
commission is purely advisory.
   L.   Seek out and encourage contributions and grants for the benefit of
historic preservation from private and public sources and to advise and
recommend to the city council on the allocation of such monies appropriated
and/or granted and/or donated for such purposes. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd.
Ord. 391, 5-8-2001; Ord. 623, 4-14-2009; Ord. 832, - -2020)
2-7-4: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY:
All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds
appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the city and
operated, supervised, maintained and controlled by the city. (Ord. 623, 4-14-
2009)
2-7-5: CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES, LANDMARKS AND DISTRICTS:
Any site, building, group of buildings, structure or object may be designated
for preservation as a historic property, landmark or district if it:
   A.   Has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation;
or is associated with the life of a person significant in the past; or
   B.   Is the site of a historic event with a significant effect upon society;
or
   C.   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social or historic
heritage of the community; or
   D.   Portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by a
distinctive architectural style; or
   E.   Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type
or engineering specimen; or
   F.   Is the work of an architect, designer, craftsman or builder whose
individual work has significantly influenced the development of the city, state
or nation; or
   G.   Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which
represent a significant innovation; or
   H.   By being part of or related to a square, park or other distinctive
area, should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on a historic,
cultural or architectural motif; or
   I.   Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood,
community or the city; or
   J.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
   K.   In addition, a historic property, landmark or district must meet the
criteria established for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places,
which are as follows:
      1.   The quality of significance in American history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings,
structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
         a.   Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of history; or
         b.   Are associated with the lives of persons significant in the past;
or
         c.   Embody the distinctive characteristic of a type, period, or
method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess
high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable
entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
         d.   Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
      2.   Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historical figures,
properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes,
structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed
historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and
properties that have achieved significance within the past fifty (50) years
shall not be considered eligible for the National Register. However, such
properties will qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet
the criteria or if they fall within the following categories:
         a.   A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historic importance; or
         b.   A building or structure removed from its original location but
which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which is the
surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or
event; or
         c.   A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly
associated with this productive life; or
         d.   A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of
persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features,
or from association with historic events; or
         e.   A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable
environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master
plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has
survived; or
         f.   A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical
significance; or
         g.   A property achieving significance within the past fifty (50)
years if it is of exceptional importance. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391,
5-8-2001)
2-7-6: PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
   A.   Designation of a historic district may be initiated by request from the
council, or one or more owners of property located within the area of the
proposed district, or by a member of the commission. Upon receipt of such a
request, the commission shall make a preliminary investigation of the historic,
architectural, archeological and cultural significance of the buildings,
structures, features, sites or surroundings included in the proposed district,
based on the criteria set forth in section
2-7-5 of this chapter. Upon completion of this investigation, the commission
shall prepare a report containing its findings and recommendations concerning
the area to be included in the proposed historic district. (Ord. 623, 4-14-
2009)
   B.   Copies of the report shall be transmitted to the members of the
planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation, and within sixty
(60) days from the date of transmittal of such positive reports, the commission
shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time, place and purpose of
such hearing shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing by
one publication in the official newspaper of the city and by a written notice
of such hearing by first class mail given to the owners of all properties to be
included in the district.
   C.   Following such hearing the commission shall submit its findings and
recommendations and a draft of the proposed ordinance (in the case of positive
findings) to the city council within thirty (30) days of the end of such
hearing.
   D.   Council action may take any of the following forms:
      1.   Approval of the historic district designation as presented;
      2.   Rejection of the application for historic district designation;
      3.   Approval of the historic district designation, with modifications.
Regardless of which of the aforementioned options is chosen, the council shall
have prepared formal findings of fact and conclusions of law setting forth
their decision and the reasons therefor.
   E.   The city clerk shall notify all property owners within the district, in
writing, by first class mail, of the council's decision. Notification shall be
made within fifteen (15) days from the date of the council meeting at which the
decision was made. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
2-7-7: DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES OR HISTORIC LANDMARKS:
The council may adopt an ordinance designating one or more historic properties
or landmarks as long as said properties or landmarks meet one or more of the
criteria set forth in section
2-7-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
2-7-8: PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTY OR LANDMARK:
   A.   Designation of a historic property or landmark may be initiated by
request from the council, upon the request of the owner of the property
proposed to be designated, or on the commission's own initiative. Upon receipt
of such request, and under the authority of the city council, the commission
shall make a preliminary investigation of the historical, architectural,
archeological and cultural significance of the proposed property or landmark
based on the criteria set forth in section
2-7-5 of this chapter. The commission shall also consider the property's
suitability for preservation or restoration; educational value; cost of
acquisition, restoration, maintenance, operation or repair; possibilities for
adaptive or alternative use of the property; appraised value and administrative
and financial responsibility of any person or organization willing to
underwrite all or a portion of such costs. Upon completion of this
investigation, the commission shall prepare a report containing its findings
and recommendations concerning the proposed historic property or landmark. If
recommendations are positive, a draft of a proposed ordinance shall also be
prepared. The ordinance shall require that the waiting period set forth in
subsection
8-9-8C of this code be observed prior to the demolition, material alteration,
remodeling or removal of said historic property or landmark. (Ord. 623, 4-14-
2009)
   B.   Copies of the completed report and draft of the ordinance shall be
transmitted to the members of the council for review, and within forty five
(45) days from the date of transmittal, the council shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed ordinance, after having given written notice to the owners and
occupants of the property and the publication of such notice in the time and
manner required by section
2-7-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Following such public hearing, the council may act on the ordinance.
   D.   Following action on the ordinance, the owners or occupants of the
proposed historic property or landmark shall be given written notification by
first class mail of the council's decision within fifteen (15) days. Upon
approval of designation, the property owner shall be sent a copy of this
chapter and provision may be made for the erection of a suitable sign or marker
on or near the property indicating that the property has been so designated.
   E.   Upon passage of the ordinance, one copy of the ordinance shall be filed
in the office of the county recorder of Ada County, Idaho, and notice of such
designation shall be given to the tax assessor of Ada County, Idaho.
   F.   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, consent of the owner shall be
required in all cases. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
CHAPTER 8
CONSERVATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-8-1: Committee Created
2-8-2: Membership, Qualifications, Terms, Conflicts
2-8-3: Organization
2-8-4: Duties And Responsibilities
2-8-1: COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is hereby created a City of Eagle Conservation Advisory Committee. The
Conservation Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to the Mayor and
City Council regarding the City of Eagle Conservation and Education Program
(CEP). The Committee will recommend to the Mayor and City Council short term
and long-term conservation and education projects to be funded by the
Conservation and Education Program funding source as identified in Eagle City
Code
8-6-7B.
The Committee is solely a recommending body to the Mayor and City Council. The
Committee cannot enter into any contracts, hire employees, or in any way bind
the City of Eagle by contract or action. In addition, the Committee shall have
no authority over the operations or employees assigned to the Committee.
(Ord. 896, 6-13-2023)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP, QUALIFICATIONS, TERMS, CONFLICTS:
Voting Members: The Committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed by
the Mayor subject to confirmation of the Council. Each shall be a voting member
on the Committee. A minimum of two (2) members shall have a background in
cultural resources or strategic planning and two (2) members shall have a
background in natural resources and/or conservation.
Terms: The initial appointments shall be staggered between two (2) and four (4)
year terms amongst the members; and thereafter, at the expiration of any terms
of office the appointment shall be for the period of four (4) years. All
members may be eligible for reappointment and vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. All members of the Committee
shall serve without compensation and shall serve only in an advisory role under
the authority of the Mayor and City Council.
Conflicts Of Interest: Each Committee member shall make every effort to avoid
any conflict of interest. To that end, no organization, which may be a
recipient of City funding, shall have on its board or staff more than one
individual who is also presently serving as a member of the Committee in a
voting or Ex-Officio role. While serving on the Committee, no member may
participate in a vote or decision on any matter affecting a person, entity, or
property in which that member has an interest, including situations where the
member or the entity they represent is reasonably likely to receive a direct
economic effect or consequence, as a result of the vote or decision in
question. This includes, but is not limited to, a Committee member's own
business or corporate interests, and those business or corporate interests of
their immediate family. Where the interest of a Committee member in the subject
matter is remote or incidental, the member may participate in the vote or
decision. Otherwise, the Committee member shall disqualify himself/herself from
any action or determination on the subject matter in question.
(Ord. 896, 6-13-2023)
2-8-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Chairperson: The Committee members shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-
Chairman from among the Committee members. The Chairman shall preside at all
meetings of the Committee. The Vice-Chairman shall, in the absence of the
Chairman, perform the duties of the Chairman. The authority of both the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be limited to those enumerated in this
chapter.
   B.   Authority: The Committee is solely a recommending body to Mayor and
City Council, and therefore its authority is limited. The Committee shall have
only those duties and responsibilities in set forth in Section
2-8-4.
   C.   Assistance Of Other Parties: The Committee may recommend to the Mayor
and City Council the employment of, or the contracting with, other parties for
the services of technical experts or other persons, to assist the committee in
its functions.
   D.   Meetings: All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and
shall follow the requirements of Idaho's Open Meeting law. In order to transact
any Committee business at a meeting a quorum of presently appointed Voting
Committee members must be present. The Committee shall hold a minimum of two
(2) annual meetings, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairman
or by the Mayor or City Council.
   E.   Records Kept: The commission shall keep accurate minutes and other
appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. Upon
their approval, all records and minutes shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 896, 6-13-2023)
2-8-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity and is established to:
   A.   Develop and update a one (1) and five (5) year conservation education
program and funding plan for the City of Eagle including identification of
goals and objectives; Projects recommended will be presented to the City
Council as part of the annual City of Eagle Capital Improvement and Maintenance
Plan for prioritization and appropriation process;
   B.   Assist the City in identifying and prioritizing conservation and
education projects that may include:
      1.   Acquisition of conservation easements on agricultural lands to
preserve food production, protect soils, and provide pollinator and wildlife
habitat.
      2.   Acquisition of private lands or conservation easements (upland or
riparian) to mitigate impacts to wildlife and habitat loss.
      3.   Acquisition of private lands or conservation easements for public
trails and access, associated with conservation.
      4.   Restoration, rehabilitation, or enhancement projects - natural
resources (e.g. upland, riparian, aquatic habitat).
      5.   Management of invasive and noxious weed species, including fuels
projects, associated with protection of habitat (monitoring, control, and
maintenance).
      6.   Educational materials, classes, equipment, and infrastructure
associated with conservation-based education and outreach.
      7.   Other activities as identified by the City Council.
      8.   Identify projects where CEP funds may be used to supplement or
replace existing maintenance requirements of the city, or its partners, if
associated with existing mitigation or conservation efforts.
   C.   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the Conservation Education Plan
and the City's Capital Improvements and Maintenance Plan;
   D.   File reports, at least annually, with respect to the completion and
status of projects utilizing conservation funds to the Mayor and Council any
perceived issues in implementing of the program; and
   E.   Advise the Mayor and Council of the need to update or revise the
Conservation and Education Program or funding plans.
   F.   The Mayor and Council shall make available to the Committee, upon
request, all financial and accounting information, professional reports in
relation to other development and implementation of land use assumptions, the
Conservation Education program and periodic updates of the Capital Improvements
Plan and budget.
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any
authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the City,
but all the departments and officials of the City shall cooperate with the
Committee for the purpose of coordinating the efforts and functions of all
departments, commissions, and boards of the City for the development of all
public facilities of the City.
(Ord. 896, 6-13-2023)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Registration Required
3-1-4: Payment Of Fees; License, Issuance
3-1-5: Contents And Authority Of Licenses
3-1-6: Term Of License
3-1-7: More Than One Business At One Location
3-1-8: Violation And Penalties
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain an accurate listing of the trades,
businesses, and professions located in the city in order to:
   A.   Further the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Eagle so
that the city, especially the police, paramedics, and firefighters, have
knowledge of the materials and activities present within such businesses in the
event of emergencies; and
   B.   Allow the city and other interested parties to better communicate with
the Eagle business community and comprehend the business categories that may be
over or under served in the area. (Ord. 459, 10-14-2003)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter "trade", "business" and entities, or activities,
excluding "solicitor", "special event", "temporary merchant" or "vendor" as
defined in chapter 4 of this title, which hold themselves out to the public as
businesses, trades or professions regardless of size including such trades,
businesses or professions constituting home occupations as defined in title 8,
chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 459, 10-14-2003)
3-1-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, prosecute or carry on any trade, business or
profession within the limits of the city until such person or entity has
registered with the city as described in this chapter. (Ord. 459, 10-14-2003)
3-1-4: PAYMENT OF FEES; LICENSE, ISSUANCE:
Every trade, business, or profession shall pay, in advance to the city clerk,
the required fees as adopted by resolution of the city council. With the
receipt of such fee, the city clerk shall issue a license to the parties
applying therefor. (Ord. 459, 10-14-2003)
3-1-5: CONTENTS AND AUTHORITY OF LICENSES:
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain and set forth the
name, location, and type of each trade, business or profession for which such
license is granted. Said license shall authorize the continuance of the
business named therein for the term of such license, unless the place
registered shall be closed. In such cases, the city clerk shall be notified of
the change and shall note the same in the register of licenses. (Ord. 459, 10-
14-2003)
3-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Licenses shall be valid for one (1) year, expiring on June 30 of each year.
Licenses issued on or after January 1 shall be valid from the date of issuance
and expire June 30 of the current year. Each general business license shall be
renewed before June 30 upon request to the city clerk along with payment of the
annual fee. Failure to renew license shall result in the license becoming
invalid. (Ord. 459, 10-14-2003; amd. Ord. 859, 9-28-2021)
3-1-7: MORE THAN ONE BUSINESS AT ONE LOCATION:
In every case where more than one business, trade or profession shall be
pursued or carried on in the same place by the same person at the same time,
license must be taken out for each business accordingly. (Ord. 459, 10-14-2003)
3-1-8: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
If any person, persons, or entities exercise or carry on any trade, business or
profession without first receiving a license from the city as required by this
chapter, or violate any of the provisions of this chapter, he, she, or they
shall be guilty of an infraction punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: State Regulations Adopted
3-2-2: Application Determination By City Clerk
3-2-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
There are hereby adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and
use of alcoholic beverages within the city those laws of the state of Idaho
being particularly title 23, Idaho Code, as presently in effect or as may
hereafter be amended by the legislature together with any and all duly
promulgated regulations issued thereunder. The same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length
herein. (Ord. 428, 7-9-2002)
3-2-2: APPLICATION DETERMINATION BY CITY CLERK:
   A.   The city council has determined that the city clerk shall be delegated
the authority to process, grant or deny all alcoholic beverage license and
permit applications, other than as specifically provided herein.
   B.   Whenever the city clerk shall determine that an application for an
alcoholic beverage license and/or permit, or the transfer or renewal of a
license or permit is complete and the applicant possesses all of the
qualifications and none of the disqualifications for said license and/or permit
as provided by law, the city clerk shall approve such application.
   C.   If the city clerk denies the application the city clerk shall specify
in writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reasons for denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   D.   Whenever the city clerk shall deny any application under this chapter,
the applicant may appeal the city clerk's decision to the city council. Such
appeal shall be filed within twenty eight (28) days from the date of the city
clerk's denial.
   E.   A transcribable verbatim record of all appeals of denials of a permit,
license, transfer or renewal thereof shall be kept for six (6) months from the
date of appeal. Appeals shall be heard before the city council.
   F.   The city clerk shall issue a license and/or permit to the applicant,
which license or licenses shall at all times be prominently displayed in the
place of business of the licensee and shall be issued only for the particular
premises therein described. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
ARTICLE A. BEER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Definitions
3-2A-2: License Requirement
3-2A-3: Application For License And Review
3-2A-4: Qualifications Of Applicant
3-2A-5: License Fee, Terms
3-2A-6: Conditions Of License
3-2A-7: Inspection
3-2A-8: Revocation Of License
3-2A-9: Appeal And Revocation Procedures
3-2A-10: Violation And Penalty
3-2A-11: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
BEER:     Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
          decoction of barley, malt, and other ingredients in drinkable water.
DIRECTOR: The director of the state of Idaho department of law enforcement.
PERSON:   Any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation, or any
          group or combination acting as a unit.
          The building and contiguous improved property owned, leased, or used
PREMISES: by a licensee as part of the licensee's business establishment in the
          business of selling beer at retail.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale of beer to the consumer. (Ord. 128, 1-
          26-1988; amd. Ord. 670, 5-29-2012; Ord. 923, 4-23-2024)
 
3-2A-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to sell beer without first obtaining a
license in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 128, 1-26-
1988)
3-2A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND REVIEW:
   A.   Application; Review: Application for a license to sell beer at retail
or the transfer or renewal of such license shall be made in writing by an
applicant. An application shall contain such information and statements
relative to the applicant and the premises where beer is to be sold as the
mayor and city council reasonably require and shall be verified by the
affidavit of the person making it before a person authorized to administer
oaths. Such application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be
accompanied by the fee herein required. The application shall be reviewed as
provided in section
3-2-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
3-2A-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
An applicant for a license or the transfer or renewal of a license shall
possess all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications necessary
to obtain a retail beer license from the director of the department of law
enforcement, as prescribed by title 23, chapter 10, Idaho Code. The applicant
shall possess a current state retail beer license from the director and a
current county retail beer license from the board of Ada County commissioners.
(Ord. 128, 1-26-1988)
3-2A-5: LICENSE FEE, TERMS:
Every retailer licensed under the provisions of this article shall pay the city
license fees as follows:
   A.   Where such retailer sells only bottled or canned beer, none of which is
consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) a year. The annual license fee shall be prorated to reflect the actual
months of issuance.
   B.   Where such retailer sells for consumption draft beer and/or bottled or
canned beer on the premises or off premises. The annual license fee shall be
two hundred dollars ($200.00) a year. The annual license fee shall be prorated
to reflect the actual months of issuance.
   C.   Where such retailer obtains a license originally issued to another
retailer, or where such retailer transfers a license from authorized premises
to other approved premises, the license transfer fee shall be five dollars
($5.00).
   D.   Such license year shall be from July 1 through June 30 of the following
year; provided, however, should a license be issued for less than a full
calendar year, the license fee shall be prorated in accordance with the actual
months of issuance. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011; amd. Ord. 670, 5-29-2012; Ord. 822,
2-25-2020; Ord. 923, 4-23-2024)
3-2A-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Premises Restrictions: A retailer licensed under the provisions of this
article shall sell beer only upon the premises described in the license
application and approved by the city council. The retailer's city license to
sell beer at retail shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon such premises
during the period of time for which the license is issued. A licensed retailer
seeking to change premises shall make application to the city clerk in
accordance with the provisions of section
3-2A-3 of this article. (Ord. 670, 5-29-2012)
   B.   Transfer Restrictions: A retailer licensed under the provisions of this
article shall not assign or otherwise transfer a city license to sell beer at
retail to another person without the approval of the city council. Application
to transfer a license to another person shall be made to the city clerk in
accordance with the provisions of section
3-2A-3 of this article. (Ord. 128, 1-26-1988; amd. Ord. 923, 4-23-2024)
3-2A-7: INSPECTION:
The director or any duly authorized representative of the director, any Ada
County sheriff, and any city police officer shall have the right, at any time
the premises of a licensee is occupied for any purpose, to make an examination
of the premises for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state,
the rules and regulations of the director, and the ordinances of the city and
county are being complied with. The failure of a licensee or of a licensee's
agents or employees to permit any person authorized hereunder to enter and
examine the premises shall be deemed a violation of this article. (Ord. 128, 1-
26-1988)
3-2A-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may revoke any license for fraud and misrepresentation in its
procurement, or in the event of the conviction of a licensed retailer under the
provisions of any city or county ordinance, or of any law of the state or of
the United States, regulating, governing, or prohibiting the sale, manufacture,
transportation, or possession of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or
upon any other grounds authorized by title 23, chapter 10, Idaho Code. (Ord.
128, 1-26-1988)
3-2A-9: APPEAL AND REVOCATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   License Revocation: The city council shall proceed in accordance with
the notice and hearing provisions of title 67, chapter 52, Idaho Code, in
considering the revocation of a license pursuant to section 3-2A-8 of this
article. The city council shall cause to be kept minutes and make a
transcribable verbatim record of any revocation proceeding. If a license is
revoked, the city council shall keep the transcribable verbatim record of the
proceeding for a period of not less than six (6) months after a written
decision on the matter is transmitted to the licensee.
   B.   Judicial Review: An applicant or licensee aggrieved by a decision of
the city council may, within sixty (60) days, seek judicial review under the
procedures provided in sections 67-5215 and 67-5216, Idaho Code. (Ord. 128, 1-
26-1988)
3-2A-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
3-2A-11: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person in any place
licensed to sell beer or where beer is sold or dispensed to be consumed on the
premises, whether conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell, dispense or give
away beer between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M.
   B.   Any person present on the licensed premises after the sale of beer has
stopped as provided in subsection A of this section shall have a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to consume any beverage already
served.
   C.   Any person who consumes or intentionally permits the consumption of any
alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises after the time provided for in
subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 655, 3-22-
2011)
ARTICLE B. WINE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2B-1: License Required, Application
3-2B-2: Qualifications Of Applicant
3-2B-3: License Fee, Term
3-2B-4: Issuance Of License
3-2B-5: Transfer Of License
3-2B-6: Conditions Of License, Consumption On Premises
3-2B-7: Prohibited Acts, Possession In Vehicles
3-2B-8: Revocation Of License
3-2B-9: Violation And Penalty
3-2B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail within the corporate
limits of the city without having first procured a license therefor.
Application for license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant upon application forms furnished by the city clerk. Such application
shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the required
fee. The application shall be reviewed as provided in section
3-2-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
3-2B-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary
to obtain a license from the director of the department of law enforcement of
the state, as prescribed by the laws of the state, and maintain such
qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The
possession of licenses regularly issued by the department of law enforcement
and the county, in addition to a city beer license, shall be prima facie
evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder.
(Ord. 4, 6-14-1971; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2B-3: LICENSE FEE, TERM:
Every retailer licensed under the provisions of this article shall pay the city
license fees as follows:
   A.   Where such person sells wine at retail for consumption off the licensed
premises, the annual license fee shall be one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00) a year. The annual license fee shall be prorated to reflect the
actual months of issuance.
   B.   Where such person sells wine by the individual glass or opened bottle
at retail, for consumption on the premises or off premises. The annual license
fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) a year. The annual license fee shall
be prorated to reflect the actual months of issuance.
   C.   Such license year shall be from July 1 through June 30 of the following
year; provided, however, should a license be issued for less than a full
calendar year, the license fee shall be prorated in accordance with the actual
months of issuance. (Ord. 313, 11-25-1997; amd. Ord. 428, 7-9-2002; Ord. 670,
5-29-2012; Ord. 822, 2-25-2020; Ord. 923, 4-23- 2024)
3-2B-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence as
required by section 3-2B-2 of this article as to the qualifications of the
applicant and by the payment of the required license fee, the clerk shall, upon
approval of the council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at
retail within the municipality for such calendar year or the remainder thereof.
(Ord. 4, 6-14-1971; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2B-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The assignment or transfer of a wine license shall be the same as provided for
the assignment or transfer of a beer license in sections 3-2A-3 and 3-2A-4, and
subsections 3-2A-5C and 3-2A-6B of this chapter. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
3-2B-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE, CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
   A.   Wine sold for consumption or dispensed on the retailer's premises may
be sold only during hours that beer may be sold, consumed or dispensed pursuant
to the laws of the state.
   B.   Wine sold by the retailer for consumption off the premises of the
retailer may be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to
the laws of this state 1 . (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 23-1012.
3-2B-7: PROHIBITED ACTS, POSSESSION IN VEHICLES:
No person may, while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a
public highway of this city, have in his possession any wine in an open or
unsealed container of any kind. (Ord. 4, 6-14-1971; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2B-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the mayor and council, and
the mayor and council may, as hereinafter provided, suspend or cancel any
license for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement, or for a violation
of any of the provisions of this article, or for any conduct or act of the
licensee or his/her employees or any conduct or act permitted by him/her or
them on the premises where such business is conducted, or in connection
therewith or adjacent thereto, tending to render such business or such premises
where the same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health,
peace, safety or general welfare of the city; provided, that revocation or
suspension of the state license by the director of the department of law
enforcement shall be deemed prima facie evidence for revocation or suspension
of the license issued herein. Proceedings for the suspension, revocation or
cancellation of any license issued pursuant to this article shall be in
accordance with the notice and hearing requirements set forth in subsection 3-
2A-9A of this chapter. (Ord. 4, 6-14-1971; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2B-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to
comply with any of the terms and conditions of this act shall be guilty of an
infraction, and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-4-2013)
ARTICLE C. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Definitions
3-2C-2: Findings And Policy
3-2C-3: License Required
3-2C-4: Application For License
3-2C-5: Investigation Of Applicant
3-2C-6: License Fee, Terms
3-2C-7: Retail Liquor License
3-2C-8: Form, Renewal, And Transfer Of License
3-2C-9: Actual Use Required
3-2C-10: Hours Of Sale
3-2C-11: Revocation And Suspension
3-2C-12: Alcoholic Beverage Catering Permit
3-2C-13: Violation And Penalty
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
BEER:          Same meaning as provided in section
               3-2A-1 of this chapter.
CITY:          The city of Eagle, Ada County, Idaho.
CITY CLERK:    The clerk of the city.
CITY COUNCIL:  The council of the city.
DIRECTOR:      The director of the department of law enforcement of the state
               of Idaho.
LICENSE:       A retail liquor license issued under the provisions of this
               article.
LICENSEE:      A person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of
               this article.
LIQUOR:        Any kind of liquor sold by and in a state liquor store of the
               state of Idaho.
PERSON:        An individual, partnership, corporation, organization, or
               association.
PREMISES:      A building or place in which the sale of liquor by the drink at
               retail is authorized under title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code.
               An event conducted on public property, or private property open
               to the public, including: streets, beaches, parks, community
               centers, parking lots and waterways, for the purpose of
               conducting certain short term events such as art shows, music
               concerts, fundraising events, sidewalk sales, amusement
               attractions, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, swap meets, and
               sporting events including, but not limited to, organized float
SPECIAL EVENT: trips, contests, street dances, tournaments, walk-a-thons,
               marathons, races, exhibitions, craft/art shows or related
               activities. A small community event has an estimated number of
               attendees of fifty to one hundred (50 - 100). A medium community
               event has an estimated number of attendees of one hundred one to
               nine hundred ninety nine (101 - 999). A large community event
               has an estimated number of attendees exceeding one thousand
               (1,000).
               A retail liquor license issued by the director to a qualified
STATE LICENSE: person pursuant to title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code.(Ord. 729, 2-
               10-2015; amd. Ord. 923, 4-23-2024)
 
3-2C-2: FINDINGS AND POLICY:
The city council hereby finds and determines that it is in the best interests
of the city and its inhabitants, and in the best interests of the public
health, safety, morals, and welfare, that the proliferation of the number of
premises within the city licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the
drink not be encouraged. It shall therefore be the policy of the city, to the
extent possible, to issue licenses under this article to those premises which
were licensed for the sale of beer by the drink, and which were actually
operating under such licenses, as of the date of the election approving the
licensing and sale of liquor by the drink within the city.
The city council further finds and determines that the foregoing restriction is
reasonable and will further the policy of the city against the proliferation of
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the
city. (Ord. 146, 11-15-1988)
3-2C-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell liquor by the drink at retail
within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license
therefor as provided in this article. (Ord. 146, 11-15-1988)
3-2C-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Each applicant for a license shall file with the clerk an application in
writing, verified by affidavit, setting forth the following:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant, which shall include all members
of a partnership or association, and the officers and members of the governing
board, and ten (10) principal stockholders of a corporation.
   B.   A detailed statement of the assets and liabilities of the applicant.
   C.   A statement that the applicant possesses all of the qualifications and
none of the disqualifications necessary to obtain a state license from the
director as provided by title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code, and that the applicant
holds a retail beer license issued under the laws of the state of Idaho.
   D.   A detailed description of the premises for which a license is sought,
including its location, showing that it is located in a zone in which the sale
of alcoholic beverages is permitted under the zoning ordinance of the city, and
the name of the owner of the premises.
   E.   A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of any corporation,
the articles of association and bylaws of any association, or the articles of
partnership of any partnership.
   F.   The names and addresses of all persons who will have a financial
interest in any business to be carried on in the licensed premises, whether
such interest results from open loans, mortgages, conditional sales agreements,
limited partnerships, trusts, or any other basis other than accounts incurred
in the ordinary course of business, and the extent of such interest.
   G.   If the premises to be licensed is not owned by the applicant, then a
true and correct copy of the lease shall be attached showing that the owner
consents to the sale of liquor by the drink on such premises.
   H.   Such information as may be reasonably required by the city clerk in
order to determine the applicant's qualifications or disqualifications for a
license under this article.
If, during the period of any license issued hereunder, any change shall take
place in any of the requirements of this section, the licensee shall forthwith
make a verified report of such change to the city clerk.
If, during the period of any license issued hereunder, the licensee seeks to
move his business from one premises to another within the city, he may do so
subject to the director's approval that the new premises is suitable for the
carrying on of the business, and subject to compliance with applicable zoning,
building, and other ordinances of the city.
The making of any false statement in any part of the application, or in any
subsequent report required under this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 146, 11-15-1988)
3-2C-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this article, accompanied by
the required fee, the city clerk shall obtain and review the report of the
investigation of the applicant by the director, and may rely upon the
director's investigation in determining whether or not the applicant possesses
all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications for a license. The
city clerk may, additionally, conduct such independent investigation as he or
she may deem appropriate. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
3-2C-6: LICENSE FEE, TERMS:
Each licensee shall pay a license fee in advance in the amount of five hundred
sixty two dollars fifty cents ($562.50) for the sale of liquor to be consumed
only where sold. Wine for consumption on and off the premises is included. The
license which is effective from July 1 through June 30 of the following year.
If the license is issued for less than a full twelve (12) month period, the
license fee shall be prorated as of the month of actual issuance, but shall not
be less than one- fourth (1/4) of the annual fee. (Ord. 428, 7-9-2002; amd.
Ord. 822, 2-25-2020; Ord. 923, 4-23-2024)
3-2C-7: RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE:
If the city clerk shall determine that the contents of the application are
true, that such applicant is qualified to receive a license, and that the
requirements of this article have been met and complied with, the city clerk
shall issue the license pursuant to the review procedures as provided in
section
3-2-2 of this chapter.
If there is more than one qualified applicant for a license, first in time of
filing the application with the city clerk shall be first in right; provided,
that persons holding and actually operating under, on November 8, 1988,
existing licenses of the city for the sale of beer by the drink shall be
entitled to priority over other applicants. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
3-2C-8: FORM, RENEWAL, AND TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Every license issued under this article shall be issued by the city clerk and
shall set forth the name of the person to whom issued, the location, by street
and number or other definite designation, of the premises, and such other
information as the city clerk deems necessary. If issued to a partnership, the
names of the persons constituting the partnership shall be set forth. If issued
to a corporation or association, the names of the principal officers and the
governing board shall be set forth. Such license shall be signed by the
licensee and prominently displayed in the place of business at all times. Every
license issued under the provisions of this article is separate and distinct,
and no person except the licensee therein named, except as herein otherwise
provided, shall exercise any of the privileges granted thereunder.
No person shall be granted more than one license in the city for any one year.
No partnership, association, or corporation holding a license under this
chapter shall have as a member, officer, or stockholder any person who has any
financial interest of any kind in, or is a member or an officer of, another
partnership, association, or corporation holding a license in the city for the
same year. Nor shall any duplication of licenses be permitted on the same
premises.
Renewal applications for licenses accompanied by the required fee must be filed
with the city clerk prior to the expiration date listed on the license. Any
licensee holding a valid license who fails to file an application for renewal
of his current license shall have a grace period of an additional thirty one
(31) days in which to file an application for renewal of his license and during
which time he shall not be permitted to sell and dispense liquor by the drink
at retail.
Application to transfer any license issued hereunder shall be made to the city
clerk. Upon receipt of such application, the city clerk shall make the same
investigation as provided under section 3-2C-5 of this article. Upon transfer,
the license shall be endorsed to the proposed transferee by said licensee for
the remainder of the period for which such license was issued, and the city
clerk shall note approval of such transfer on such license. No transfer fee
shall be collected for transfers described in section 23-908(5)(a), (b), (c),
(d), or (e), Idaho Code. (Ord. 655, 3-22-2011)
3-2C-9: ACTUAL USE REQUIRED:
Each new license shall be placed into actual use by the original licensee at
the time of issuance and shall remain in actual use for at least six (6)
consecutive months or be forfeited to the city. Such license shall not be
transferable, except as provided in section 23-908(4)(a), (b), (c), (d), or
(e), Idaho Code, for a period of two (2) years from the date of original
issuance. (Ord. 146, 11-15-1988)
3-2C-10: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed
premises, and all liquor not in sealed bottles must be locked in a separate
room or cabinet, during the hours between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. Liquor may be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon
any licensed premises any day of the year including Sundays, Memorial Day and
Thanksgiving subject to the time restrictions provided for above. Any patron
present on the licensed premises after the sale of liquor has stopped as
provided above shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes,
to consume any beverages already served. Any person who consumes or
intentionally permits the consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon licensed
premises after the time provided for above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It
shall be the duty of every person who is employed at or upon a licensed
premises or who owns or manages a licensed premises and is present upon the
licensed premises during the hours and at the time set forth in this section to
lock up and keep locked up in a locked room or locked cabinet all unsealed
containers of liquor during the hours and at the times set forth in this
section, and any such person who fails to perform the duty provided herein
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Severability: If any provision of this section shall be held to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered
separately and apart from the remaining provisions of this section, which shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 629, 2-8-2011; amd. Ord. 831, 5-12-2020)
3-2C-11: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
The city council may, in accordance with proceedings provided for revocation of
beer licenses under section 3-2A-9 of this chapter, revoke any license for any
of the grounds set forth in section 3-2A-8 of this chapter, or upon any other
grounds authorized by title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code.
The suspension of a license for the sale of beer or wine shall automatically
result in the suspension of any license for the sale of liquor held by the same
licensee and issued for the same premises. Such additional suspension shall be
equal in length to and run concurrently with the period of the original
suspension. (Ord. 146, 11-15-1988)
3-2C-12: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERING PERMIT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure and
guidelines for obtaining an alcoholic beverage catering license pursuant to
Idaho Code, title 23.
   B.   Permit Determination By The City Clerk: The city council has determined
that the city clerk shall be delegated the authority to process, grant or deny
all alcohol beverage catering permit applications.
   C.   Catering Permits Required; Fees:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to serve and sell any alcoholic
beverage retail by the drink upon an unlicensed premises, without first
obtaining a catering permit issued by the city clerk pursuant to these
provisions. Catering permits associated with events open to the public may also
require an open container permit pursuant to section 3-2D-4 of this chapter.
      2.   A nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00)
per day shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of filing.
   D.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Application: Any person holding an Idaho retail liquor license,
retail beer or wine license, or permit issued pursuant to Idaho Code section
23-1007A may obtain an application for a catering permit at the office of the
city clerk and fill out the application completely where designated on the
application. The application must be executed by the applicant and filed with
the city clerk not less than five (5) business days prior to the catering date
(s) requested. Failure to complete the required portions of the application may
result in a denial of the application.
      2.   Permit: The application for permit shall provide the following
information:
         a.   Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
         b.   The number of his/her Idaho state retail liquor license, Idaho
state retail beer or wine license, or permit issued pursuant to Idaho Code
section 23-1007A;
         c.   A photocopy of the Idaho state retail liquor license, Idaho state
retail beer or wine license, or permit issued pursuant to Idaho Code section
23-1007A when requested by the city clerk;
         d.   Dates and hours requested during which the permit is to be
effective, not to exceed three (3) consecutive days;
         e.   The names of the organizations, groups, or persons sponsoring the
event; and the name of the applicant's designee who will be present at the
event;
         f.   The address at which the alcoholic beverages are to be served;
and if a public building, or private building open to the public, the rooms in
which the alcoholic beverages are to be served;
         g.   The number of anticipated people who will attend the party or
convention including all hosts, employees, sponsors, agents, consumers, and
security personnel;
         h.   A detailed description or diagram of the location where the
alcoholic beverages are to be served and sold.
      3.   Persons Not Qualified For Catering Permit: No catering permit shall
be issued to:
         a.   Any person who does not possess a valid retail liquor license,
Idaho state retail beer or wine license, or a benevolent, charitable, or public
purpose permit from the state pursuant to Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, 10 or
13;
         b.   An applicant who wilfully files any false or misleading statement
which the applicant knows to be or reasonably should have known to be false or
misleading in any part of said application or any subsequent report;
         c.   Any application for catering permit for more than three (3)
consecutive days as provided by Idaho Code.
   E.   Applications Reviewed:
      1.   The city clerk shall review the application for a catering permit
for completeness and forward said application to the police chief and fire
chief for their recommendation.
      2.   Recommendation of the police chief and fire chief or their
designees:
         a.   The police chief and fire chief or their designees may recommend
conditions, terms, or a reduction in the number of requested dates or times as
determined reasonable to carry out the policies of the city, which include the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, or to prevent an
unlawful disturbance or nuisance. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to, posting of appropriate signs, and hiring at applicant's expense
additional licensed, bonded security personnel. Any such conditions must be
attached and displayed as a part of the catering permit.
         b.   Where the police chief and fire chief or their designees
determine that due to the anticipated number of participants, location,
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, occurrence of other special events, ingress or
egress of customers, or presence of minors requires additional physical
configuration or limitation of the premises for enforcement purposes, the chief
may recommend that the site of catering be maintained in a specified manner as
a condition of the permit.
   F.   Issuance Or Denial Of Application:
      1.   In addition to the standard of review provided in section
3-2-2 of this chapter, whenever the city clerk shall determine that an
application for a catering permit is complete the city clerk shall approve or
deny such application in accordance with this article. The city clerk shall
issue an alcoholic beverage catering permit if all of the following criteria
are met and shall deny the application for a permit if any of the following
criteria are not met:
         a.   The applicant is qualified;
         b.   The police chief and fire chief or their designees recommend
issuance of a permit either absolutely or conditionally;
         c.   A catering site where the applicant proposes to offer alcoholic
beverages:
            (1)   Abuts or is contiguous to where sanitation and related
services are performed;
            (2)   The boundaries of the proposed catering site are identified
in a detailed diagram or description of the premises in which the perimeter of
the catering site and its proximity to the nearest streets is designated and
measured in feet;
            (3)   The detailed diagram or description of the premises
accompanying the application reflects that the proposed event will not inhibit
the public health and safety including, but not limited to, the placement of
catering site furnishings, tables, chairs or barriers such that it inhibits
safe sidewalk or roadway passage.
      2.   Whenever the city clerk shall deny any application the city clerk
shall specify in writing:
         a.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
         b.   The reasons for the denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof.
   G.   Permit Display, Required: The applicant or the applicant's designee is
required to carry, display or post the original catering permit issued and must
be personally present at the approved catering premises at all times during the
life of the catering permit. The applicant's designee on the application shall
also be approved by the city clerk in the same manner as described herein for
the applicant.
   H.   Grounds And Procedures For Revocation: The city council may, in
accordance with proceedings provided for under section 3-2A-9 of this chapter,
revoke any catering permit for any of the grounds set forth in this article or
as authorized by title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code, including, but not limited
to, for any conduct or act of the permittee or his/her employees or any conduct
or act permitted by him/her or them on the site where the catering event is
conducted, or in connection therewith or adjacent thereto, tending to render
such site as a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety or
general welfare of the city.
   I.   Exigent Circumstances For Revocation: Where there exists a clear
endangerment to the health, safety and welfare of the public resulting from the
use of the permit, or where the applicant or his/her agents fail to perform in
conformance with the conditions and terms set forth on the permit, the city
clerk or the police chief may revoke the catering permit issued under the
provisions of this article by immediately demanding and seizing the permit from
the applicant. Upon receipt of the revoked permit, or where the permit cannot
be seized due to unavailability of the applicant, or where the applicant
refuses to surrender said permit, the chief of police may direct the seizure of
all alcoholic beverages and remove the same and keep the same as evidence, and
upon conviction of the person for violation of the provisions hereof, the said
liquor and all packages, or receptacles containing the same, shall be forfeited
to the state of Idaho. (Ord. 729, 2-10-2015)
3-2C-13: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
ARTICLE D. OPEN CONTAINERS IN PUBLIC
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Definitions
3-2D-2: Unlawful To Have Possession Of An Open Container
3-2D-3: Unlawful To Consume Alcoholic Beverages
3-2D-4: Permits
3-2D-5: Exceptions
3-2D-6: Violation And Penalty
3-2D-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol, including "beer" and
                    "wine" as defined hereinafter by this article.
                    Any beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an
BEER:               infusion or decoction of barley, malt, and/or other
                    ingredients in drinkable water.
CONTAINER:          Any receptacle capable of holding or storing liquid.
LIQUOR:             Any beverage as defined in Idaho Code section 23-105.
PARKING LOT:        Any place maintained for the outdoor parking of motor
                    vehicles.
PERSON:             Any individual, firm, copartnership, association,
                    corporation, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
                    An event conducted on public property, or private property
                    open to the public, including: streets, beaches, parks,
                    community centers, parking lots and waterways, for the
                    purpose of conducting certain short term events such as art
                    shows, music concerts, fundraising events, sidewalk sales,
                    amusement attractions, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, swap
                    meets, and sporting events including, but not limited to,
SPECIAL EVENT:      organized float trips, contests, street dances,
                    tournaments, walk-a-thons, marathons, races, exhibitions,
                    craft/art shows or related activities. A small community
                    event has an estimated number of attendees of fifty to one
                    hundred (50 - 100). A medium community event has an
                    estimated number of attendees of one hundred one to nine
                    hundred ninety nine (101 - 999). A large community event
                    has an estimated number of attendees exceeding one thousand
                    (1,000).
                    Entire width between the boundary lines of every way or
STREET:             place open to the public for motorized or nonmotorized
                    vehicular travel, including any sidewalk or way intended
                    for pedestrian travel.
                    Any beverage obtained through fermentation of the natural
WINE:               sugar content of fruits or other agricultural products
                    containing sugar whether or not other ingredients are
                    added.
All other words and phrases used in this article, the definition of which is
not herein given, shall be given their ordinary and commonly understood and
accepted meanings. (Ord. 729, 2-10-2015; amd. Ord. 923, 4-23-2024)
 
3-2D-2: UNLAWFUL TO HAVE POSSESSION OF AN OPEN CONTAINER:
Except as otherwise permitted by statute or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for
any person to have in his or her possession any open container of any alcoholic
beverage in any of the following areas:
   A.   On any street;
   B.   In any public or private parking lot if open to the public;
   C.   In or upon any public or private motor vehicle;
   D.   Upon any public or private property if open to the public; and
   E.   Within the city park system, it shall only be unlawful to possess or
consume any alcoholic beverage upon any street, parking lot or restroom. (Ord.
323, 5-12-1998)
3-2D-3: UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
Except as otherwise permitted by statute or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for
any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any of the following areas open
to the public:
   A.   On any street;
   B.   In any public or private parking lot;
   C.   In or upon any public or private motor vehicle;
   D.   Upon any public or private property if open to the public; and
   E.   Within the city park system, it shall only be unlawful to possess or
consume any alcoholic beverage upon any street, parking lot or restroom. (Ord.
323, 5-12-1998)
3-2D-4: PERMITS:
   A.   Permits Required: Possession or consumption of alcohol may be allowed
in any of the prohibited areas in sections 3-2D-2 and 3-2D-3 of this article,
upon obtaining a permit as set forth below. Within the city park system permits
shall be required for the possession of more than seven and one-half (71/2)
gallons of alcoholic beverages.
   B.   Application: An applicant for such permit shall make application to the
city clerk. The applicant shall further remit a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee, and
comply with all rules and regulations related to such use. When the city clerk
determines that the application is complete, the application shall be reviewed
as provided in this section and in section
3-2-2 of this chapter. The application for an open container permit shall
provide the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of the applicant; permit applicants
shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Dates and hours requested during which the permit is to be
effective;
      3.   The address at which the alcoholic beverages are to be served; and
if a public building, or private building open to the public, the rooms in
which the alcoholic beverages are to be served;
      4.   The number of anticipated people who will attend the event including
all hosts, employees, sponsors, agents, consumers, and security personnel;
      5.   A detailed description or diagram of the location where the
alcoholic beverages are to be served and sold.
   C.   Applications Reviewed:
      1.   The city clerk shall review the application for open container
permit for completeness.
         a.   If the permit is sought in conjunction with a small community
event (50 - 100 estimated attendees), the city clerk will forward said
application to the Eagle police chief and fire chief for their recommendation.
The application shall be submitted to the city clerk not less than five (5)
working days prior to the scheduled event.
         b.   If the permit is sought in conjunction with a medium (101 - 999
estimated attendees) or large (1,000+ estimated attendees) community event, the
applicant shall obtain written permission from the Eagle police chief and fire
chief (or designees) prior to application submittal. The application, including
the written recommendation of the Eagle police chief and fire chief or
designee, shall be submitted to the city clerk not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the scheduled event.
      2.   Recommendation of the police chief and fire chief or their
designees:
         a.   The police chief and fire chief or their designees may recommend
conditions, terms, or a reduction in the number of requested dates or times as
determined reasonable to carry out the policies of the city, which include
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, or to prevent an
unlawful disturbance or nuisance. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to, posting of appropriate signs, and hiring at applicant's expense
additional licensed, bonded security personnel. Any such conditions must be
attached and displayed as a part of the open container permit.
         b.   Where the police chief determines that due to the anticipated
number of participants, site of open container permit, pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, occurrence of special events, ingress or egress of customers, or
presence of minors requires additional physical configuration or limitation of
the premises for enforcement purposes, the chief may recommend that the site of
open container permit be maintained in a specified manner as a condition of the
permit.
   D.   Issuance Or Denial Of Application: The city clerk may impose conditions
as determined to be reasonable to carry out the policies of the city, which
include protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, or to
prevent an unlawful disturbance or nuisance. Persons attending an event at
which open containers of alcohol are possessed or served are subject to all
federal, state, county and city statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. In
the event the issuance of the permit results in the violation of any of the
permit conditions, the individual representative and the group will not be
granted another permit for a period of one year. Whenever the city clerk shall
deny any application the city clerk shall specify in writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reasons for denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain an open
container permit. (Ord. 729, 2-10-2015)
3-2D-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage shall be allowed within the
city park system except upon any street, parking lot, or restroom within a city
park. (Ord. 323, 5-12-1998)
3-2D-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
ARTICLE A. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Application For License, Qualifications
3-3A-2: License Fees
3-3A-3: Electrical Examining Board
3-3A-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person wishing to engage in the business of installing any electrical
wiring, machinery, apparatus, sign or equipment shall make application to the
city council indicating his desire to become a licensed electrician. Such
application must be accompanied by a certificate of the electrical examining
board approving his qualifications to act as a licensed electrician and
authorizing the issuance of the license. If the application is approved, the
city council shall order the city clerk to issue the license, upon the payment
of the required fee.
No license shall be issued to any person until they have qualified before the
electrical examining board. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
3-3A-2: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for a license for a licensed electrician shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00) and the license shall be in force for one year from date of issue.
Thereafter any person who holds a valid license as a licensed electrician shall
annually apply for and receive, without further examination, a renewal of such
license upon the payment of a five dollar ($5.00) fee. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
3-3A-3: ELECTRICAL EXAMINING BOARD:
   A.   Board Created, Membership: There is hereby created an electrical
examining board for the purpose of examining into and determining the
qualifications and fitness of all applicants to become licensed electricians.
Such board shall consist of the electrical inspector 1  and one other competent
person to be appointed by the mayor.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The electrical examining board shall have the power
and it is hereby made its duty to promulgate rules and regulations for the
examination of applicants for a licensed electrician and regulating of
examination of such applicants. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to
the approval of the mayor and council.
   C.   Compensation: Each member of the electrical examining board shall
receive a fee of two dollars ($2.00) for each person examined by the board as
provided in this article; such fee to be paid by the city as other claims
against the city. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 7-1C-2 of this code.
ARTICLE B. PLUMBING CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-3B-1: License Required
3-3B-2: Classifications Of Plumbers
3-3B-3: License Fees, Expiration And Renewal
3-3B-4: Eligibility For License
3-3B-5: Violation
3-3B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, corporation, copartnership, firm or association shall engage in the
business, trade, practice or work of plumbing in the city, from and after the
effective date hereof, unless such person, or a responsible person representing
such firm, copartnership, association or corporation, has been first licensed
by the city. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
3-3B-2: CLASSIFICATIONS OF PLUMBERS:
There shall be three (3) classifications of plumbers, namely: plumbing
contractor, also known as master plumber; plumbing journeyman; and plumbing
apprentice, each of whom shall have respectively the qualifications set forth
and provided in section 54-2611 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
3-3B-3: LICENSE FEES, EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
Before a license is issued by the city for engaging in one of the
classifications of plumbing mentioned in section 3-3B-2 of this article, the
applicant shall pay to the city an original and a renewal fee as follows:
 
                    Initial Fee Renewal Fee
Plumbing contractor $100.00     $15.00
Plumbing journeyman 15.00       3.00
 
All licenses shall expire on January 1 of each year and may be renewed for a
period of one year upon payment of the renewal fee above provided for. Licenses
which have expired for failure of the holder to pay the renewal fee shall be
reinstated upon the payment of the renewal fee and a penalty of ten dollars
($10.00), in addition to such renewal fee. All licenses which have expired for
failure to pay such renewal fee and have not been reinstated within one year
shall stand revoked and no new license shall be issued except upon the payment
of the initial fee above provided for; provided, however, that all persons who
were duly licensed under the provisions of the plumbing code of the city
preceding the adoption of this article may be relicensed under the terms of
this section by paying the renewal fee hereinabove provided for, which such
license shall expire January 1. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
3-3B-4: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
Any person who has been duly licensed or issued a certificate of competency by
the state or by any city of the state having a plumbing code substantially
equivalent to the code adopted by the city, may be licensed by the city without
taking any examination, upon the payment of the fees provided for in section
3-3B-3 of this article. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
3-3B-5: VIOLATION:
Any person who shall engage in the business, practice or work of plumbing
without a license issued by the city or who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
CHAPTER 4
VENDORS, SOLICITORS AND TEMPORARY MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Licenses Required
3-4-4: Registry And Notice Of No Soliciting
3-4-5: Exceptions
3-4-6: Application For License
3-4-7: Investigation Fee; Investigation Of Applicant; Issuance Of License
3-4-8: License Fees
3-4-9: Bond Requirement
3-4-10: Issuance And Exhibition Of License
3-4-11: Restrictions
3-4-12: Unlawful Conduct
3-4-13: Cancellation Of Sale
3-4-14: Enforcement
3-4-15: Appeal Of Denial Of License
3-4-16: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-4-17: Expiration Of License
3-4-18: Penalty
3-4-19: Severance Clause
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and welfare
of residents of the City and to protect its citizens from crime by means of
regulation of vendors, peddlers, solicitors, and temporary merchants. (Ord.
791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
CITY CLERK: The Licensing Officer of the City of Eagle.
MOBILE FOOD CONCESSIONS: Carts or motor vehicles from which food and beverages
are sold.
NONMOBILE FOOD CONCESSIONS: Stands from which food and beverages are sold that
are not designed to be moved during operation. Includes semipermanent
structures open seasonally and permanent structures.
ORGANIZER: The person who coordinates and/or promotes one or more vendors,
activities and/or venues in order to create or produce a special event, and/or
the applicant in whose name a City of Eagle special event permit for an outdoor
market or special event is held.
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER: Licensing Officer, Code enforcement personnel, fireman
and police officer.
SOLICITOR: An individual who is taking or attempting to take, whether in person
or by telephone, orders for sale of food, beverages, goods, merchandise or
services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether he is collecting
advance payments on such sales or not. Such definitions shall include any
person who, for himself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies
any building, structure, or motor vehicle within the City for the sole purpose
of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
SPECIAL EVENT: The temporary use, with a valid permit, of public property and/
or property accessible by the general public, including streets, beaches,
parks, community centers and waterways, for the purpose of conducting certain
short term events such as art shows, music concerts, fundraising events,
sidewalk sales, amusement attractions, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, swap meets,
sporting events, grand openings, promotional sales, including, but not limited
to, organized float trips, contests, street dances, tournaments, walk-a-thons,
marathons, races, food truck rallies, exhibitions or related activities.
TEMPORARY: One year (12 consecutive months) or less.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT: Any person whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident
of the City or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares, merchandise and services within the City.
VENDOR: Any person who sells or offers to take orders for goods or merchandise
from a stand, cart, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance or from his
or her person. The word vendor shall include the words "hauler", "huckster" and
"peddler".
VENDOR CART: A movable and/or wheeled cart designed to be propelled by human
power and operated by a vendor standing adjacent. Goods sold from a cart may
include, but are not limited to, perishable and nonperishable food items,
merchandise, and sundries.
VENDOR STAND: A nonpermanent, immobile structure, booth, stall, counter or the
like operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame of the structure,
booth, stall, counter or the like. Goods sold from a stand may include, but are
not limited to, perishable and nonperishable food items, merchandise, and
sundries. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018; amd. Ord. 862, 11-9-2021)
3-4-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
All vendors, solicitors, organizers or temporary merchants must obtain all
applicable City, State, and Federal licenses, permits and/or certifications in
order to be issued and continually maintain a City issued license, including
but not limited to, regulations of the Central District Health Department.
(Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-4: REGISTRY AND NOTICE OF NO SOLICITING:
   A.   Registry Of Residences Prohibiting Solicitors: A central registry is
hereby established whereby a resident of the City may docket their physical
address as notice that no solicitor may lawfully enter into said noncommercial
premises. Said register will be kept by the City Clerk and open to the general
public during normal business hours. Residents who choose to be on the registry
shall re-register at the beginning of each calendar year.
   B.   Notice Of "No Soliciting": Notice may also be given that a solicitor
may not lawfully enter a commercial or noncommercial premises by posting of a
sign containing the words "No Solicitors" or "No Peddlers" or other words to
such effect at each entry of said premises. It is the duty of the solicitor to
make every reasonable effort to ensure him or herself that such a notice is not
present prior to entry. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Any sales under court order;
   B.   Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who
exclusively or primarily sell to, or solicit orders for future delivery, from
local retailers, local businesses, local governments, local schools, or local
wholesale firms; (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
   C.   The sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the same.
If sold off premises, a site plan, property owner permission and signage
regulations shall be required. Permitting fees shall be waived, as shall
background investigation requirement; (Ord. 808, 3-12-2019)
   D.   The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person
engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper;
   E.   The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a function
of their school; or fundraising sales by local service clubs or groups such as
Elks, Kiwanis, Lions, Boy or Girl Scouts;
   F.   Any political group seeking funds or membership;
   G.   Garage, yard, or similar sales by individuals at their residence or
place of business not exceeding two (2) separate sales in one calendar year,
not to exceed three (3) days each, which sales shall not include business
inventory or items that have been purchased for the purpose of resale at
another garage sale. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the City
Clerk an application furnished by the City Clerk, which shall contain, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following information:
      1.   Name and description of the applicant; if the applicant is an
association, company or corporation, then it shall state its name along with
the names and descriptions of the persons who will be soliciting in the City.
Each business representative shall complete an application;
      2.   Address - both legal and local;
      3.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold, and in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or
grown by the applicant;
      4.   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship between the employer and the
applicant;
      5.   The proposed method of operation, length of time for which the right
to do business is desired and if a motor vehicle is to be used, a description
of the same, together with a license number or other means of identification;
      6.   Whether a permit or license issued to the applicant has been revoked
during the past five (5) years, and if so, where and when;
      7.   Personal identifying information of the applicant or the persons
acting on its behalf in the City as may be necessary for the City Clerk to
conduct a background investigation;
      8.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
a violation of any Federal, State or Municipal law, the nature of the offense
and the date, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
      9.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery;
      10.   When the applicant proposes to peddle any prepared food product for
human consumption, a certification by Central District Health shall be required
at the time of filing an application;
      11.   Vendors, organizers and temporary merchants must submit a site plan
that includes the site design and the design of any signage proposed for the
site, which conforms to the requirements of subsection
3-4-11F of this chapter. The City Clerk or designee will submit the site plan
and signage design to the Eagle Planning and Zoning Department for approval;
      12.   An affidavit or written permission shall be obtained from the land
owner for mobile vendors, organizers and temporary merchants seeking to utilize
private property or private property but open to the public, including but not
limited to parking lots, landscaped areas, plazas or open space areas.
   B.   The City Clerk, or Deputy Clerk shall be responsible for issuing a City
of Eagle license. The City Clerk, or Deputy Clerk, shall require an applicant
for a City license to provide information and fingerprints necessary to obtain
criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau
of Investigation. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008, and Public Law 92-
544, the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall require the applicant to submit a set
of fingerprints for a City license and the required fees to the Idaho State
Police, Bureau of Criminal Identification, for criminal records check of State
and national database. The submission of fingerprints and information required
by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police. The
City of Eagle Police Department is authorized to receive criminal history
information from the Idaho State Police and from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation for the purpose of evaluating the suitability of applicants for a
City license, and the City of Eagle Police Department shall recommend approval
and/or denial of the application based on this information and relay that
recommendation to the City Clerk's Office. As required by State and Federal
law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is
prohibited. Any denial may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section
3-4-15 of this chapter. If not denied within that period, the application shall
be deemed approved.
   C.   Once a license is issued, the applicant has an affirmative duty to
maintain all applicable licenses and certifications and to notify the City
Clerk in writing of any material change in the information provided by the
applicant in the original application.
   D.   No license issued hereunder shall be transferrable. (Ord. 791, 4-24-
2018, eff. 6-1-2018; amd. Ord. 862, 11-9-2021)
3-4-7: INVESTIGATION FEE; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Background investigations shall be required for all individuals participating
in door to door sales, promotional and/or advertising purposes, all individuals
operating mobile food concessions and vendor carts. Site managers seeking to
operate non-mobile stands (including food/beverage sales and fireworks stands)
shall be required to obtain a background investigation. (Ord. 808, 3-12-2019)
   A.   At the time of filing an original application, the applicant shall pay
any direct costs incurred by the City in obtaining background investigation
results and the license fee set forth in section
3-4-8 of this chapter as established by resolution of the Eagle City Council.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall
refer the application to the Chief of Police of the City of Eagle Police
Department, who shall cause an investigation to determine validity and
completeness of the information therein. The Chief of Police shall endorse upon
the application the findings of the investigation and return it to the City
Clerk or Deputy Clerk.
   C.   Upon receipt of the findings of the Chief of Police, but no later than
thirty (30) days from the date of submission of the completed application and
all application materials required by this chapter, the City Clerk or Deputy
Clerk shall either issue a City of Eagle license to the applicant or deny the
application. Where the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk denies an application, he or
she shall notify the applicant of such denial in writing, which shall include
notice of the right to appeal as set forth in this chapter. Written notice of
the denial shall be sent via U.S. mail to the applicant at the address set
forth on the application.
   D.   The City Clerk shall deny an application for a license where:
      1.   Investigation of such application or application materials reveals
that provided information is invalid, false, or incomplete;
      2.   The applicant has been convicted of:
         a.   A violation of any provision of this section within the five (5)
years preceding the date of submission of the application.
         b.   Reckless driving, eluding a police officer, racing, and/or
failure to carry insurance within the five (5) years preceding the date of
submission of the application, except that such conviction shall not be grounds
for denial where the applicant does not seek to operate a motor vehicle while
operating or acting as a vendor, peddler, solicitor, and/or temporary merchant.
         c.   A misdemeanor charge of driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs within the five (5) years preceding the date of submission of the
application, or a felony charge of driving under the influence of alcohol or
drugs within the ten (10) years preceding the date of submission of the
application, except that such conviction shall not be grounds for denial where
the applicant does not seek to operate a motor vehicle while operating or
acting as a vendor, peddler, solicitor, and/or temporary merchant.
         d.   Any misdemeanor charge involving theft or fraud within the five
(5) years preceding the date of submission of the application, or any felony
charge of theft or fraud within the fifteen (15) years preceding the date of
submission of the application.
         e.   A misdemeanor charge of battery, assault, domestic battery or
assault, telephone harassment, stalking, or violation of a protective order
within the five (5) years preceding the date of submission of the application,
or a felony charge of battery, assault, domestic battery or assault, telephone
harassment, stalking, or violation of a protective order within the ten (10)
years preceding the date of submission of the application.
         f.   Any crime involving, or related to, firearms or other weapons.
         g.   Any crime involving, or related to, a child or children, elderly
persons, and/or other vulnerable persons.
         h.   Any crime involving, or related to, prostitution, indecent
exposure, obscene conduct, or other sexual conduct or activity.
         i.   Any crime involving, or related to, drugs or illicit substances.
      3.   The applicant is or at any time has been required by any law or
legal order to register as a sex offender.
Such denial may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of section
3-4-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018; amd. Ord. 862, 11-
9-2021)
3-4-8: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for any vendor, solicitor or canvasser, or temporary merchant
shall be adopted via resolution of the Eagle City Council. The license shall be
valid up to twelve (12) consecutive months, unless restrictions have been
established by Idaho Statute or Ada County ordinance limiting authorized date
(s) of sales. All fees shall be paid in advance. A separate application and fee
may be required to participate in City sponsored events. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018,
eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-9: BOND REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Every applicant plying his trade as an individual, shall file with the
City Clerk a surety bond or a cashier's check in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) running to the City.
   B.   Every business firm, company or corporation, which has two (2) or more
employees or agents acting in the capacity of vendor, solicitor, canvasser or
temporary merchant, shall file with the City Clerk a surety bond covering all
such employees or agents and running to the City, or a cashier's check in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per employee to a maximum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The surety bond must be one issued by an agent
upon which service of process may be made in the State of Idaho.
   C.   Action on the surety bond or cashier's check may be brought directly by
any person damaged by a licensee's violation of any provision of this chapter.
   D.   After expiration of a license, the City Clerk shall, upon application
of the licensee, return the bond or cashier's check sixty (60) days after
receipt of application for return, unless the Clerk has been notified of the
pendency of any claim or cause of action by any person upon the bond or
cashier's check.
   E.   After being licensed for two (2) consecutive years, without claims
against the surety bond, the above bonding requirements will be waived, if the
applicant requests the waiver in writing.
   F.   Every organizer applying for a special event shall provide proof of an
insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in
Idaho, protecting the applicant and/or any employees and/or agents thereof from
all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death, which
may arise from operations under or in connection with the special event. Such
insurance shall name the City as additional insured, and shall provide that the
policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without
thirty (30) days' advance written notice to the City. Such insurance shall
afford minimum limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person
bodily injury, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence
bodily injury, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence
property damage. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-10: ISSUANCE AND EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is
approved and shall issue a license. Such license shall show the name, address,
the type of license issued, and the kind of goods to be sold or type of sales
to be solicited thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and
the date of expiration.
   B.   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant if their license request is
disapproved, the reasons therefor, and advise them of the appeal procedure
pursuant to the provisions of section
3-4-15 of this chapter.
   C.   The license issued to the licensee hereunder by the City Clerk shall be
exhibited in a conspicuous place if the licensee is using a vehicle or a
building in his business, and otherwise must be displayed on the outside
garment of the individual during hours of operation. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff.
6-1-2018)
3-4-11: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Location: No licensee hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any
location in a public street, nor shall he/she be permitted to operate in any
congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public.
For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a public safety officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. Mobile vendors shall not
remain within any three hundred (300) square foot area for more than two (2)
consecutive hours within any twenty four (24) hour period within a
Residentially zoned area and no more than four (4) consecutive hours within a
Commercially zoned area on a publicly owned street. Mobile vendors seeking to
locate on private/open to the public property shall comply with subsection F of
this section. This license does not preclude the issuance of other permits by
the Parks Department in public parks, for special events or the granting of
permission to sell and/or operate on private property by its owners.
   B.   Hours Of Operation: Vendors, canvassers, solicitors shall be allowed to
engage in their licensed business only between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
sunset. All vending stands, carts or vehicles must be removed from public
property during nonvending hours. For special events, the City may make an
exception to the usual hours of operation.
   C.   Removal Of Trash: All trash or debris accumulating within twenty feet
(20') of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in
trash containers. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash
receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands.
   D.   Prohibited Areas: Any duly authorized public safety officer shall
prohibit vendors from selling on specified public ways if he determines such
prohibitions are necessary for the protection of public health and safety.
Vendor carts, stands, and motor vehicles are prohibited within fifteen feet
(15') of a fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop, loading zone, or driveway of a
fire station, police station, school zone or hospital.
   E.   Nonmobile Food Concession: One nonmobile food concession vendor will be
allowed per Municipal park at the discretion of the City Council. Procedures
for vendor selection shall be adopted via resolution and kept on file for
review at the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
   F.   Planning And Zoning Approval: All vendors and temporary merchants must
receive written approval from the Eagle Zoning Administrator for the proposed
site, design and signage pursuant to the conditions herein. After being
licensed for two (2) consecutive years and having made no modification to their
site location and/or design criteria, this requirement may be waived. For the
purposes of this section and in conformance with the terms "vendor" and
"temporary merchant" as defined in section
3-4-2 of this chapter, a stand, cart, mobile food concession, or nonmobile food
concession includes, but is not limited to, vehicles, canopies, display racks,
and items placed on the ground. (Ord. 808, 3-12-2019)
      1.   Zoning Permit Required: Written approval by the Eagle Zoning
Administrator shall be required upon finding that a vendor or temporary
merchant:
         a.   Does not operate on any private property that contains a
structure (use) that is dilapidated. Operation on a premises that detrimentally
impacts the surrounding neighborhood due to dilapidation, deterioration, decay,
abandonment or unfinished construction and which renders the enjoyment of the
property essentially uncomfortable or inconvenient to the neighborhood shall be
prohibited. Parcels and uses in combination that are not dilapidated but which
are considered nonconforming may be eligible for siting provided that the
stand, mobile food concession, or nonmobile food concession does not expand the
land area of the parcel or is situated in a manner that expands the
nonconformity of the site.
         b.   Will not operate in such a manner as to reduce the amount of
parking spaces below the minimum required for the principal use upon which the
vendor or temporary merchant operation is proposed.
      2.   Additional Criteria: In addition, the following criteria shall apply
to all vendors and temporary merchants:
         a.   A stand, cart, mobile food concession, or nonmobile food
concession must be designed and built meeting normal building industry
standards, used in a safe manner, and meet all requirements of the Central
District Health Department as may be necessary. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-
2018)
         b.   A stand, cart, or nonmobile food concession shall not exceed
sixty four (64) gross square feet in size and no more than twelve feet (12') in
height. (Ord. 808, 3-12-2019)
         c.   Support equipment and accessories, other than a generator, must
not extend more than two feet (2') from the edge of the stand, cart, mobile
food concession, or nonmobile food concession in any direction and shall not be
placed so as to impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic. Canopies or other covers,
whether stand alone or used on a stand, cart, mobile food concession, or
nonmobile food concession, must be securely fastened. Such covers shall have a
minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8') and must not extend more than
four feet (4') from the edge of the stand, mobile food concession, or nonmobile
food concession in any direction.
         d.   A stand, cart, mobile food concession, or nonmobile food
concession shall maintain a clear pedestrian passage on the public sidewalk of
no less than five feet (5') wide; shall not block any vehicle travelway; shall
not be positioned within a driveway or within ten feet (10') of either side of
the driveway; shall not be positioned within a doorway or within five feet (5')
of either side of the doorway; nor in a manner that impedes movement or
visually obstructs pedestrians and vehicles using the public rights-of-way.
         e.   Stands, carts, mobile food concessions, and nonmobile food
concessions shall not be locked or chained to a tree, streetlight, or other
street furnishings.
         f.   Stands, carts, and nonmobile food concessions shall be designed
to be aesthetically pleasing, generally in compliance with the requirements
prescribed in title 8, chapter 2, article A of this Code, and maintained to
have a neat and clean appearance at all times. Mobile food concessions are
exempt from the design requirements in title 8, chapter 2, article A of this
Code.
         g.   Stands, carts, and nonmobile food concessions may be permitted to
have one table provided it is contained within a ten foot (10') radius of the
main service window. The table and any permitted accessories shall be stored
either within the stand, cart, or nonmobile food concession or off site during
nonbusiness hours.
         h.   Overhead utility service connections are not permitted.
Electrical lines are not allowed overhead or lying in the pedestrian portion of
the sidewalk, in a vehicle travelway or parking lot, or within any landscaping.
City streetlight facilities shall not be used in any way to supply electrical
service to a vendor site.
         i.   Vendors must provide trash receptacles and waste removal adjacent
to or as a part of their operations. All spilled food, beverages, grease, or
other trash or debris resulting from the operation of any stand, cart, mobile
food concession, or nonmobile food concession shall be cleaned and collected by
the vendor and deposited in the vendor's trash receptacle. The vendor is
prohibited from depositing waste, ice, and any gray or waste water into
sidewalk waste receptacles, privately owned dumpsters, City planters, parking
lot drains or the street drainage system.
         j.   Stands, carts, mobile food concessions, and nonmobile food
concessions shall be maintained in such a manner that prevents the spilling or
splattering of grease, water, food, or trash on any ground where the cart,
trailer, or vehicle is located. The stand, mobile food concession, or nonmobile
food concession owner shall be responsible for the cleaning and repair of any
ground soiled, stained, or damaged by the placement and operation of their
business.
      3.   Fireworks Stands Exempt: Fireworks stands are exempt from the
provisions of this subsection. Vendors remain subject to the conditions of this
title and those controls set forth in Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26
regulating fireworks stands.
   G.   Signage: Each stand, cart, mobile food concession and/or nonmobile food
concession is allowed the following signage: 1) one portable feather flag; 2)
one portable-sign; and 3) signage affixed to the structure (stand, cart or
vehicle) which denotes the business name. Additional signage is not allowed.
Should a conflict exist between this subsection and section 8-2A-8 of this Code
or other sections of this Code, the regulations in this section shall prevail.
(Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-12: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No licensee hereunder shall:
   A.   Fail to comply with any of the provisions set forth in this chapter;
   B.   Misrepresent the purpose of, or affiliation of those engaged in, the
solicitation;
   C.   Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual
informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy
anything from that solicitor;
   D.   Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an
endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation;
   E.   Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No
Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation Allowed" or other words to such effect;
   F.   Commit fraud, make misrepresentation or false statement in the course
of carrying on the business. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-13: CANCELLATION OF SALE:
The buyer shall have the right to cancel the door to door sale within three (3)
business days. A business day is any calendar day except Sunday, or the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-14: ENFORCEMENT:
The Ada County Prosecutor shall provide the Eagle City Clerk with a copy of any
citation or criminal complaint issued hereunder. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-
1-2018)
3-4-15: APPEAL OF DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Appeal To The Mayor: Within five (5) calendar days from the date of
denial by the City Clerk, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Mayor by
filing a written appeal with the Mayor's Office, which appeal shall enumerate
the grounds for the appeal. A fee shall not be required. The Mayor, or his or
her designee, shall proceed to affirm, modify, or reverse the decision. Within
seven (7) calendar days after a written decision has been rendered, the Mayor
shall provide the appellant with written notice of the action on the request.
If an appeal to the City Council is not filed within five (5) calendar days
from the date of receipt of written notice of the Mayor's decision, the
decision shall be final.
   B.   Appeal To The City Council: Within five (5) calendar days from the date
of receipt of the written notice of the Mayor's decision on the appeal, the
appellant may file with the Mayor's Office a notice of appeal of the decision
to the City Council. The City Council, after receipt of the appeal, shall
proceed to affirm, modify, or reverse the decision. The decision of the City
Council shall be final. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-16: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Cause For Suspension Or Revocation: The City Clerk or designee may
suspend or revoke any license for fraud and misrepresentation in its
procurement, for violations of this chapter, or for any conduct or act of the
licensee or their employees or any conduct or act permitted by them on the
premises where such business is conducted, or in connection therewith or
adjacent thereto, tending to render such business or such premises where the
same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety
or general welfare of the City, or in the event of the conviction of a licensed
vendor, solicitor, or temporary merchant under the provisions of any City or
County ordinance, or of any law of the State or of the United States,
regulating, governing, or prohibiting the activities regulated under this
chapter.
   B.   License Revocation: The City Clerk or designee shall notify the
licensee of such revocation or suspension in writing, and shall mail such
notice to the licensee at the mailing address set forth in the application.
Such revocation or suspension shall be effective immediately upon mailing by
the City Clerk or designee.
   C.   Appeal Of Revocation Or Suspension: Appeal of the City Clerk's
revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder may be made by the
licensee. Such appeal shall be made in writing, shall be mailed to the City
Clerk via hand delivery or U.S. mail, and shall state the reasons for such
appeal. Upon receipt of such appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule a public
hearing on the appeal at a City Council meeting within fourteen (14) days. The
City Council's decision on such appeal shall be a final decision. (Ord. 791, 4-
24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-17: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the
date specified in the permit. No license shall be issued for a period longer
than twelve (12) consecutive months. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-18: PENALTY:
Any person, business, firm, company or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment as established by Idaho Code.
In addition to such penalty, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to any and all other applicable administrative, criminal and/
or civil penalties. Each day or violation continued shall be separate offenses,
punishable as hereinabove described. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-1-2018)
3-4-19: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section be
found to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter, but they
shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall
stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. (Ord. 791, 4-24-2018, eff. 6-
1-2018)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Responsible Party
4-1-3: Abatable Nuisances; Procedures And Penalties
4-1-4: General Nuisances; Procedures And Penalties
4-1-5: Hindering Authorized Person
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
GRAFFITI: Any inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or design that
is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any real or personal
property or improvement, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, gates,
pavement, buildings, rocks, trees, bridges, streets, sidewalks, and/or signs,
whether such property is public, private, temporary, or permanent, without the
consent of the owner of such property or the owner's authorized agent, and
which inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or design is visible
from any publicly accessible location.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle, or parts thereof, which:
   A.   Cannot be safely operated under its own power;
   B.   Is missing any one of the following: foot brakes, hand brakes,
headlights, taillights, horn, muffler, rearview mirrors, windshield wipers, or
adequate fenders;
   C.   Has been declared salvage, or has been physically damaged to the extent
that the cost of parts and labor minus the salvage value would make it
uneconomical to repair or rebuild such vehicle; or
   D.   Is otherwise in a wrecked, partially dismantled, inoperative, or
dilapidated condition.
This definition shall not include junk vehicles lawfully stored or parked
pursuant to the operation of a lawfully conducted business, industry or
commercial enterprise.
NUISANCE: Anything which unreasonably injures or offends the health or senses;
obstructs the free passage, comfortable enjoyment, or customary use of public
or private property; or creates an actual or potential safety, health, or fire
hazard. Nuisances shall include, but shall not be limited to conditions
designated as abatable nuisances and as general nuisances as enumerated in this
chapter.
Abateable Nuisance: Nuisance conditions that may be abated by the City in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, specifically including, without
limitation, the following nuisance conditions:
   A.   Nuisance weeds.
   B.   Graffiti, on any surface.
   C.   Snow or ice on any public sidewalk abutting or adjoining any privately
owned premises.
   D.   Vegetation, including trees, that impedes or obstructs a public
sidewalk or roadway.
General Nuisance: Nuisance conditions that may lead to criminal charges without
any prior attempt by the City to obtain abatement thereof, specifically
including, without limitation, the following nuisance conditions:
   A.   Nuisance materials on the ground.
   B.   Personal property on any portion of a public sidewalk, except as
specifically allowed by law or by written permit issued by the City or other
governing authority.
   C.   One or more junk vehicle(s), where such junk vehicle is not enclosed in
any structure or otherwise concealed from public view pursuant to title 8 of
this Code.
   D.   Stagnant or impure water which causes or creates an offensive,
unhealthy, or unsanitary condition.
   E.   Refuse, vegetative decay or any decaying substance, garbage or filth of
any kind which is exposed to the elements and which causes or creates an
offensive, unhealthy, or unsanitary condition.
   F.   Discarded matter which has no substantial market value, is exposed to
the elements, and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from
public view, including, but not limited to: rubble, litter, asphalt, concrete,
plaster, tile, cardboard, paper, scrap wood, scrap metal, tires, broken glass,
and/or other dilapidated or deteriorating personal property.
   G.   The accumulation of and/or failure to lawfully dispose of solid waste
on any commercial or residential premises.
   H.   Any building or structure that is so dilapidated or is in such
condition as to menace the public health or the safety of persons or property
due to increased fire hazard or other hazard.
   I.   Any nuisance condition not otherwise enumerated in this chapter.
NUISANCE MATERIALS: Hazardous, noxious, dangerous, or offensive materials,
including, but not limited to, oil, gasoline, fuel, antifreeze, paint,
pesticides, or herbicides. This definition shall not include the incidental
leakage of nuisance materials from registered vehicles lawfully moving or
parked upon a public right-of-way; the lawful application of pesticides or
herbicides for purposes of controlling pests or weeds; or activity otherwise
specifically allowed by law or by written permit issued by the City or other
governing authority.
NUISANCE WEEDS: Undesirable plant growth, whether living or dead, which:
   A.   Is over eight inches (8") in height;
   B.   By reason of size, manner of growth, location, or dryness, constitutes
a safety, health, or fire hazard to any person, building, improvement, crop, or
other real or personal property;
   C.   By reason of size, manner of growth, or location, impedes or obstructs
a sidewalk or roadway or any portion thereof; or
   D.   Is designated as a noxious weed by the State of Idaho.
This definition shall not include cultivated grasses and pastures, though such
vegetation may be declared a nuisance where otherwise appropriate. (Ord. 784,
9-26-2017)
4-1-2: RESPONSIBLE PARTY:
Where a nuisance exists upon property that is vacant, abandoned, and/or
uninhabited, the owner of record, as reflected on the most recent assessment
roll, shall be presumed to be responsible for creating, causing, committing,
maintaining, and/or allowing such nuisance. Such owner of record shall be
subject to any and all penalties imposed as set forth herein, and shall be
responsible for payment of any and all costs incurred in abating the nuisance.
The owner of record shall bear the burden of rebutting this presumption. (Ord.
784, 9-26-2017)
4-1-3: ABATABLE NUISANCES; PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Applicability: The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to
abatable nuisances.
   B.   Abatable Nuisance Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner,
occupant, user, or person in charge or control of any property to create,
cause, commit, maintain, or allow the existence of any abatable nuisance on
such property, or upon any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way abutting
such property including the area behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and
property to the center of alleys and ditches. Further, it shall be unlawful for
any person to create, cause, allow, or commit any nuisance upon any public
property, right- of-way, or infrastructure, including sidewalks, streets,
gutters, or storm drains.
   C.   Procedure: If it is determined by a Peace Officer, Code Enforcement
Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator that an abatable nuisance exists, the
Peace Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator shall
cause a notice of violation and order to abate to be issued to the owner,
occupier, and/or person in control of such property. Such notice and order
shall contain the street address and parcel number of the property, describe
the nuisance existing thereon, order the abatement of the nuisance, establish
the time period for abatement, specify the penalty for noncompliance, and
describe the opportunity and time for appeal. The Peace Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator shall issue such notice
and order to the owner, occupier, or person in control of the property on which
the nuisance exists in one of the following ways:
      1.   By written personal service upon such owner, occupier, or person in
charge or control of the property; or
      2.   By regular mail to such owner, occupier, or person in charge or
control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment
roll, or as otherwise known; or
      3.   By posting such notice and order at a conspicuous place on the
property and publishing one notice in the official newspaper of the City that
the property has been posted in accordance with this chapter and ordering the
owner, occupier, or person in charge or control of the property.
   D.   Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner, occupier,
or person in charge or control of any property where any abatable nuisance
exists, to abate such nuisance within five (5) calendar days from the date of
personal service, mailing, or publication, except that the Peace Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator may require summary
abatement of an abatable nuisance where such condition presents an imminent or
ongoing threat to or impairment of human health or safety. Abatement of
graffiti shall meet the following standards:
      1.   The removal of such graffiti shall not follow the pattern of the
graffiti such that the inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or
design of such graffiti remains apparent.
      2.   The removal of such graffiti by painting over it shall be reasonably
similar or identical to the original color of the surface upon which such
graffiti was applied.
      3.   If the surface is heavily covered with graffiti, the entire surface
shall be repainted.
   E.   Appeal:
      1.   Appeal To The Mayor: Within five (5) calendar days from the date of
service, mailing, or publication of the notice of violation and order to abate,
the owner, occupier, and/or person in charge or control of the subject property
may appeal to the Mayor by filing a written appeal with the Mayor's Office,
which appeal shall enumerate the grounds for the appeal. A fee shall not be
required. The Mayor, or his or her designee shall proceed to affirm, withdraw,
or modify the order to abate. Within seven (7) calendar days after a written
decision has been rendered, the Mayor shall provide the appellant with written
notice of the action on the request. If an appeal to the City Council is not
filed within five (5) calendar days from the date of receipt of written notice
of the action, the decision shall be final.
      2.   Appeal To The City Council: Within five (5) calendar days from the
date of receipt of the written notice of action on the request by the Mayor,
the appellant may file with the Mayor's Office a notice of appeal of the
decision to the City Council. An appeal fee shall be required as adopted by fee
schedule. The City Council, after receipt of the appeal, shall proceed to
affirm, withdraw, or modify the order to abate. The decision of the City
Council shall be final. If City Council affirms the order, the appellant shall
have five (5) calendar days from the date of such affirmation to abate the
nuisance as ordered.
   F.   Criminal Penalties: If, following notice of violation and order to
abate, any person allows the existence of an abatable nuisance, such person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day in which any such
violation continues may be deemed a separate offense. Upon conviction for a
violation of this section, the City shall request from the Criminal Court an
order of restitution for any and all costs of abatement and/or other related
costs incurred by the City. Peace Officers, Code Enforcement Officers, and the
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to issue uniform citations to
violators of this section.
   G.   Civil Penalties: In addition to any other penalties described in this
section, the City may also take civil action to obtain an order enjoining the
ongoing maintenance of such property free from nuisance, and/or to recover any
and all costs of abatement, enforcement, litigation, and/or prosecution
including, but not limited to, attorney fees and court costs.
   H.   Abatement; Administrative Penalties: In addition to, or in lieu of,
pursuing criminal and/or civil penalties, and notwithstanding the imposition of
any civil or criminal fine, penalty or imprisonment, the Peace Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator, after providing notice as
provided herein, may abate or cause the abatement of any abatable nuisance
where the owner, occupant, agent or person in control of property does not
comply in all respects with an order to abate. The owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property shall be billed, assessed,
and/or held responsible for any and all actual expenses of such work, and any
related charges, including fees and fines that may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter and/or adopted by fee schedule, pursuant to the following procedures:
      1.   Recovery Of Abatement Costs And Fees: Within thirty (30) days of
abatement of the nuisance, the City shall send to the owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property, by regular mail, a billing
statement requiring payment to City the costs of abating the nuisance and
administrative fee as established by fee schedule.
      2.   Nonpayment Of Abatement Costs: If full payment is not made to City
within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the billing statement requiring
payment of abatement costs and fees, the City may:
         a.   Attempt to recover such amount through the City bill collection
procedures;
         b.   Add the amount due and owing to the Municipal abatement account
related to the property on which the nuisance was abated and collect such
amount in accordance with utility bill collection procedures; and/or
         c.   Levy a special assessment against the subject property pursuant
to Idaho Code sections 50-1008 and 50-334 and/or any subsequently adopted or
otherwise applicable laws. Notice of the special assessment shall be sent by
regular mail to the owner of the subject property, and shall state the address
and parcel number of the subject property, date of abatement action taken, and
state the amount to be assessed, including any applicable administrative and/or
late fees, and shall state that if the assessment is not paid within thirty
(30) days, the assessment will be placed on the Real Property Tax rolls and
will become a lien against such property. If payment to the City Clerk is not
made within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of special assessment,
the assessment shall be declared delinquent and shall be certified, including a
ten percent (10%) late fee, to the Ada County Assessor by the City Clerk, not
later than August 1 of each year. Upon such certification, the assessment shall
be placed upon the tax roll and shall thereafter become a lien against the
property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner and
subject to the same penalties as other City taxes. Upon payment of the
assessment, fees and penalties in full, the City Clerk shall file a release of
lien with the Ada County Assessor.
   I.   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Peace
Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or the Zoning Administrator from requiring,
undertaking, or causing summary abatement of an abatable nuisance where such
condition presents an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human
health or safety.
   J.   Noxious Weeds: In addition to other remedies set forth in this chapter,
a Peace Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator may
notify Ada County of the presence of any noxious weeds. (Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-1-4: GENERAL NUISANCES; PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Applicability: The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to
general nuisances.
   B.   General Nuisance Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner,
occupant, user, or person in charge or control of any property to create,
cause, commit, maintain, or allow the existence of any general nuisance on such
property, or upon any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way abutting such
property including the area behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and
property to the center of alleys and ditches. Further, it shall be unlawful for
any person to create, cause, allow, or commit any nuisance upon any public
property, right- of-way, or infrastructure, including sidewalks, streets,
gutters, or storm drains.
   C.   Criminal Penalties: Any person who causes, creates, or allows the
existence of any general nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and
every day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense. Peace Officers, Code Enforcement Officers, and the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to issue uniform citations to violators
of this section. Issuance of notice of violation and order to abate shall not
be a mandatory prerequisite to issuance of a uniform citation under this
section.
   D.   Civil Penalties: In addition to any other penalties described in this
section, the City may also take civil action to obtain an order mandating the
abatement of such general nuisance and ongoing maintenance of such property
free from nuisance, and/or to recover any and all costs of enforcement,
litigation, and/or prosecution including, but not limited to, attorney fees and
court costs.
   E.   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Peace
Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, and/or the Zoning Administrator from
requiring, undertaking, or causing summary abatement of a general nuisance
condition where such condition presents an imminent or ongoing threat to or
impairment of human health or safety. (Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-1-5: HINDERING AUTHORIZED PERSON:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to interfere with, hinder or refuse to
allow any authorized City official or employee to enter upon private or public
property to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose And Interpretation
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Garbage And Refuse Storage Regulations
4-2-4: Franchise Required
4-2-5: Franchise Period And Fees
4-2-6: Franchise Conditions
4-2-7: Revocation Of Franchise And Procedure
4-2-8: Unlawful Deposits On Public Ways And Property
4-2-9: Violation And Penalty
4-2-10: Additional Rules And Regulations
4-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city,
acting in its governmental capacity, for the protection and preservation of the
health, welfare, morals, safety and cleanliness of the city and all of its
provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(Ord. 335, 12-15-1998)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ASHES: The residue of materials burned.
FRANCHISEE: The entity granted a franchise to collect garbage, rubbish and
other solid waste within the city limits of Eagle.
GARBAGE: Kitchen and table refuse and offal, swill and also every accumulation
of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the
preparation, consumption, use, decay, cooking, dealing in, or storage of animal
matter, meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables; except, that dead
animals exceeding ten (10) pounds in weight, and offal of slaughterhouses are
not included within the meaning of the word "garbage" as herein defined. The
word "garbage" does not include dishwater or wastewater.
RUBBISH: Ashes, broken crockery, broken bottles, broken bricks, tin vessels,
trimmings from lawns and flower gardens, including shrubbery, pasteboard boxes,
berry boxes, paper sacks, straw, sawdust, packing materials, shavings and
discarded household utensils; but the term "rubbish" shall not include broken
or discarded stoves or furniture, broken or discarded building material, trees
or any waste accumulated, other than heretofore specified. (Ord. 335, 12-15-
1998)
4-2-3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE STORAGE REGULATIONS 1 :
   A.   Preparation Of Garbage: All garbage, before being deposited in the
receptacles required by this section, shall be drained of surplus liquids and
water.
   B.   Receptacle Requirements: Each householder, head of a family, tenant,
proprietor, or operator of a place of business within the city, who is in
possession of or in charge of any premises within the city upon which garbage
or rubbish accumulates or may accumulate shall provide and maintain upon such
premises at a place not exceeding five feet (5') from the alley line of such
premises where such premises is adjacent to an alley and where the same may be
conveniently emptied by the garbage and rubbish collector of the city, a
receptacle of a capacity not exceeding one hundred (100) pounds, to accommodate
all garbage and rubbish accumulated on such premises between pick up periods.
Such receptacle shall be equipped with handles for convenient handling, be
watertight, with tightly fitting covers so as to prevent flies from entering or
escaping from such receptacle, be free from offensive odors and in such
condition that all garbage and rubbish will readily pour therefrom. Each such
householder, head of a family, tenant or proprietor or operator shall deposit
all "garbage" and "rubbish" as defined in section
4-2-2 of this chapter, accumulating upon such premises in such receptacles as
fast as the same accumulates.
   C.   Placement Of Receptacles: It shall be unlawful for any person to place
any receptacle containing, or designed or used for garbage or rubbish, upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, public place or open lot in the city except, only
where premises are not situated adjacent to an alley, the owner or occupant of
such premises may place receptacles containing garbage or rubbish upon the
sidewalk or street adjacent to such premises in such manner as not to interfere
with the free use of such sidewalk or street for an unreasonable period of
time.
   D.   Unauthorized Interference With Receptacle: It shall be unlawful for any
person, other than the city, its agents or employees, or a person holding a
permit or license for such purpose, or having a contract with the city for such
purpose, to interfere in any manner with any receptacle containing garbage or
rubbish, or any form of refuse, or to remove any such receptacle from the
location where the same was placed by the owner thereof, or to remove any of
the contents of such receptacle. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
 
Notes
  1. See subsection
1 8-3-2D of this code for additional requirements in commercial, industrial and
  multi-family residential areas.
4-2-4: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Garbage Collection: The city may collect, gather, haul, convey, or
transport garbage and rubbish within the city or authorize by franchise,
contract, or license for independent contractors to perform such service. It
shall be unlawful for any person who is not an agent, contractor, franchise, or
employee of the city to engage in the business of collecting, gathering,
hauling, conveying, or transporting for hire garbage or rubbish within the
city. However, any occupant may remove garbage or rubbish from such occupant's
own premises at any time, provided such removal does not create a public
nuisance.
   B.   Franchise Required: No person shall engage in the business of
collecting, gathering, hauling, conveying, or transporting garbage or rubbish
upon the streets or alleys of the city without first obtaining a franchise
therefor from the city. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-2-5: FRANCHISE PERIOD AND FEES:
A franchise shall be granted for a period of up to seven (7) years. Every
licensed franchise under the provisions of this chapter shall pay the city a
franchise fee of eight percent (8.0%) of the gross revenues collected within
the city limits. The license fee shall be payable quarterly or as otherwise
provided. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-2-6: FRANCHISE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Garbage And Rubbish Disposal: A franchisee shall perform all services
incidental to and in connection with collecting, gathering, hauling, conveying,
and transporting garbage or rubbish in an orderly and timely manner. Garbage
and rubbish shall be disposed of at state approved solid waste disposal sites
only.
   B.   Vehicle Construction And Condition: All vehicles used in collecting,
gathering, hauling, conveying, or transporting garbage or rubbish shall be
constructed in a manner that will prevent any portion of the garbage or rubbish
from leaking, spilling, falling, or blowing out of said vehicles onto any
highway, street, alley, or other public or private place. All vehicles shall be
equipped with watertight, leakproof bodies and provided with tightfitting
covers, which shall remain closed at all times except when actually depositing
garbage or rubbish in the conveyance or removing garbage or rubbish from it.
All vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and
shall be disinfected at regular intervals of not less than once every two (2)
weeks. All vehicles shall be subject to inspection at reasonable hours by the
city clerk or the city clerk's duly authorized representative.
   C.   Collection And Fee Schedules: A franchisee shall collect and dispose of
garbage and rubbish from each customer at least once a week or as may otherwise
be provided by the city. A franchisee shall only impose for such service those
fees which are approved by the city council.
   D.   Terms Of Franchise: In addition to the requirements of this chapter,
the city and any franchisee shall by agreement approved by such parties set
forth any additional terms and conditions the city and franchisee deem
appropriate. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-2-7: REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE AND PROCEDURE:
The city council may revoke a franchise if the franchisee fails to comply with
the franchise conditions set forth in section
4-2-6 of this chapter and the franchise agreement. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-2-8: UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY:
Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to
place any grass trimmings, garbage or rubbish upon any street, alley, sidewalk,
public place or open lot in the city. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-2-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
4-2-10: ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have the power to make and adopt, by resolution, such
further rules or regulations, including the designation of districts for pick
up schedules, as may be necessary to effectuate and facilitate the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  Chapter 1 of this title.
CHAPTER 4
MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSIONS CONTROL
(Rep. by Ord. 900, 7-11-2023)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
4-5-1: Legal Authority
4-5-2: Short Title And Purpose
4-5-3: Definitions
4-5-4: Cruelty To Animals
4-5-5: Dog Licenses
4-5-6: Kennel Licenses
4-5-7: Dogs Running At Large Prohibited
4-5-8: Rabies Control, Quarantine
4-5-9: Animals Presenting An Immediate Danger
4-5-10: Directing A Dog To Harass Or Attack
4-5-11: Criminal Responsibility For Dog Bites And Attacks
4-5-12: Habitual Barking Or Noisemaking; Nuisance
4-5-13: Enforcement Official; Animal Shelter
4-5-14: Obstructing Animal Control Officer
4-5-15: Impounding Of Animals
4-5-16: Habitual Violator
4-5-17: Designation And Management Of Dangerous Or At-Risk Dogs
4-5-18: Appeal Procedure For Affected Persons
4-5-19: Denying Ownership
4-5-20: Penalties
4-5-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code Sections 50-301, 50-304, 50-307, and 25-2812 authorize the City of
Eagle to enact ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations to promote and
maintain the public's health and safety in general, and specifically permits
the City of Eagle to regulate animals At Large and dangerous and potentially
dangerous dogs within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-2: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This Chapter shall be known as the CITY OF EAGLE ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE, and
is enacted to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the people of the
City of Eagle and the humane and safe treatment of various animals, including
dogs, and to establish all required procedures and regulations for the
licensing and control of dogs. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
             To leave an animal unattended for more than twenty-four (24) hours without the
             owner making arrangements for its food, water and shelter, or releasing the
             animal upon public highways or public or private property. Shall not apply to a
ABANDON:     person who captures a free roaming At Large domestic cat, transports the cat to a
             veterinarian for sterilization surgery, and releases the cat in the approximate
             location in which it was found for the purpose of cat population control. Shall
             not apply to the Animal Control Agency.
AFFECTED     Any person, in particular owners, whose rights to own or possess an animal have
PERSON:      been adversely impacted by a specific decision to enforce any provision of this
             Chapter against that person.
             Animals shall be classified as follows: Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish,
ANIMAL:      bird (including all fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as part
             of the animal kingdom.
ANIMAL       Any organization(s) authorized by the City to enforce the provisions of this
CONTROL      Chapter.
AGENCY:
ANIMAL       Any individual authorized by the City or the Animal Control Agency to enforce the
CONTROL      provisions of this Chapter, to include, state or local law enforcement officers
OFFICER:     whose duties include assignments that involve animal seizure and impoundment.
ANIMAL       An animal control facility authorized by the City or the Animal Control Agency as
CONTROL      the location for the impounding of animals.
SHELTER:
             Any domesticated animal except a service animal is At Large if it is outside the
             owner's premises and not leashed, unless it is in a dog exercise area designated
AT LARGE:    by the City of Eagle. Any other animal is At Large if it is outside the owner's
             premises and is not leashed or immediately responsive to verbal or non-verbal
             direction.
             Any dog that:
             A.   Without justified provocation bites a person without causing a traumatic
             injury, as defined in Idaho Code § 18-918(1)(b); or
AT-RISK DOG: B.   Without justified provocation and while At Large has killed, inflicted
             injury, or otherwise caused injury to a domestic animal by attacking a domestic
             animal not on the real property of the owner of the dog.
             C.   Has previously been found to be an at-risk dog pursuant to the Idaho Code or
             a substantially conforming ordinance or statute from foreign jurisdiction.
ATTACK:      Any aggressive action by an animal that a reasonable person would conclude places
             any person or domestic animal in reasonable belief of imminent bodily harm.
BARKING:     A vocal sound produced by a dog that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of
             normal sensitivities.
BITE OR      When the skin of an individual or other animal has been broken or penetrated by
BITTEN:      an animal's teeth in an act of aggression, attack or defense.
CAT:         Both the male and female of the Felidae species.
COMPANION    Any animals solely kept as pets including, but not limited to, domestic dogs,
ANIMAL:      domestic cats, rabbits, companion birds, and other animals.
             An animal that has received a primary rabies vaccine at least thirty (30) days
             ago, and no more than one (1) year ago or has received a booster vaccine
CURRENT      administered according to the manufacturer's written instructions. The rabies
RABIES       vaccine shall be licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use
VACCINATION: in that species (a list of the currently licensed vaccines can be found in the
             current "Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines" prepared and updated annually by
             the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians).
             Any dog that:
             A.   Without justified provocation has inflicted serious injury on a person:
             B.   Has been previously be found to be at-risk and thereafter bites or
DANGEROUS    physically harms a person without justified provocation;
DOG:         C.   Has previously been found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to the Idaho Code
             or a substantially conforming ordinance or statute from foreign jurisdiction; or
             D.   Has been previously found to be at-risk and thereafter inflicts injury to a
             domestic animal not on the real property of the owner of the dog.
DOG:         Both the male and female of the Canine species.
             The procedure in which an animal is humanely killed by a method that is painless
EUTHANASIA:  to the animal and causing unconsciousness and death. This procedure is to be
             performed by a certified euthanasia technician or licensed veterinarian in
             accordance with Idaho Code, Title 54, Chapter 21.
             Allowing an animal to remain, or to be lodged, fed or sheltered on real property
HARBORING:   the owner occupies or controls for twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, or for one
             (1) or more hours per day for three (3) consecutive days.
IMPOUND:     To receive into the custody of the Animal Control Shelter or an Animal Control
             Officer.
             To perform any act or omission that a reasonable person with common knowledge of
             dog or cat behavior would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite or attack by
             an ordinary dog or cat. Justified provocation includes, but is not limited to,
             the following:
             A.   The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity
             of the dog or cat from an attack or assault;
             B.   The person was committing a crime or offense upon the property of the owner
             or custodian of the dog;
JUSTIFIED    C.   The person was at the time, or had in the past, willfully tormented, abused
PROVOCATION: or assaulted the dog;
             D.   The dog was responding to immediate pain or injury or protecting its
             offspring;
             E.   The dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog
             on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage
             or injury sustained was to a person who was interfering with the dog while the
             dog was working in a place where it was lawfully engaged in such activity,
             including public lands; or
             F.   The person was intervening between two (2) or more animals engaged in
             aggressive behavior or fighting, unless one or both of the animals is At Large.
KENNEL: (For Any lot or premises or portion on which three (3) or more dogs, cats and other
Hobby,       household domestic animals are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or
Commercial   cared for in return for compensation or kept for sale including privately or
Or Boarding  publicly owned, operated or managed dog pounds.
Purposes):
LEASH:       Any rope, leather strap, chain or other material to be held in the hand of a
             person for the purpose of controlling an animal to which it is attached.
NONBITE      Saliva from an animal who has come in contact with a person's open wound or mucus
EXPOSURE:    membrane that may pose health concerns.
OTHER
SUPPORT OR   Any animal defined as a "service dog" by Department of Justice Regulations at 28
THERAPY      C.F.R. § 35.104 or any successor or amended regulation.
ANIMALS:
             To keep, harbor, or have control, charge or custody of an animal. Animals kept in
OWN:         the custody of a minor or incapacitated person shall be deemed to be owned by the
             minor's parent(s), guardian or other designated responsible person where the
             minor or incapacitated person resides.
             Any person who keeps, harbors, or has control, charge or custody of, or permits
OWNER:       any animal to remain on their property. In the event that a minor falls under the
             definition of "Owner," the parent or guardian shall be liable for all injuries,
             property damage, fines and impoundment fees caused or incurred by the animal.
             Any individual, corporation, non-profit, society, co-partnership, limited
PERSON:      partnership, limited liability company, association, or any other legal or
             business entity.
             A person performing an act or omission that an ordinary and reasonable person
PROVOKE:     would conclude is likely to precipitate dog aggression in the form of a bite or
             attack.
PUBLICLY     Property owned, leased or otherwise used by tax supported agencies. (Example:
OWNED        City parks, schools, post office.)
PROPERTY:
             The strict confinement of an animal in a manner which limits direct contact with
QUARANTINE:  other animals not in quarantine or persons other than the owner or caretaker. The
             quarantine shall be conducted by way of an order issued by the Animal Control
             Agency designating the specific place, manner and provisions of the quarantine.
RABIES       Any animal which has bitten, scratched, or broken the skin of an individual or
SUSPECT      has been bitten, scratched or otherwise wounded or had contact with a rabid
ANIMAL:      animal; or any animal showing symptoms suggestive of rabies or any animal that is
             suspected of having rabies in any way.
RESIDENCE:   Refers to the place of abode for a person or family that is more than merely
             temporary shelter.
SANITIZE:    To make physically clean to the maximum degree that is practical.
SECURE       An enclosure that securely holds an animal.
ENCLOSURE:
             Means an injury to a person characterized by bruising, laceration, or other
SERIOUS      injury that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a
INJURY:      medical professional without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
             treatment.
SERVICE      Any animal defined as a "service dog" by Department of Justice Regulations at 28
ANIMAL:      C.F.R. § 35.104 or any successor or amended regulation.
             A dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of
             an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric,
             intellectual, or other mental disability. Other species of animals, whether wild
             or domestic, trained or untrained, are not service animals for the purposes of
             this chapter. The work or tasks performed by the service dog must be directly
             related to the individual's disability. Examples of work or tasks include, but
             are not limited to, assisting individuals who are blind or have low vision with
             navigation and other tasks, alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing
             to the presence of people or sounds, providing nonviolent protection or rescue
SERVICE DOG: work, pulling a wheelchair, assisting an individual during a seizure, alerting
             individuals to the presence of allergens, retrieving items such as medicine or
             the telephone, providing physical support and assistance with balance and
             stability to individuals with mobility disabilities, and helping persons with
             psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing or interrupting impulsive
             or destructive behaviors. The crime deterrent effects of an animal's presence and
             the provision of emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship do not
             constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this chapter. Idaho Code, Title 56,
             Chapter 701A(5) or any successor or amended statutes. Nothing in this ordinance
             shall conflict with the provisions of the Federal Americans with Disabilities
             Act.
             "Dog-in-training" means a dog being specifically trained to develop social,
SERVICE DOG  environmental, and other skills needed for work with or to perform tasks for an
IN TRAINING: individual with a disability. Dogs- in-training shall wear a jacket, collar,
             scarf, or other similar article identifying it as a dog-in-training. Idaho Code,
             Title 56, Chapter 701A(2), or any amended statutes.
WAIVER:      A statement signed by a licensed veterinarian qualifying the medical reason that
             an animal should not be vaccinated for rabies. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
 
4-5-4: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Standard of Animal Care: Owners shall provide their animals the minimum
standard of care set forth in this Section. Every owner shall provide the
animal with sufficient food, water and shelter according to the following
minimum standards:
      1.   Adequate Food: Animals shall be provided, at intervals not to exceed
twenty-four (24) hours, a quantity of wholesome food specific to the age of the
animal's species that provides a level of nutrition necessary to sustain the
good health of the animal.
      2.   Adequate Quantities of Water: Animals shall at all times have access
clean and fresh water. The owner shall replenish the water supply a minimum of
every twenty-four (24) hours.
      3.   Sanitary Animal Keeping: Owners shall keep their animals in a clean,
sanitary and healthy manner and not confine them in a manner where they are
forced to stand, sit or lie in their own excrement.
      4.   Shelter: Every owner shall provide their Companion Animal with a
shelter structure possessing walls, roof, and raised floor adequate to shield
the animals from wind and rain. The structure shall be adequately ventilated
and provide protection from excessive heat and cold, and shall be commensurate
to the size of the inhabiting animal to permit it to move about freely.
      5.   Tethering: An owner shall not tether a dog or other Companion Animal
through use of a choke collar or tether, or confine an animal in such manner
that it can become entangled to the extent it cannot move freely, or reach
shelter or water, or become entangled with another animal. The area where the
animal is tethered or confined must be free of extraneous material that may
cause it injury (materials such as glass, sharp metal and nails). No animal may
be kept continuously tethered for more than twelve (12) hours during any
twenty-four (24) hour period or tethered on a continuous basis. As defined by
ADA and Idaho Code for an individual with a disability who has a service dog/
service dog in training or a trainer who is training a dog for an individual
with a disability. See ADA and Idaho Code Title 56, Chapter 7 for definitions
and exemptions for off leash/tether/harness.
      6.   Exercise: Every confined animal must be regularly provided with
physical activity appropriate to their species, age and condition sufficient to
maintain their good health.
      7.   Veterinary Care: The owner of a diseased or injured animal shall
promptly provide the animal with appropriate veterinary care and shall
segregate the diseased animal from other animals, as necessary to prevent the
transmittal of disease.
   B.   Animal Fights Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to attend
or participate in any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other such combat
between animals.
   C.   Fighting Equipment: It shall be unlawful to possess cockspurs,
slashers, gaffs, or other tools, equipment, devices or training facilities
intended for purposes for training or engaging an animal in combat with another
animal.
   D.   Animal Exhibition; Circus: It shall be unlawful for an animal
exhibition or circus to perform acts or establish exhibits where the performing
or exhibited animals are induced to perform through the use of chemical,
mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which is likely to cause
physical injury or suffering.
   E.   Confinement without Food and Water; Intervention: A person observing a
Companion Animal confined without access to food or water for more than twenty-
four (24) hours, should immediately contact the Animal Control Agency. A person
acting in good faith to provide food, water or shelter to a mistreated animal
shall be immune from civil liability.
   F.   Improper Containment of Animal in Motor Vehicle or Trailer: No person
(s) shall permit an animal to be contained within a motor vehicle or trailer
under conditions that endanger the health, safety or wellbeing of the animal.
This provision includes circumstances relating dangerous temperatures or lack
of air, food, water and proper care. An Animal Control Officer, law enforcement
officer or public official who has probable cause to believe a confined animal
is imperiled shall have the authority to enter the motor vehicle or trailer by
any reasonable means after making an effort to locate the owner.
   G.   Abandonment: It shall be unlawful to abandon an animal intentionally,
knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence, or leave an animal at a
location without providing for the animal's continued care. Abandonment
includes the disposing of an animal at or near an animal shelter, veterinary
clinic or other place of shelter without first making provisions for its
reasonable care.
   H.   A violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as provided for in Section
4-5-20. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-5: DOG LICENSES:
   A.   Location for Purchasing License: Dog licenses shall be purchased at
locations designated by the City of Eagle.
   B.   License Required; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to
own, harbor, keep or possess a dog older than six (6) months of age within the
City without first procuring a license as required by this Chapter, except:
      1.   Dogs whose owners are nonresidents, but who are temporarily residing
within the City for thirty (30) days or less, and possessing a license issued
by another municipality or other licensing authority.
      2.   Dogs brought into the City for the purpose of participating in
shows, exhibits, competitions, or similar events.
      3.   Service Dogs and Service Dogs in training specially trained to
assist people with disabilities where the dog is serving in this capacity.
   C.   License Term; Application; Fees:
      1.   Dog licenses shall be valid until the last day of the month, one (1)
year or two (2) years from the month of original issue depending on the
duration of license purchased. The owner of the dog located within the City
shall make application at designated locations and pay a license fee as set by
resolution of the City of Eagle.
      2.   No dog will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof the
surgery was performed.
      3.   At time of payment the license issuer shall provide a receipt
designating the dog owner's name, license number, animal gender (or status of
spayed or neutered) and the amount paid. A metal tag bearing the number
corresponding to that affixed upon the receipt will also be provided when
purchasing a new license.
      4.   If a license is lost, the dog owner shall apply for a replacement
tag and pay the appropriate fee.
      5.   Dog licenses may be purchased year-round and renewed up to thirty
(30) days prior to expiration.
      6.   A late fee shall be required for renewal thirty (30) days after
expiration date.
   D.   Use of Improper or Imitation Dog License: It shall be unlawful for a
person to allow their dog to wear a license tag issued to another dog or wear
an imitated City license tag representing the current year's registration, or
any tag marked on plate or collar similar to that required by this ordinance.
   E.   Exceptions: Service Dogs/service dogs in training: License fees shall
be waived for any service dog/service dog in training that has been task
trained for or is being task trained for an individual with a disability. To
qualify under this exception, the owner and user of the dog must sign an
attestation that they meet the requirements under the Americans with
Disabilities Act as disabled or they meet the statutory requirements as a
trainer under Idaho Code Title 56, Chapter 704B(2). Personal protection,
comfort or therapy dogs do not qualify for an exemption under this chapter.
Additionally, there shall be no cost for any dog temporarily in the care of a
shelter who needs to live in a home environment prior to adoption. (Ord. 922,
4-24-2024)
4-5-6: KENNEL LICENSES:
   A.   License Requirements: All kennels must be licensed. Applications are to
be addressed to the Animal Control Agency. The application shall state the name
and address of the owner, the location of the kennel or residence, and the
number and type of dogs or cats to be kept. The City fee for a kennel license
shall be set by resolution of the City of Eagle. The City may seek an
authorized officer of the Animal Control Agency to inspect all prospective
kennels or multiple animal residences prior to granting a kennel permit. The
Animal Control Agency will ensure that the designated number of animals and the
housing and keeping of such animals will not likely constitute a public
nuisance, as defined in Section
4-1-1.
   B.   Any application for a kennel license must include:
      1.   Licensing for each dog that is subject to licensing under Section
4-5-5.
      2.   Written approval for a kennel license, which shall be in the form of
an approved conditional use permit and a valid zoning certificate issued
pursuant to Title 8 of the Eagle City Code. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-7: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Dogs At Large: Notwithstanding the following subsections, it shall be
an infraction for any owner to allow a dog(s) to run At Large, as defined
above.
   B.   Impoundment: The Animal Control Agency may impound any dog found At
Large and there is no owner present, subject to redemption in the manner as
provided for in this Chapter. It shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or cause
injury to a dog At Large, except as provided for elsewhere in this Chapter.
   C.   Collar and Tag Required: Every dog shall wear a substantial, durable
collar or harness at all times, to which the required license tag shall be
securely attached.
   D.   Training and Exercise Grounds: The City of Eagle may designate public
grounds for the training or exercise of dogs, subject to certain rules and
regulations. Dogs exercising in these areas need not be controlled by leash,
provided they are under the control of a responsible person through whistle,
voice, or other effective command.
   E.   Public Parks, Pathways, and City Property: Unless otherwise posted, all
dogs must be on a leash while in a public park, play field or other City owned
property. No animal shall be taken upon or allowed on the premises of any City
owned, leased, subject to a city held right of way or easement, right of way
easement held by the City, natural area, park, playground or play field where
designated as prohibited.
      1.   This section shall not apply to:
         a.   Police officers and their K9 during the official performance of
their duties;
         b.   Handlers of search and rescue animals during the official
performance of their duties; or
         c.   Persons with disabilities utilizing a service animal or service
animal in training.
   F.   Enclosure Requirements: Any owner who relies upon a fence, or other
enclosure, to contain a dog while it is out of doors must maintain the fence or
enclosure in a condition to prevent the dog from escaping and running At Large.
In the event a dog escapes and is found At Large, or injures or attacks another
animal or person through a defective fence, the Animal Control Agency may
investigate and document the condition of the fence or enclosure where the
owner regularly keeps the dog. If the fence is found to be defective or
damaged, the owner shall repair the identified damage, deficiencies, or defects
in the fence. If the owner fails to repair the identified damage, deficiencies,
or defects, and the dog is again found running At Large, the owner may be cited
under this provision for failure to repair the fence to prevent a dog from
running At Large in addition to a citation for the dog running At Large as
defined in
1-4-1. (Ord. 922, 4-24- 2024)
4-5-8: RABIES CONTROL, QUARANTINE:
   A.   Rabies Vaccination Requirements:
      1.   Vaccination Required: The owner or custodian of any dog within the
City shall vaccinate such animal against rabies within thirty (30) days of:
         a.   The dog becoming four (4) months of age;
         b.   Acquiring a dog without documented proof of current rabies
vaccination; or
         c.   Bringing a dog four (4) months of age or older into the City's
limits.
      2.   Revaccination Intervals: The owner or custodian of any dog within
the City that has been vaccinated against rabies is required to revaccinate
such animal within a period of not more than:
         a.   Twelve (12) months after the animal's initial vaccination, if the
animal was between four (4) months and one (1) year of age at the time of such
vaccination; and
         b.   Thirty-six (36) months after each subsequent vaccination.
      3.   Rabies Vaccination Waiver: Upon physical examination of a dog, an
Idaho licensed veterinarian may provide a written waiver from rabies
vaccination based on an illness or infirmity in such animal, or based on a
positive rabies antibody obtained by laboratory testing. A written waiver must
provide an expiration date, not to exceed twelve (12) months. Upon expiration,
the animal must be vaccinated, or it must be physically reexamined by an Idaho
licensed veterinarian, who may issue a new written waiver from rabies
vaccination following the same guidelines set forth herein.
      4.   Approved Vaccination: Only U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
approved rabies vaccinations may be administered to dogs and cats within the
City.
      5.   Certificate of Vaccination: An Idaho licensed veterinarian who
vaccinates a dog against rabies within the City, must immediately issue a
certificate of vaccination signed by the veterinarian to such animal's owner or
custodian. The certificate of rabies vaccination shall provide the following
information:
         a.   The date of the vaccination;
         b.   The name and address of the vaccinated animal's owner or
custodian;
         c.   The type of vaccine used, the vaccine manufacturer's name, and
the vaccine's serial or lot number; and
         d.   The breed, age, color, sex, and name of the vaccinated dog.
      6.   Maintaining Vaccination Records: The owner or custodian of a dog
shall maintain copies of the certificates of rabies vaccinations for the animal
and shall produce such records upon request by:
         a.   An Animal Control Officer;
         b.   A person who was injured by and potentially exposed to rabies by
such animal;
         c.   A licensed physician who is currently treating a person who was
injured by and potentially exposed to rabies by such animal; or
         d.   A veterinarian who is currently treating an animal that was
injured by and potentially exposed to rabies by such animal.
   B.   Duty to Report and Confine Suspected Rabid Animals: It shall be
unlawful for an owner or person having charge, custody or control of any
animal, who learns or observes the animal act in a manner that would lead a
reasonable person to suspect the animal is infected with rabies:
      1.   To fail, refuse, or neglect to immediately notify the Animal Control
Agency;
      2.   To fail to securely confine such animal as directed by the Animal
Control Agency;
      3.   To fail, refuse, or neglect to allow a licensed veterinarian to
inspect or examine such animal for symptoms of rabies.
   C.   Quarantine of Biting Animals; Suspected Rabies - Procedures:
      1.   An owner or custodian of any animal who learns of or observes such
animal exhibiting rabies symptoms or observes the animal act in a manner that
would lead a reasonable person to suspect the animal is infected with rabies,
shall surrender the animal for quarantine to an animal shelter or licensed
veterinarian.
      2.   An owner or custodian of any animal that has bitten a human in which
the skin was broken shall surrender such animal for quarantined confinement to
an animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian.
      3.   An owner or custodian of any animal which comes into contact with a
known rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined in a place and
manner, and for a period of time, designated by the Director of the Animal
Control Agency.
      4.   Quarantine Period: Any animal quarantined for biting or under
suspicion of rabies infection shall be confined and observed by a licensed
veterinarian for a period of no less than ten (10) days and not more than
fifteen (15) days from the date the bite was inflicted.
      5.   Alternative Quarantine Procedure: At the discretion of the Director
of the Animal Control Agency, the quarantine of an animal may be conducted at a
licensed boarding kennel or upon the premises of the owner or custodian of the
animal. During the period of quarantine, the animal must be securely confined
and isolated from contact with humans and other animals. Within forty-eight
(48) hours of the conclusion of the quarantine period, and at the owner's or
custodian's expense, the owner or custodian shall have the animal examined by a
licensed veterinarian, the Animal Control Agency, or an Animal Control Officer
to determine whether the animal exhibits any symptoms of rabies or has died. In
the case of a veterinary examination, the owner or custodian shall submit a
true and accurate copy of the veterinarian's examination record to the Animal
Control Agency. If the animal dies while in alternative quarantine, the
animal's owner or custodian shall immediately notify the Animal Control Agency
and surrender the carcass for testing if requested by the Animal Control
Agency.
      6.   Surrender for Destruction of Rabid Animals: The owner or custodian
of an animal that is determined to be rabid shall surrender the infected animal
to the Animal Control Agency, if not already in possession of the Animal
Control Agency. The animal's diagnosis shall be confirmed. If the animal is
found to be rabid then the animal shall be euthanized by the Animal Control
Agency after the owner is notified.
      7.   Impoundment; Fees and Costs; and Disposal of Quarantined Animal: Any
animal exhibiting rabies symptoms may be impounded for quarantine, and the
animal's owner shall be liable for all related fees and costs as set forth in
this Chapter. Impounded animals for quarantine are subject to disposal by the
Animal Control Agency as set forth in this Chapter.
   D.   Contagious Diseased Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or allow any animal with a contagious or infectious disease to
run At Large upon the public streets, or to be within and upon any public
transportation facility, or any other public building or place within the City,
or to expose such animal in any public building or place, whereby the health,
safety and wellbeing of the public, or any member or members thereof, may be
affected; nor shall such animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner of such animal, except under the supervision of the Animal Control
Agency. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-9: ANIMALS PRESENTING AN IMMEDIATE DANGER:
   A.   If an animal:
      1.   Presents an immediate danger to the health and safety of a person;
      2.   Is threatening a person; or
      3.   Is harming a person;
Then the animal may be restrained by whatever humane means necessary and even
destroyed if absolutely necessary to prevent injury to the victim.
Alternatively, a law enforcement officer, the Animal Control Officer or Animal
Control Agency may, if practical, apprehend the animal and impound it.
   B.   Any owner of an animal presenting an immediate danger without
provocation, as described above, in addition to any other penalties as provided
in this Chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-10: DIRECTING A DOG TO HARASS OR ATTACK:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession of any animal to
direct, encourage, cause, allow, or otherwise aid or assist a dog to threaten,
charge, bite, harass, menace, or attack a person or other animal within the
City. The directed animal may be seized and impounded. This Section shall not
apply to an attack by a dog under the control of a law enforcement officer or
resultant from an attack upon an uninvited intruder who enters the owner's
property with a criminal intent. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-11: CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR DOG BITES AND ATTACKS:
   A.   An owner or person in possession of a dog that bites or attacks a
Companion Animal, or bites or attacks a human being without causing serious
injury and without justified provocation as provided in this Chapter, is guilty
of an infraction, and shall be punished per
1-4-1 upon conviction. Further, as consequence of the owner or person in
possession pleading guilty or being found guilty of an infraction under this
subsection, the dog which bit or attacked shall be deemed an At-Risk Dog,
provided the animal is found to meet the definition as provided in this
Chapter, and that justified provocation was not a factor in the incident. The
provisions of Section
4-5-17 applicable to keeping at-risk dogs shall apply to that dog.
      1.   If, within twelve (12) months from the date of a conviction under
this Section, a dog again attacks or bites a Companion Animal, or attacks or
bites a human being and without justified provocation, and without causing
serious injury, the owner, or person in possession, shall be guilty of
misdemeanor. Further, as a consequence of the owner or person in possession
pleading guilty or being found guilty of a misdemeanor under this subsection,
the dog which bit or attacked shall be deemed dangerous. The provisions of
Section
4-5-17 applicable to keeping dangerous dogs shall apply to that dog.
   B.   Any owner, or person in possession, of a dog that bites or attacks a
human being and causes serious injury and without justified provocation as
provided in this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Further, as a
consequence of the owner (or person in possession) pleading guilty or being
found guilty of a misdemeanor under this subsection, the dog which bit or
attacked shall be deemed a Dangerous Dog provided the animal is found to meet
the definition of dangerous dog as provided in this Chapter, and that justified
provocation was not a factor in the incident. The provisions of
4-5-20 applicable to keeping a Dangerous Dog shall apply. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-12: HABITUAL BARKING OR NOISEMAKING; NUISANCE:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to exercise
proper care and control of their animal. To prevent it from becoming a public
nuisance, as the term public nuisance is defined in Chapter 1, Title 52, of the
Idaho Code, a person shall be subject to criminal liability and guilty of a
misdemeanor for allowing an animal to become a public nuisance when such person
permits or allows an animal to:
      1.   Bark, bay, cry, howl, or emit any excessive animal noise audible
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the animal is situated for an
extended period of time, day or night, thereby unreasonably disturbing another
person. For purposes of this Section "extended period of time" means either:
         a.   Barking, baying, crying, howling, or other animal noise emitted
by one or more animals incessantly for thirty (30) minutes, with no individual
period of silence of more than one (1) minute during the thirty (30) minute
period; or
         b.   Barking, baying, crying, howling or other animal noise emitted by
one or more animals intermittently for a total of sixty (60) minutes or more
within a twenty-four (24) hour period.
   B.   Exceptions: This Section shall not apply to animals that are being
harassed or provoked by a person to cause such noise, that are maintained on
land zoned for agricultural purposes, are kept at a properly permitted animal
shelter established for the care and placement of unwanted or stray animals, or
are kept at a properly zoned commercial boarding kennel.
   C.   Proof of Excessive Noise Nuisance: The owner or custodian of an animal
may be charged with excessive animal noise nuisance when an Animal Control
Officer:
      1.   Receives signed complaints alleging an animal noise nuisance from at
least two (2) unrelated adult witnesses residing in different residences;
      2.   Receives a signed complaint alleging an animal noise nuisance from
one adult witness who has an audio or video recording of the alleged violation;
      3.   Receives a signed complaint alleging an animal noise nuisance from
one (1) adult witness and the Animal Control Officer also personally observes
noise emission consistent with the complainant's allegations, even if the noise
emission witnessed by the officer is for less than the required amount of time
under this ordinance; or
      4.   Personally witnesses the excessive noise violation for the required
period of time under this ordinance.
   D.   Other Animal Nuisances: Another animal nuisance may occur when:
      1.   An animal threatens, or acts aggressively towards, passersby;
      2.   An animal chases vehicles, individuals on bicycles, scooters or
similar devices, or pedestrians;
      3.   An animal attacks other animals;
      4.   An animal trespasses upon public or private property in such a
manner as to damage the property;
      5.   An excessive amount of animal feces is permitted to accumulate in
such a manner as to present a health risk to a person or which is of such
quantity as to generate odors off the premises of the animal owner; or
   E.   Nuisance Feral Cat Prevention: Any cat not spayed or neutered that is
permitted to be out of doors not under the direct control of its owner is
deemed a nuisance. The Animal Control Agency may seize any cat At Large and may
spay or neuter such animal. The Animal Control Agency may mark the cat as being
spayed or neutered by marking the animal's ear, or through some other
methodology. A cat that is seized pursuant this Section, spayed or neutered,
and marked as such, may be released by the Animal Control Agency to the
location from which it was seized. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-13: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; ANIMAL SHELTER:
   A.   Animal Control Agency:
      1.   Appointment of Animal Control Agency: The City of Eagle is
authorized to appoint an Animal Control Agency to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter.
      2.   Duty of Animal Control Agency, Shelter and its Officers or Assigns:
The Animal Control Agency is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter and is designated as a peace officer for this purpose. The Animal
Control Agency is authorized to make necessary animal seizures. The Animal
Control Agency may remove and keep any animal in violation of the provisions of
this Chapter. The Animal Control Agency shall issue a notice of ordinance
violation to enforce provisions of this Section. The notice of ordinance
violation may be signed by any person witnessing a violation as well as the
witnessing Animal Control Officer whose name shall be affixed on the notice of
ordinance violation.
   B.   Designation of Animal Control Shelter: The City of Eagle shall
designate an official Animal Control Shelter where animals found in violation
of this Chapter shall be taken. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-14: OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
   A.   No person shall obstruct, delay, hinder, hide, conceal, or interfere
with any person authorized by the City of Eagle to discharge their duties under
this Section. The following acts are considered obstructing or interfering with
an Animal Control Officer's duties:
      1.   Removing an animal from the animal control shelter or from the
custody of an Animal Control Officer without the authority of the Animal
Control Agency.
      2.   Removing an animal from the animal control shelter without paying
the designated fees.
      3.   Threatening or obstructing an Animal Control Officer acting in their
official powers or duties.
      4.   Committing an act that interferes with or obstructs an Animal
Control Officer acting in the discharge of their duties.
      5.   It is unlawful to make a false or misleading statement or
representation about animal ownership or custody to an Animal Control Agency,
shelter or officer.
   B.   An Animal Control Officer in the course of their duties has an
obligation to identify who they are to those requesting that information and
provide a current work address and, if necessary, sign an acknowledgement of
receipt of infraction or misdemeanor.
   C.   Any person violating this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-15: IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS:
   A.   An Animal Control Officer may impound an animal if they have probable
cause to believe a violation of any provision of this Chapter has occurred and
for which an animal may be impounded. The notice and terms of impoundment,
redemption, and disposal of such animal are set forth in this Section.
   B.   Record of Impounding: At time of animal impoundment the Animal Control
Agency shall record the date of impounding, a description of the animal
impounded, the reason behind the impoundment and an assessment of its identity
if that can be determined.
   C.   Identified Animals: Within twenty-four (24) hours after impoundment of
an identified animal, the Animal Control Agency shall make all reasonable
efforts to notify the owner of the animal's impoundment.
   D.   An Animal Control Officer may impound any animal if they have probable
cause to believe the animal has been left unattended due to the arrest,
hospitalization, or other incapacity of the owner.
   E.   Redeeming Animals:
      1.   Animals brought to the animal control shelter shall be provided
humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort. They shall be
held by the Animal Control Shelter for a period of time, as determined by the
impounding agency, unless they are subject to other provisions of this Section.
      2.   This Section does not apply to animals that are sick or injured to
the extent that their impoundment will prolong their suffering and a better
course of action would be to humanely euthanize the animal in the opinion of a
licensed veterinarian.
      3.   The owner of any animal that is lawfully impounded shall be
responsible for and pay all fees and expenses related to the impoundment
whether or not the animal is later claimed.
      4.   The following protocol is required to reclaim an animal, unless
otherwise noted:
         a.   Execution of a sworn statement of current ownership.
         b.   Proof of current license (if required) in the circumstance the
animal is untagged, or purchase of a license and tag.
         c.   Payment of the impoundment fees.
         d.   Payment of the boarding fee according to the boarding schedule.
         e.   Payment of any veterinary and hospital expenses incurred during
the animal's impoundment.
   F.   Refusal to Redeem Impounded Animal; Adoption; Appeal: The animal may
not be redeemed by the owner, if, in the judgment of a licensed veterinarian or
an agent of the Animal Control Agency, an animal should not be returned to the
owner for humane or public health reasons. The owner shall be provided written
notice of this decision, and the owner shall be permitted to appeal this
decision to the director as an affected person. After completion of an appeal,
or after the time for filing an appeal has passed, the Animal Control Agency
may either: (1) find a responsible person to adopt the animal; or (2) euthanize
the animal.
   G.   Impoundment fee: The Animal Control Shelter shall charge a fee, set by
resolution of the City of Eagle for receiving an animal into custody. This fee
shall be paid at time of animal redemption and these fees shall be remitted to
the City of Eagle.
   H.   Boarding Fees: The Animal Control Shelter shall be entitled to charge a
boarding fee for the keeping and selling of an animal and these fees shall be
retained by the Animal Control Shelter.
   I.   Annual Report of Fees: The charges associated with the keeping and
selling of an animal shall be determined by the Animal Control Shelter. The
fees charged by the Animal Control Shelter for boarding and keeping any animal
shall be paid at time of animal redemption along with any veterinary and
hospital expenses incurred during the animal's impoundment. The Animal Control
Shelter is obligated to keep a fee schedule for services rendered available for
public inspection and advise the City of Eagle annually the fees it charges for
its services. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-16: HABITUAL VIOLATOR:
   A.   Notice of Abatement; Appeal: In addition to any legal remedy available
under the provisions of this Chapter, the Animal Control Agency may notify and
direct, in writing, an owner who is guilty of three (3) convictions of a
violation of this Chapter in any twelve (12) month period to abate and remove
the animal(s) causing the violations from the City within five (5) calendar
days from the date of the notice; or, in the alternative, to abate and transfer
ownership and possession of the animal to another person not living at the same
place of residence.
   B.   Request Hearing Before District Court: The owner of an animal that has
been served with an order of abatement, pursuant to subsection A. of this
Section, may appeal such order by requesting a hearing before the district
court by submitting a written request to the clerk of the court. Any appeal
must be filed within five (5) calendar days following service of the notice.
   C.   Failure to Abate; Impoundment of Animal: If the owner of the animal is
found in violation of the abatement notice and has failed to timely appeal the
notice or lost their appeal, the animal shall be removed and impounded by the
Animal Control Agency, subject to all impoundment procedures; provided,
however, the animal may not be returned to the same residence or property from
where it formerly resided or was impounded. The owner of the animal shall be
responsible for the fees incurred as a result of the seizure and impoundment of
the animal. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-17: DESIGNATION AND MANAGEMENT OF DANGEROUS OR AT-RISK DOGS:
   A.   Purpose.
      1.   Dangerous and At-Risk dogs found within the boundaries of the City
of Eagle present a risk to the health, safety, and welfare of persons and other
animals. The purpose of this Section is to provide policies and procedures for
the safe management of Dangerous and At-Risk dogs to promote the public health,
safety, and welfare, while also promoting the humane and ethical treatment of
animals.
   B.   Procedure for Designating a Dog as Dangerous or At-Risk.
      1.   If an Animal Control Officer has probable cause to believe a dog is
Dangerous or At-Risk, as those terms are defined in this Chapter, the Officer
shall have authority to designate the dog as Dangerous or At-Risk and shall
serve a written Notice of Designation on the owner of the dog. An Animal
Control Officer shall have authority to designate an animal regardless of
whether or not an owner has been charged with a crime related to an unprovoked
animal attack. The Notice of Designation shall:
         a.   Be personally served on the owner by an Animal Control Officer or
other authorized person.
         b.   Identify whether the dog is being designated as Dangerous or At-
Risk;
         c.   Identify the date on which the officer determined the dog to be
Dangerous or At-Risk;
         d.   Provide a description of the factual circumstances and events
that support the officer's decision to designate the dog as Dangerous or At-
Risk;
         e.   Provide a clear description of the dog such that it can be
identified, a photograph of the dog is encouraged;
         f.   Provide notice that the owner may petition the Animal Control
Agency to review the Officer's decision to designate the animal as Dangerous or
At-Risk;
         g.   Provide notice that the Officer's designation decision shall
become final after ten (10) business days if the owner fails to petition the
Animal Control Agency to review the Notice of Designation;
         h.   Provide notice that owners of a dog designated as At-Risk or
Dangerous may either keep the dog in their possession and be subject to the
restrictions the Animal Control Agency puts in place for the keeping of such
dogs, or may voluntarily relinquish custody of the dog to the Animal Control
Agency; and
         i.   Provide notice that the final disposition of a dog voluntarily
relinquished to, or seized by, the Animal Control Agency pursuant to this
Section may be adoption or euthanasia, and this decision shall be in the sole
discretion of the Animal Control Agency.
      2.   No dog may be designated as Dangerous or At-Risk when, at the time
an injury or damage was sustained, the precipitating cause constituted
justified provocation.
      3.   An Animal Control Officer has the authority to seize and impound a
dog that has been determined, by an Animal Control Officer, to be:
         a.   Dangerous; or
         b.   Present an ongoing risk.
      4.   When an Animal Control Officer designates a dog as At-Risk the
Animal Control Officer shall have authority, but is not required, to seize and
impound the dog. Where the officer chooses to leave the dog in the owner's
custody and care, based upon the owner's express willingness to comply with
requirements and restrictions for keeping such dogs, the Officer shall provide
notice to the owner of the requirements and restrictions for keeping At-Risk
dogs as provided in this Section.
      5.   If an owner chooses to petition the Animal Control Agency to review
the Officer's designation decision, the owner shall be responsible for any fees
associated with boarding and caring for the animal during the time the petition
and any additional proceedings are pending, as well as any fees associated with
processing and considering the petition.
   C.   Any owner that receives a Notice of Designation shall be permitted to
appeal that designation as an affected person as provided in this Chapter.
   D.   Keeping Dangerous Dogs: The owner of a dog designated as Dangerous, or
a new adoptive owner of a dog designated as Dangerous prior to being adopted,
shall be subject to the following restrictions for the keeping of such dog
within the boundaries of City of Eagle:
      1.   The dog shall be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter.
      2.   The owner shall be required to have a microchip implanted in the dog
that allows for identification of the animal and the owner shall be required to
report the microchip number to the Animal Control Agency.
      3.   The owner shall be required to procure and maintain liability
insurance of not less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) in the
case of a dog that is designated as Dangerous based on an attack or injury
inflicted on any person, or twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) in the case of a
dog that is designated as Dangerous based solely on attacks or injuries
inflicted on animals but not people, that covers any damage or injury that may
be caused by such Dangerous dog; the City shall be named as an additional
insured on this policy for the purpose that the City Clerk, or other licensing
authority, will be notified by the insurance company if the policy is
cancelled, terminated, or otherwise expires.
      4.   The dog shall be contained within an enclosure on the owner's
property; this enclosure may be a fence, kennel, or other adequate means of
containing the animal to the owner's property. The Animal Control Agency shall
be permitted to inspect such enclosure, and if the enclosure is found to be
defective or inadequate by the Agency the owner shall not be permitted to keep
the dog until the enclosure improved as requested by the Animal Control Agency.
Failure to improve the enclosure shall result in the inability of the owner to
keep the Dangerous Dog.
      5.   The owner shall be required to post signs on their property that
announce to other persons that there is a Dangerous Dog on the property. Such
signs must be placed at any potential entrance point to the yard or home (such
as at gates, doors, and on the enclosure where the dog is kept), and must
include words indicating the presence of a "dangerous" dog. A sign merely
stating "Beware of Dog," without also identifying the dog to be "dangerous,"
"vicious" or some substantially similar word indicating the dog's propensity
for aggression shall be insufficient.
      6.   In the event the owner takes the dog off their property, the dog
shall be on a leash no greater than three (3) feet in length, and the dog shall
also be required to wear a muzzle. The leash must be of adequate strength to
restrain the dog, and the person holding the leash must be physically capable
of restraining and controlling the dog; the dog must not be allowed to be off
leash within city limits including any areas designated as off leash areas, the
dog shall not be kept at dog care facilities where dogs are kept in group off
leash housing. The owner or custodian of the dog shall ensure that the dog is
not allowed to have physical contact with any other dog or person other than
the keeper, custodian or immediate family of the owner when off the property of
the owner.
      7.   The owner shall be required to spay or neuter the dog.
      8.   The owner shall be obligated to schedule and obtain annual
inspections of the dog by the Animal Control Agency.
   E.   Keeping At-Risk Dogs: The owner of a dog designated as At-Risk, or a
new adoptive owner of a dog designated as At-Risk prior to being adopted, shall
be subject to the following restrictions for the keeping of such dog within the
boundaries of the City of Eagle:
      1.   The dog shall be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter;
      2.   The owner shall be required to have a microchip implanted in the dog
that allows for identification of the animal and the owner shall be required to
report the microchip number to the Animal Control Agency;
      3.   The dog shall be contained within an enclosure on the owner's
property; this enclosure may be a fence, kennel, or other adequate means of
containing the animal to the owner's property. The Animal Control Agency shall
be permitted to inspect such enclosure, and if the enclosure is found to be
defective or inadequate by the Agency the owner shall not be permitted to keep
the dog until the enclosure improved as requested by the Animal Control Agency.
Therefore, the dog may be impounded until the enclosure is repaired or
improved. Failure to improve the enclosure shall result in the inability of the
owner to keep the At-Risk dog;
      4.   In the event the owner takes the dog off their property, the dog
shall be on a leash no greater than six (6) feet in length. Further the leash
must be of adequate strength to restrain the dog, and the person holding the
leash must be physically capable of restraining and controlling the dog; the
dog must not be allowed to be off leash within City limits including any areas
designated as off leash areas, the dog shall not be kept at dog care facilities
where dogs are kept in group off leash housing. The owner or custodian of the
dog shall ensure that the dog is not allowed to have physical contact with any
other dog or person other than the keeper, custodian or immediate family of the
owner when off the property of the owner.
   F.   In addition to any criminal penalties, failure to comply with any of
the restrictions in Section (D) or (E) above may result in the dog being
immediately seized and impounded. An owner is permitted to redeem the animal
from impound so long as the owner comes into compliance with the provisions of
Section (D) or (E), whichever is applicable, within ten (10) days of the dog
being seized. If the owner fails to come into compliance with the provisions of
the applicable Section (D) or (E), the Animal Control Agency may place the dog
up for adoption or euthanize the dog, provided the Agency complies with the
adoption or euthanasia guidelines provided for elsewhere in this Chapter.
   G.   Transfer of At-Risk or Dangerous Dogs: If an owner of an At-Risk or
Dangerous dog transfers ownership of the dog to another person, they shall be
obligated to notify the new owner of the designation. Further, they shall be
obligated to notify the Animal Control Agency of the transfer of ownership of
the animal, and provide to the Animal Control Agency the name, physical
address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. The new owner shall
be obligated to comply with the requirements set forth in this Section for
keeping At-Risk or Dangerous dogs.
   H.   Disposition of Dogs Designated as Dangerous or At-risk.
      1.   In the event a dog designated as Dangerous again, while unprovoked,
attacks a person, such dog shall be subject to immediate impounding by the
Animal Control Agency and shall be humanely euthanized as expeditiously as
reasonably possible. Such second attack need not cause serious injury for this
provision to apply.
      2.   As proscribed elsewhere in this Chapter, Dangerous or At-Risk dogs
may be impounded under various circumstances. Where such dogs are voluntarily
relinquished by the owner, or where the owner cannot or will not redeem the dog
from impound, the Animal Control Agency shall be permitted to place the dog for
adoption if, in the Agency's judgment, the dog can be safely adopted to a new
home. Where the Agency concludes the dog cannot be safely adopted, the Agency
shall humanely euthanize such animal.
      3.   If the Animal Control Agency chooses to place for adoption a dog
currently or previously designated as Dangerous or At-Risk to a new home, the
Animal Control Agency shall provide written notice to the person(s) adopting
the dog of its current or previous designation. Prior to approving the
adoption, the Agency shall obtain a written signed waiver from the adopting
person(s) indicating they are aware of the dog's designation, and will not hold
the City liable for incidents that may arise related to the dog's behavior.
Further, where the designation is currently in place and not expired or
vacated, the Animal Control Agency shall notify the person(s) adopting the
animal of the restrictions placed on an owner of such animal provided for in
Eagle City Code Section
4-5-17(D) and (E), and the owner shall be obligated to comply with these
restrictions.
      4.   The Animal Control Agency, in its sole discretion, shall be
authorized to deny a request to adopt a Dangerous or At-Risk dog. The Animal
Control Agency shall be particularly sensitive to the potential risks
associated with adopting the animal to a home with small children or other
vulnerable individuals, and only approve such adoptions in rare circumstances.
The Agency's decision to deny an adoption request under this provision is not
subject to appeal.
      5.   The Animal Control Agency shall keep records of dogs designated as
Dangerous or At-Risk. The records kept shall at a minimum contain information
identifying the dog (including name, breed, color and markings description,
microchip number, and gender), the date of the Notice of Designation, and the
name and contact information for the current owner of such dog.
   I.   Expiration or Cancellation of At-Risk Designation.
      1.   The designation as an At-Risk dog shall expire twenty-four (24)
months after the Notice of Designation is served on the current or previous
owner, provided the dog has not acted in a manner or committed an act during
that twenty-four (24) month period that would constitute grounds to again
designate the dog as At-Risk.
      2.   An owner of an At-Risk dog may petition the Animal Control Agency
earlier than twenty-four (24) months to cancel the designation as At-Risk. The
petition shall set out factual or legal circumstances that would warrant the
cancellation of the designation. The Agency receiving such a petition shall
investigate the circumstances asserted by the owner, and provide a written
decision to the owner either granting or denying the petition. An owner may
file more than one petition under this provision, provided no owner shall bring
more than one such petition during any twelve (12) month period of time. The
owner bringing such petition shall be responsible for all fees and costs
incurred by the City or Animal Control Agency in processing said petition.
   J.   The owner of a dog impounded under any provision of this Section shall
be liable to the Animal Control Agency for costs associated with boarding and
caring for the animal until the animal redeemed from impound, adopted, or
euthanized, except where the animal was voluntary relinquished to the Animal
Control Agency.
   K.   An owner of a dog who violates any provision of Eagle City Code Section
4-5-17 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided
herein. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-18: APPEAL PROCEDURE FOR AFFECTED PERSONS:
If an Animal Control Officer determines a dog to be At-Risk or Dangerous, the
Animal Control Officer or Agency shall notify the dog owner of the
determination. The results of the investigation will be reported to the Animal
Control Agency and to the dog owner. The dog owner has the option of filing an
appeal with the district court. Such appeal shall be within ten (10) days of
the designation as an At-Risk or Dangerous dog. Depending on the circumstances,
the dog may be impounded pending disposition of the case. The hearing
procedures shall be governed by the Idaho Rules of Civil Procedure with the
burden of proof on the owner of the dog to show the dog should not be
classified as Dangerous or At-Risk.
   A.   Destruction of Dangerous Dog:
      1.   If the court finds the dog is Dangerous, then the court may order
the Owner to comply with restrictions set out by the Animal Control Agency, or
such dog shall be subject to destruction by the Animal Control Agency. Upon
request of the owner, the dog's remains shall be provided to the owner within
five (5) days of destruction.
      2.   If the court finds that the dog is not At-Risk or Dangerous as
defined in this Chapter, such dog may be released to the custody of the owner
upon payment of any outstanding impoundment fees. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-19: DENYING OWNERSHIP:
It shall be a misdemeanor for an owner of an animal to deny ownership of that
animal. (Ord. 922, 4-24-2024)
4-5-20: PENALTIES:
Except where specifically provided otherwise within this Chapter, any person
violating any of the provisions of this Chapter for which a fixed fine has not
been designated shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished with a fine as provided by Idaho Code Section 18-113
as it may from time to time be amended and/or retitled, or by imprisonment for
not more than six (6) months, or by both said fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 922,
4-24-2024)
CHAPTER 6
CLEAN AIR
SECTION:
4-6-1: Short Title
4-6-2: Authority And Purpose
4-6-3: Definitions
4-6-4: Air Quality Index (AQI) And Related Restrictions
4-6-5: Public Notification
4-6-6: Prohibited Burning
4-6-7: Permitted Open Burning
4-6-8: Exemptions From Restrictions
4-6-9: Minimum Standards For Clean Burning Appliances
4-6-10: Applicability Of Chapter
4-6-11: Penalty
4-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF EAGLE CLEAN AIR ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 245, 5-10-1994)
4-6-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect air quality resources vital to the
public health, safety and welfare of the city residents and the economic future
of the city by controlling emissions from solid fuel and refuse burning. This
chapter is promulgated under the authority of Idaho Code section 50-302. (Ord.
245, 5-10-1994)
4-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations all have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any contaminate or
combinations thereof in such quantity or of such nature and duration and under
such conditions as would be injurious to human health or welfare, to plant or
animal life, or to property, to interfere unreasonably with the enjoyment of
life or property.
BUILDING: Any structure, dwelling, office, industrial plant, garage or barn,
whether publicly or privately owned or any other structure as defined by the
international building code as adopted by title 7, chapter 1, article A of this
code.
BURN DOWN: That period of time following an air pollution alert required for
the cessation of combustion within solid fuel heating appliances or any outdoor
fires or burning or incineration included within this chapter.
CLEAN BURNING APPLIANCE: A solid fuel heating appliance that has been certified
as clean burning by either the Oregon department of environmental quality or
the United States environmental protection agency and has been placed on the
list of approved clean burning appliances maintained by the city clerk.
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: Fifty percent (50%) or less of the city of Eagle's median
income as established by the U.S. department of housing and urban development.
FIREPLACE: A residential solid fuel burning device with an air to fuel ratio of
greater than thirty (30) which is a permanent structural feature of a building.
A fireplace is made up of a concealed masonry or metal flue and a masonry or
metal firebox enclosed in decorative masonry or other building materials. A
residential solid fuel burning device which is freestanding or which is
installed into an existing "fireplace" opening is not included in the
definition of "fireplace".
HEAT OUTPUT: The British thermal unit (BTU)/hour output of a solid fuel heating
appliance.
OPEN BURNING: Means the combustion of any material not contained in a heating
appliance or incinerator.
PARTICULATE MATTER (PM10/PM2.5): Any gas borne particles resulting from
incomplete combustion, consisting predominantly, but not exclusively, of carbon
and other combustible matter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or governmental entity.
REFUSE: All solid waste, garbage and rubbish, including, but not limited to,
cardboard, plastic, rubber, styrofoam, petroleum products, food stuff,
Christmas trees, yard debris and chemically treated wood.
REFUSE INCINERATOR: Any device designed or operated to reduce the volume of
refuse. Natural gas fired pathological incinerators are excluded.
SOLE SOURCE: One or more solid fuel heating devices which constitute the only
source of heat in a building for the purpose of space heating. No solid fuel
heating device(s) shall be the sole source of heat if the building is equipped
with a permanently installed furnace or heating system designed to heat the
building that is connected or unconnected from its energy source, utilizing
oil, natural gas, electricity or propane.
SOLID FUEL: Any form of untreated wood or coal.
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE: An enclosed device designed for solid fuel
combustion that meets all of the following criteria:
   A.   An air to fuel ratio averaging less than thirty five to one (35 to 1);
   B.   Firebox volume less than twenty (20) cubic feet;
   C.   Minimum burn rate less than five (5) kilograms per hour; and
   D.   Maximum weight of less than eight hundred (800) kilograms.
Explicitly excluded are furnaces, boilers, cook stoves and open fireplaces.
(Ord. 245, 5-10-1994; amd. Ord. 448, 6-10-2003)
4-6-4: AIR QUALITY INDEX (AQI) AND RELATED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The quality of the city's air is determined by the Idaho state
department of environmental quality (DEQ) by monitoring pollutant levels in
and/or around the city with equipment and methods approved by the DEQ.
   B.   The quality of the city's air shall be designated according to the
following table:
   AIR QUALITY INDEX (AQI)
Designation AQI
Designation                    AQI
Good                           0   �50
Moderate                       51  �100
Unhealthy for sensitive groups 101 �150
Unhealthy                      151 �200
Very unhealthy                 201 �300
Hazardous                      301 �500
 
   C.   All open burning, even if a valid permit has been issued, is prohibited
when the DEQ reports an air quality index (AQI) of sixty (60) or higher for any
pollutant measured in the Treasure Valley. It is the responsibility of the
permit holder to be informed of the AQI designation prior to ignition. The AQI
can be accessed by calling the DEQ's daily AQI report and/or via DEQ's website.
   D.   All wood burning, including, but not limited to, within a solid fuel
heating appliance designed for wood fuel (commonly known as a "wood stove") or
open fireplace, is prohibited whenever the DEQ reports an AQI of seventy four
(74) or greater and forecasts air stagnation conditions to continue for at
least twenty four (24) hours.
      1.   No person shall cause or allow, after a three (3) hour "burn down",
the operation of a solid fuel heating appliance or open fireplace, unless an
exemption has been granted by the city of Eagle and/or the Eagle fire
protection district.
      2.   No person shall cause or allow the operation of a solid waste
incinerator.
      3.   No person shall build, ignite, or maintain any outdoor fire of any
kind or character, or for any purpose whatsoever, except as provided within
this chapter. (Ord. 448, 6-10-2003)
4-6-5: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION:
Whenever air pollution alert conditions are met, local print, radio and
television news media will be notified. Announcements of the existence of an
air pollution "alert" will be made by the news media during regularly scheduled
broadcasts. (Ord. 245, 5-10-1994)
4-6-6: PROHIBITED BURNING:
   A.   No person shall cause or allow refuse or coal to be burned in a solid
fuel heating appliance designed for wood fuel.
   B.   No person shall cause or allow a solid fuel heating appliance or refuse
incinerator to be operated contrary to the design, specifications and
manufacturer's instructions.
   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any section of this chapter, no
person shall allow, suffer, cause, or permit the open burning of materials
which emit toxic contaminants or large volumes of smoke, particulates or odors
deemed a public nuisance. Such prohibited materials consist of the following,
but are not limited to: garbage, tires or any other rubber materials, plastics,
heavy petroleum products, dead animals or parts thereof, lumber, tree stumps,
trash, wet or green vegetation, trade waste, commercial waste, roofing
materials or any other asphaltic materials, drywall, sheetrock, tarpaper, floor
underlayment, insulation, chemicals, household garbage, motor vehicles or parts
thereof whether junked or not, insulated wire, pathogenic wastes, hazardous
wastes, etc.
   D.   Any open burning that would otherwise be allowed under this chapter,
but is determined to be a nuisance, hazard, or source of air pollution, shall
be prohibited.
   E.   All open burning, even if a valid permit has been issued, is prohibited
when the DEQ reports an AQI of sixty (60) or higher for any pollutant measured
in the Treasure Valley. (Ord. 448, 6-10-2003)
4-6-7: PERMITTED OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Open burning of the following are permitted only in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and do not require a permit:
      1.   Fires used by organized firefighting personnel for the purpose of
combating fire or training.
      2.   Barbecues or other fires used in the preparation of food, provided
however, that the fire does not exceed three feet (3') in diameter and two feet
(2') high.
   B.   Open burning of the following are permitted only in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall require a permit from the Eagle fire
protection district:
      1.   Fires used to keep irrigation ditches and fence rows clear of plant
and weed growth.
      2.   Fires used to dispose of or reduce dry vegetative waste materials,
such as, but not limited to, tree branches, gardening waste, weeds, or other
dry vegetation, where mulching or other types of disposal are impractical.
   C.   Open burning for the purposes of agricultural activities is
specifically exempt from the requirements of this chapter. However, burn
permits are still required for these activities and must be obtained from the
Eagle fire protection district prior to the ignition of any fire.
   D.   Burning permits are available through the Eagle fire protection
district. (Ord. 448, 6-10-2003)
4-6-8: EXEMPTIONS FROM RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The city of Eagle and/or the Eagle fire protection district shall grant
exemptions from this chapter if it is determined by the Eagle fire department
that:
      1.   A solid fuel heating appliance is the sole source of heat for the
structure in which it is situated; or
      2.   Using alternative heating would cause an unreasonable economic
hardship; or
      3.   The solid fuel heating appliance is certified by the Eagle fire
department as a clean burning appliance by the environmental protection agency
(EPA).
   B.   Any person denied an exemption under this chapter shall be provided, at
the option of the applicant for the exemption, an appeal hearing before the
city council.
   C.   Any building constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall
not be eligible for an exemption under subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
(Ord. 448, 6-10-2003)
4-6-9: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CLEAN BURNING APPLIANCES:
   A.   In no event shall the standards for clean burning solid fuel heating
appliances allow a weighted average particulate emission greater than:
      1.   For a new clean burning solid fuel heating appliance with a minimum
heat output of less than forty thousand (40,000) BTU per hour and tested
pursuant to procedures approved by the building department:
         a.   Seven and five-tenths grams (7.5 g) per hour for a noncatalytic
solid fuel heating appliance.
         b.   Four and one-tenth grams (4.1 g) per hour for a catalytic solid
fuel heating appliance.
      2.   Clean burning solid fuel heating appliances with a minimum heat
output of greater than forty thousand (40,000) BTU per hour shall not exceed an
average particulate emission standard equal to the sum of eight grams (8.0 g)
per hour plus two- tenths gram (0.2 g) per hour for each one thousand (1,000)
BTU per hour heat output.
      3.   For any solid fuel heating appliance officially exempted by the
environmental protection agency from the above requirements. (Ord. 245, 5-10-
1994)
4-6-10: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to conflict with, supersede, repeal or
affect any other regulations or requirements for the installation or inspection
of solid fuel heating appliances, including, but not limited to, those
regulations adopted at title 7, chapter 1, article E of this code. Further,
nothing in this chapter is entitled to conflict with, supersede, repeal or
affect any other regulations or requirements for the burning, outdoor fires and
incineration permits including, but not limited to, those regulations adopted
in chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 245, 5-10-1994)
4-6-11: PENALTY:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the failure or omission
to perform any duty imposed by the provisions of this chapter is hereby
declared unlawful and punishable as an infraction and punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 7
REFUSE AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Short Title
4-7-2: Purpose
4-7-3: Definitions
4-7-4: Grant Of Authority To Employ Labor
4-7-5: Refuse Prohibited
4-7-5-1: Accumulation Of Refuse Prohibited
4-7-5-2: City To Cause Cleanup Of Refuse And Charge Against Property (Rep. by
Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-7-5-3: Penalty For Violations (Rep. by Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-7-5-4: Each Day Separate Offense
4-7-6: Abandoned Motor Vehicles
4-7-6-1: Abandonment Prohibited
4-7-6-2: Presumption
4-7-6-3: Removal Of Stolen Vehicles Or Vehicles Found Under Emergency
Circumstances
4-7-6-4: Removal Of Abandoned Vehicles By Authorized Officer
4-7-6-5: Poststorage Hearing
4-7-6-6: Removal Of Unauthorized And Abandoned Vehicle From Real Property
4-7-6-7: Charges Not Otherwise Provided For
4-7-6-8: Storage Of Vehicle
4-7-6-9: Request By Possessory Lienholder For Names And Addresses Of Interested
Persons; Notice Of Sale To Satisfy Lien
4-7-6-10: Sale Of Unclaimed Vehicles
4-7-6-11: Claiming Of Abandoned Vehicles
4-7-6-12: Removal Without Payment Provided
4-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the REFUSE AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to help solve the problems created by refuse deposited
or left upon private and public property within the City. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDON: To leave a vehicle on private property without the permission of the
person having rights to the possession of the property, or on a highway,
street, alley, road or other property open to the public for the purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any
highway, street, alley or road for twenty four (24) hours or longer.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle observed by a City law enforcement officer or
reported by a member of the public to have been left within the limits of any
highway, street, alley, road or right-of-way thereof, or upon the property of
another without the consent of the property owner for a period of twenty four
(24) hours or longer, except that a vehicle shall not be considered abandoned
if its owner-operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located
and has notified a law enforcement agency and requested assistance.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle which:
   A.   Does not meet the vehicle equipment standards of chapter 9, title 49,
of the Idaho Code as result of damage or neglect, unless the vehicle is driven
on the City streets and roadways on a regular basis; and
   B.   Is not in the current process of being restored or repaired by its
owner(s).
(Comment: This is a distinct and separate classification from abandoned
vehicle. Abandoned vehicles are vehicles belonging to one person and left on
the property of another person or political subdivision. Junk vehicles fail to
conform to vehicle equipment standards and are not in the process of repair and
restoration. One way a violation of section
4-7-5-1 of this chapter occurs is where a junk vehicle is left by its owner on
property of the vehicle owner.)
REFUSE: Undesirable matter including, but not limited to: all waste wood, tree
trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees, chips,
shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, used and discarded articles of
clothing, combustible waste, pulp, boxes and packaging materials, glass, ashes,
construction debris, garbage, stable matter, junk or badly weathered building
materials not currently in use, stoves, refrigerators, washers, dryers,
furniture, mattresses, scrap metals, car parts, tires and junk vehicles. For
the purposes of violations of this Code, "refuse" as defined herein includes
the terms "garbage" and "rubbish" as defined in section
4-2-2 of this title.
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE: Any vehicle parked or otherwise left on private property
without the consent of the person owning or controlling that property. (Ord.
247, 7-19-1994; amd. Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-7-4: GRANT OF AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY LABOR:
The Mayor and City Council are hereby given the power and authority to employ
such labor as is necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and
allow the bills therefor. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-5: REFUSE PROHIBITED:
The accumulation of refuse in violation of this title is prohibited and shall
constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-7-5-1: ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Every person residing, doing business, owning, managing, renting or
leasing property within the City limits shall be required to keep that property
free from any accumulation or scattering of "refuse" or "garbage" or "rubbish"
as defined in section
4-2-2 of this title. This shall not only include all refuse on private
property, but also any refuse, garbage or rubbish blown from or scattered from
private property onto public property adjacent to or contiguous with that
property including areas behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and property to
the center of alleys and ditches. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
   B.   The storage of automobiles in various states of disrepair by authorized
auto salvage companies is exempt from subsection A of this section as it
pertains to the automobiles used in the auto salvage business.
   C.   It is not a violation of subsection A of this section for the owner(s)
of junk vehicles to store those vehicles in an enclosed garage or to store the
vehicles in such a manner that they are screened from view of the street and
any neighbors. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-5-2: CITY TO CAUSE CLEANUP OF REFUSE AND CHARGE AGAINST PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-7-5-3: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 784, 9-26-2017)
4-7-5-4: EACH DAY SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each and every day any such person shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
4-7-6: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES:
4-7-6-1: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway, street, alley,
roadway or right-of-way thereof.
   B.   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property
without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the property. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
4-7-6-2: PRESUMPTION:
The abandonment of any vehicle shall create a presumption that the last
registered owner of record is responsible for the abandonment and is thereby
liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle. (Ord. 247, 7-19-
1994)
4-7-6-3: REMOVAL OF STOLEN VEHICLES OR VEHICLES FOUND UNDER EMERGENCY
CIRCUMSTANCES:
   A.   Any City law enforcement officer, upon discovery of a vehicle reported
as stolen and not recovered or any vehicle involved in any extraordinary
circumstances, may take the vehicle into custody and cause it to be taken to
and stored in a suitable place, or may cause the vehicle to be placed in the
custody of a tow truck operator, all expenses of towing and storage to be those
of the vehicle owner unless otherwise determined according to the provisions of
subsection
4-7-6-5E of this chapter.
   B.   Within forty eight (48) hours of the time that the vehicle is taken
into custody and is stored pursuant to this chapter, the City shall give
written notice by certified mail to the registered and legal owners of the
vehicle, if known. The notice shall state:
      1.   That the vehicle has been taken into custody and stored; and
      2.   The location of storage of the vehicle.
   C.   The City shall appraise the vehicle and shall include in the notice:
identification of the officer; location of the vehicle; a description of the
vehicle, including make, year, model, identification number, license number,
state of registration and, if a motorcycle, engine number; and the statutory
authority for storage. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-4: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES BY AUTHORIZED OFFICER:
   A.   Any City law enforcement officer within the City where a vehicle is
located, who has reasonable grounds to believe that the vehicle has been
abandoned, may remove the vehicle from a highway, street, alley, roadway or
right-of-way thereof, or from public or private property to a garage or place
of safety.
   B.   Upon discovery of an abandoned vehicle which is not within the class of
vehicles defined under "emergency circumstances" in section
4-7-6-3 of this chapter, a city law enforcement officer shall attach on the
vehicle, in plain view, a notice that this vehicle will be towed away at the
expiration of forty eight (48) hours as an abandoned vehicle. The notice shall
contain the name of the city law enforcement officer who prepared the notice;
the name of the city of Eagle; the time and date of attaching the notice; the
time and date after the vehicle will be removed; and the telephone number and
address at the city where further information can be obtained. A reasonable
attempt shall be made to notify, by telephone, the owner of any vehicle which
has current license plates and registration as shown on the records of the
Idaho transportation department, prior to the expiration of the forty eight
(48) hours' notice period, of the location of the vehicle and the time and date
of intent to remove the vehicle. The inability of a city law enforcement
officer to notify the owner shall not preclude the removal of the vehicle at
the expiration of the forty eight (48) hour period.
   C.   Any vehicle which does not have current or any license plates attached
may be immediately removed to a safe place of storage. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-5: POSTSTORAGE HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a city law enforcement officer directs the towing or storage
of a vehicle, except vehicles impounded for investigation pursuant to section
4-7-6-3 of this chapter (the emergency removal provision), the city shall
provide the vehicle's registered and legal owner(s) of record, or their agents,
with the opportunity for a poststorage hearing to determine the validity of the
storage.
   B.   A notice of the storage shall be sent by certified mail to the
registered and legal owner(s) within forty eight (48) hours, excluding the
weekends and holidays, and shall include the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the city providing the
notice;
      2.   The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle
which shall include, if available, the name or make, identification number, the
license plate number, and the mileage;
      3.   The authority and purpose for the removal of the vehicle; and
      4.   In order to receive a poststorage hearing, the owner(s), or their
agents, must request the hearing in writing within ten (10) days of the date of
the notice. Any such hearing shall be conducted within forty eight (48) hours
of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. The city may authorize its own
city law enforcement officer or employee to conduct the hearing, so long as the
hearing officer is not the same person who directed the storage of the vehicle.
   C.   Failure of either the registered or legal owner, or his agent, to
request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the poststorage hearing
requirement as to that person.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles removed from
private property pursuant to section
4-7-6-6 of this chapter.
   E.   The city shall be responsible for the costs incurred for towing and
storage if it is determined in the hearing that probable cause for storage
cannot be established. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-6: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED AND ABANDONED VEHICLE FROM REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Any person having possession or control of real property who finds an
unauthorized vehicle standing upon his property is permitted to have the
vehicle removed if there is posted on or near the property in a clearly
conspicuous location, in large print, a sign or notice that unauthorized
vehicles will be removed at the owner's expense and designating the name of the
towing firm. Unauthorized vehicles need not meet the definition of "abandoned
vehicle" 1  in this instance.
   B.   Any person having possession or control of real property who finds an
abandoned vehicle standing on his property, where the property is not posted as
set out in subsection A of this section, may contact a city law enforcement
officer, who must in turn comply with the provisions of section
4-7-6-4 of this chapter, in accomplishing the removal of the vehicle except
under those circumstances set out in subsection C of this section.
   C.   Where access into or out of private property or substantial
interference with the use and enjoyment of private property is created by an
unauthorized or abandoned vehicle being parked or otherwise left on private
property, the person owning or controlling the property may contact a city law
enforcement officer who may, without regard for the provisions of section
4-7-6-4 of this chapter, immediately proceed to have the vehicle removed to a
garage or nearest place of safety. All other provisions of sections
4-7-6-1 through
4-7-6-12 of this chapter shall be complied with. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-7-3 of this chapter.
4-7-6-7: CHARGES NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED FOR:
Every towing firm, employee or agent in the process of towing, removing or
impounding a vehicle as directed by a city law enforcement officer, except
vehicles found under extraordinary circumstances or suspected stolen, shall
upon request of the owner or his authorized agent, release the vehicle at the
scene. If the vehicle is attached to the tow truck, or otherwise "in tow", the
regular scheduled tow fee may be charged. When the vehicle is not yet "in tow"
at the time of request, the release must be made, and no charge may be assessed
except a customary and reasonable charge for mileage one way from the towing
firm's place of storage to the scene plus the usual fee for the tow truck
operator. If the authorized fee is not tendered by the owner or his agent, the
towing operator may complete the impoundment, towing or removal, as authorized.
(Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-8: STORAGE OF VEHICLE:
Whenever a city law enforcement officer removes a vehicle from a highway,
street, alley, road or right of way thereof, or from public or private
property, he shall take, or cause to be taken, the vehicle to a garage or other
place of safety within the city or such other place as designated by the city
council. At the time of removal, the city law enforcement officer or employee
shall record the mileage of the vehicle. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-9: REQUEST BY POSSESSORY LIEN HOLDER FOR NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF
INTERESTED PERSONS; NOTICE OF SALE TO SATISFY LIEN:
   A.   After acquiring possession of a vehicle in any manner authorized by the
provisions of sections
4-7-6-1 through
4-7-6-12 of this chapter, the possessory lien holder shall make a request to
the Idaho transportation department for the names and addresses of all persons
having an interest in the vehicle as appears in the Idaho transportation
department's records. The possessory lien holder shall, upon receipt of this
information, notify all legal or registered owners in accordance with section
4-7-6-5 of this chapter, unless otherwise already complied with. Whenever a
vehicle has been removed under the provisions of this chapter and the
possessory lien holder has sent the notice as provided, the possessory lien
holder shall have a lien dependent upon possession for his compensation for
towage and for caring for and keeping safe the vehicle for a period not
exceeding sixty (60) days. If the vehicle is not recovered by the owner within
that period or the owner is unknown, the keeper of the garage may satisfy his
lien in the manner prescribed by Idaho statutes. The lien shall not be
assigned.
   B.   No lien shall attach to any personal property in or on the vehicle.
Personal property in or on the vehicle shall be given to the registered owner
or owner's authorized agent upon demand. The lien holder shall not be
responsible for property after any vehicle has been disposed of pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-10: SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
The sale of unclaimed vehicles shall be executed according to and in compliance
with the provisions of the Idaho Code sections 49-1801 through 49-1818 (1980
and supp.), which provide for the sale of abandoned vehicles and such sales
shall be coordinated with the Idaho department of transportation. (Ord. 247, 7-
19-1994)
4-7-6-11: CLAIMING OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   The owner of an abandoned vehicle may take possession of the abandoned
vehicle at any time prior to sale by providing ownership and paying the costs
relative to towing and storing the vehicle, costs of advertising and any fines
incurred under section
4-7-6-1 of this chapter, if any, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   A lien holder of an abandoned vehicle may take possession of the
abandoned vehicle at the sale by proving the presence of the lien and by paying
the costs relative to towing and storing the vehicle and costs of advertising.
The lien holder may also take possession of the abandoned vehicle by purchasing
the vehicle at the sale. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abate
any cause of action that a lien holder has against the owner of an abandoned
vehicle. (Ord. 247, 7-19-1994)
4-7-6-12: REMOVAL WITHOUT PAYMENT PROVIDED:
   A.   Unauthorized removal of an abandoned vehicle from the custody of the
city, or from the custody of any person holding the abandoned vehicle for the
city without payment in full of all charges and costs that have been incurred
under the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction and punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. The abandoned vehicle may be recovered and disposed of by
the city and any additional costs and attorney fees for said recovery and
disposal shall be billed and paid at one hundred percent (100%) of actual
expense. The court shall order payment to the city of the above cost. Failure
of a defendant to pay within the prescribed period may be enforced by the city
within the courts both civilly and as criminal contempt of court.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 8
FIRE PROTECTION
SECTION:
4-8-1: Eagle Fire Protection District
4-8-1: EAGLE FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT:
Eagle fire protection district is designated as the one and only official fire
protection entity for the city. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 31-1429 (1996)
the city hereby consents that all areas within the city limits, as such may be
designated from time to time, be included within the limits of the Eagle fire
protection district. (Ord. 293, 4-22-1997)
CHAPTER 9
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICES; NOISE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
4-9-1: Authority And Purpose
4-9-2: Definitions
4-9-3: Public Disturbance Noise Prohibited
4-9-4: Loud Amplifications
4-9-5: Enforcement
4-9-6: Exemptions
4-9-7: Temporary Waivers
4-9-8: Penalty
4-9-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
It is determined that sound can and does constitute a hazard to the health,
safety, welfare, and quality of life of residents of the city. The mayor and
council, by way of Idaho Code section 50-308, are empowered to impose
reasonable limitations and regulations upon the production of sound to reduce
the harmful effects thereof. Now, therefore, it is hereafter the policy of this
city to prevent and regulate sound generated by loud amplification devices
wherever it is deemed to be harmful to the health, safety, welfare, or quality
of life of the citizens of the city, and this chapter shall be liberally
continued to effectuate that purpose. (Ord. 370, 8-8-2000)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
 
                                      A back-up beeper, also known as back-up
BACKUP BEEPER:                        alarm or vehicle motion alarm, is a
                                      device intended to warn passers-by of a
                                      vehicle moving in reverse.
CITY:                                 Eagle, Idaho, or the area within the city
                                      limits of Eagle, Idaho.
                                      The area(s) of a facility, complex,
                                      apartment unit, hotel, motel or the like
                                      that are open either to the general
                                      public or persons with the permission of
                                      the owner or agent of the owner of the
                                      area. This definition would include, but
COMMON AREA(S):                       not be limited to, the following:
                                      swimming pools, restaurants, patios, hot
                                      tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting
                                      rooms, lobbies, lounges, bars and other
                                      areas within the facility that are either
                                      constructed or designed for use in this
                                      manner.
                                      Noise from any and all physical activity
                                      necessary or incidental to the erection,
                                      placement, demolition, assembling,
                                      altering, cleaning, repairing, installing
                                      or equipping of buildings and other
                                      structures, and site work for roads,
                                      utility lines, land clearing, grading,
                                      excavating, filling and paving, but not
CONSTRUCTION NOISE, LIMITED:          permitting noise from hoe rams,
                                      jackhammers, pile drivers, slamming
                                      tailgates, vibrating compaction
                                      equipment, vehicles with backup beepers
                                      engaged in reverse or moving in a reverse
                                      direction except for concrete trucks,
                                      concrete pumping vehicles, and any
                                      vehicle being used for emergency
                                      purposes, or other activities of similar
                                      noise.
                                      Occurrence or imminent threat of a
                                      disaster or condition threatening life or
EMERGENCY:                            property that requires immediate action
                                      to save lives and protect property or to
                                      avert or lessen the threat of a disaster.
                                      A motor vehicle belonging to a fire
                                      department, firefighting association, or
EMERGENCY VEHICLE:                    fire district, an ambulance, or a motor
                                      vehicle belonging to a federal, state,
                                      county, or municipal law enforcement
                                      agency.
                                      Noise from the use of lawn mowing
                                      equipment, leaf blowers, weed eaters,
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE NOISE, LIMITED: edgers and other landscape maintenance
                                      activities generating similar noise being
                                      used for common areas and non-residential
                                      properties.
                                      Any noise which is plainly audible within
                                      any residence or business other than the
LOUD OR OFFENSIVE NOISE:              source of the sound, or upon a public
                                      right of way or street at a distance of
                                      one hundred feet (100') or more from the
                                      source of such sound.
                                      Any individual, association,
PERSON:                               organization, or entity having a legally
                                      recognized existence, whether public or
                                      private.
                                      Any building or portion thereof adapted
                                      or used and intended for the overnight
                                      accommodation of persons. In the event
                                      the building is used for multiple
PLACE OF RESIDENCE:                   individual units (i.e., apartment,
                                      condominium, hotel, motel, duplex,
                                      triplex, etc.) each individual unit shall
                                      be considered a separate residence for
                                      the purposes of this chapter.
                                      Sound for which the information content
                                      is clearly communicated to the listener,
                                      including, but not limited to,
                                      understandable spoken speech,
PLAINLY AUDIBLE:                      comprehension of whether a voice is
                                      raised or normal, comprehensible musical
                                      rhythms, melody, or instrumentation, and
                                      the source of which is identifiable to
                                      the listener. (Ord. 370, 8-8-2000; amd.
                                      Ord. 851, 9-14-2021)
 
4-9-3: PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as stated below, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
one day and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, it shall be unlawful for
any person or business to make or cause loud or offensive noise by means of
voice, musical instrument, horn, radio, loudspeaker, automobile, machinery,
vibrating compaction equipment, vehicles with backup beepers engaged in reverse
or moving in a reverse direction except for any vehicle being used for
emergency purposes, other sound amplifying equipment, or any other means which
disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness residing in the area.
   B.   Construction Noise, Limited: May begin at seven o’clock (7:00) A.M.,
Monday through Friday, except that, during the summer months of June, July and
August construction noise, limited, may begin at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Monday
through Friday.
   C.   Landscape Maintenance Noise, Limited: May begin at seven o-clock (7:00)
A.M., Monday through Friday, except that, during the summer months of June,
July and August landscape maintenance noise, limited, may begin at six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Monday through Friday. (Ord. 457, 9-9-2003; amd. Ord. 851, 9-14-
2021)
4-9-4: LOUD AMPLIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or permit the operation of, any
loud amplification device upon or within a motor vehicle in such a manner that
the sound therefrom is plainly audible upon a public right of way or street at
a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the source of sound. (Ord. 370, 8-
8-2000)
4-9-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Peace Officer Citation: Any peace officer or person empowered to
enforce this provision of this code is authorized to issue a uniform citation
upon his own observation of a violation without the necessity of a citizen
complainant's signature on said citation. By signing the citation, officer or
person is certifying that he has reasonable grounds to believe that the person
cited committed the offense contrary to law.
   B.   Citizen Citation: A uniform citation may also be signed by any citizen
or person in whose presence an alleged violation of this chapter occurred and
be witnessed by a peace officer or person empowered to enforce this provision
of this code whose name shall be endorsed on the citation. (Ord. 370, 8-8-2000)
4-9-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel when responding to
an emergency call or acting in time of an emergency.
   B.   Airplanes and other FAA regulated aircraft.
   C.   Sounds caused by activities upon any outdoor municipal, school,
religious, or publicly owned property or facility, provided that such
activities have been authorized by the owner of such property or facility or
its agent.
   D.   Sounds caused by parades, fireworks displays, or any other event for
which a permit for that type of activity is required and has been obtained from
the authorized governmental entity within such hours as may be imposed as a
condition for the issuance of said permit.
   E.   Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment.
   F.   Sounds caused by burglar alarms that are not in violation of this code.
   G.   Sounds caused by safety warning devices required by law.
   H.   Sounds caused by devices approved for use within the confines of the
particular zoning designation that the device is located or pursuant to a
conditional use permit (i.e., drive-through window speakers, car lot PA
systems).
   I.   Sounds emanating from devices used within the common areas of a multi-
unit facility whose use has been approved by the owners or management of the
facility. Said use must be in compliance with any regulations imposed by the
owners or management of the facility to be exempt under this chapter. This
exemption only applies in relation to other units within the same facility.
   J.   City hosted events shall conclude no later than midnight.
   K.   Sanitation vehicles (aka garbage trucks) in operation via contract with
the city and used for the collection of business and household waste. (Ord.
370, 8-8-2000; amd. Ord. 846, 4-13-2021; Ord. 851, 9-14-2021)
4-9-7: TEMPORARY WAIVERS:
   A.   A person or entity may apply to the City Council for a temporary waiver
from the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The noise waiver may be extended no later than midnight. Such
applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office at least thirty (30)
days in advance of the date of the activity or event seeking the waiver.
Applications shall include, but be limited to, the following information:
      1.   Remittance of waiver application fees as set forth in section
1-7-5 of this code as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 846,
4-13-2021)
4-9-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013; amd. Ord. 846, 4-13-2021)
CHAPTER 10
REGULATION OF THE SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Definitions
4-10-2: Prohibited Acts
4-10-3: Limitation On Accessibility To And Sale Of Methamphetamine Precursor
Drugs
4-10-4: Penalty
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:
METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS:
   A.   A drug or product containing as its sole active ingredient
pseudoephedrine, or any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical
isomers; or
   B.   A combination drug or product containing as one of its active
ingredients pseudoephedrine, or any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of
optical isomers.
   C.   This term does not include any compounds, mixtures, or preparations
that are in liquid, liquid capsule, or gel capsule form.
OVER THE COUNTER SALES: A retail sale of a drug or product but does not include
the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid prescription.
RETAILER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity
conducting business within the city of Eagle, Idaho, who sells or furnishes any
over the counter drug product containing pseudoephedrine. (Ord. 528, 10-18-
2005)
4-10-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful within the incorporated limits of the city for any
retailer or employee thereof to knowingly sell, transfer, or to otherwise
furnish in a single transaction more than three (3) packages of any product
that he or she knows to contain more than a total weight of nine grams (9 g) of
methamphetamine precursor drugs.
   B.   The limits established in this section shall not apply to any quantity
of methamphetamine precursor drugs dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription.
(Ord. 528, 10-18-2005)
4-10-3: LIMITATION ON ACCESSIBILITY TO AND SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR
DRUGS:
A business establishment that offers for sale methamphetamine precursor drugs
shall ensure that all packages of the drugs are displayed and offered for sale
only:
   A.   Behind a checkout counter where the public is not permitted; or
   B.   Inside a locked display case; and
   C.   All sales shall be conducted with an employee of the retailer and
cannot be conducted by a self-service system; and
   D.   Purchaser must present government issued photo identification at the
time of purchase. (Ord. 528, 10-18-2005)
4-10-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
CHAPTER 11
LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY ORDER
SECTION:
4-11-1: Authority Of Mayor During Disaster Or Emergency
4-11-2: Definitions
4-11-3: Local Disaster Emergency Orders
4-11-4: Notice of Local Disaster Emergency Order
4-11-5: Penalty
4-11-1: AUTHORITY OF MAYOR DURING DISASTER OR EMERGENCY:
Purpose. By this chapter, the City Council of the City of Eagle, authorizes the
Mayor to quickly implement measures necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in the rare event of a disaster and emergency resulting in
an imminent, or present public health hazard. This authority is vested in the
Mayor by Idaho Code section 50-606 and 50-607. (Ord. 829, 3-19-2020)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Disaster: means occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-
made cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm,
wave action, volcanic activity, explosion, riot, epidemic, pandemic, or hostile
military or paramilitary action and including acts of terrorism.
   B.   Emergency: means occurrence or imminent threat of a disaster or
condition threatening life or property that requires state emergency assistance
to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property or to avert or
lessen the threat of a disaster. (Ord. 829, 3-19-2020)
4-11-3: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Upon the Mayor declaring a Local Disaster Emergency under Idaho Code section
46-1001, the Mayor, being duly authorized by Idaho Code section 50-606 and this
chapter, is hereby empowered to:
   A.   Order for the opening or closing of any building or premises owned or
controlled by the City, in the Mayor's discretion as the Mayor may determine to
be in the public interest;
   B.   Order the closure of commercial, recreational, or expressive gatherings
or events.
   C.   Order the postponement or cancellation of public meetings and hearings.
   D.   Order a curfew during such hours of the day or night and affecting such
categories of persons as may be designated.
   E.   Order the limiting of the number of persons who may gather at one
location.
   F.   Order that an infected person and/or exposed person isolate themselves
from other persons.
   G.   Order the control, restriction, allocation and/or regulation of the
sale, production, distribution of food, water, clothing or other commodities,
materials, goods, services and resources.
   H.    Order the suspension or modification of any ordinance if strict
compliance with said ordinance would restrict, hinder or unduly delay necessary
action in coping with the Local Disaster Emergency.
   I.   Order the evacuation of all or part of the population of the City from
any stricken or threatened areas that is necessary for the preservation of
life, property or other public.
Any Local Disaster Emergency Order(s) shall be effective and remain in effect
only so long as the Declaration of Local Disaster Emergency under Idaho Code
section 46-1011 remains in effect. (Ord. 829, 3-19-2020)
4-11-4: NOTICE OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY ORDER:
   A.   Enactment. The Mayor shall prepare a written Local Disaster Emergency
Order and publish it pursuant to this section.
   B.   Publication of Local Disaster Emergency Order. Mayor shall cause a
Local Disaster Emergency Order to be published:
      1.   Posting the Order in a prominent place at Eagle City Hall;
      2.   Posting the Order on the City's website;
      3.   E-mailing the Order to all persons subscribed to City e-mail
notification services;
      4.   Posting the Order to all City social media accounts;
      5.   Providing the Order to local television and radio broadcast outlets;
and
      6.   Notifying other government agencies, including West Ada School
District, Ada County Highway District, Ada County, and other municipalities.
The Local Disaster Emergency Order shall be effective upon its posting at Eagle
City Hall. (Ord. 829, 3-19-2020)
4-11-5: PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to violate any provision or directive of a duly
enacted Local Disaster Emergency Order. The violation of any provision or
directive of a Local Disaster Emergency Order shall be a misdemeanor.
   B.   That all ordinances, resolutions, orders, or parts thereof or in
conflict with this chapter are hereby voided.
   C.   That this chapter shall be effective immediately upon its passage and
publication. (Ord. 829, 3-19-2020)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MINORS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Curfew
5-1-1: CURFEW:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to be or to remain, and it shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
other person having the care and custody of any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to permit such person to be or to remain, in or upon any
street, alley, public ground, public place or any place open to the public or
exposed to public use within the city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless their presence is explained
by one of the following enumerated exceptions:
      1.   The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian of said
juvenile.
      2.   The minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or legal
guardian of said juvenile.
      3.   An emergency situation exists.
      4.   The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting the place in which
the minor resides.
      5.   The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or
returning home from such activity by direct route without detour or stop,
except for purposes of obtaining fuel for transportation.
      6.   The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious,
or civic organization, by a public organization or entity, or by another
similar organization or entity, which is supervised by adults; or is going to
or returning from such activity by direct route without detour or stop, except
for purposes of obtaining fuel for transportation.
      7.   The minor is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by his
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of him.
      8.   The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or
terminating in, the city of Eagle.
      9.   The minor is exercising first amendment rights protected by the
United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the parent or legal guardian having
legal custody of a minor to ensure that a minor complies with this chapter. It
shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian to knowingly permit, allow, or
encourage a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Every person suspected of a curfew violation shall provide their name
and age to a police officer upon a lawful request. Any person who refuses to
provide such information, or who knowingly gives false information regarding
their name or age to any police officer conducting an investigation under this
chapter shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 640, 3-23-2010)
   D.   A violation of this section shall be punished as an infraction in
accordance with Idaho Code section 20-549. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
CHAPTER 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Distributing Or Scattering Advertisements, Garbage Or Rubbish
5-2-2: Sweeping Debris Into Streets
5-2-3: Weapons, Discharge Of
5-2-4: Prohibition Of The Use Of Wheeled Apparatus On Municipal Property And In
Certain Areas Of The City
5-2-5: Malicious Injury To Public Property
5-2-6: Overnight Camping
5-2-7: Prohibited Acts On The Boise River
5-2-1: DISTRIBUTING OR SCATTERING ADVERTISEMENTS, GARBAGE OR RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, hand out, drop, throw, cast
or discard any handbills, circulars, posters, cards, advertising matter,
wastepaper, paper wrappings, sacks, cartons, boxes, discarded wrapping paper,
garbage or rubbish in, upon or about any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks,
avenues or public places, or in or upon any motor vehicle, or in open spaces,
or vacant lots, or in yards or stoops or privately owned premises in the City;
provided, however, it shall not be unlawful to distribute newspapers capable of
being entered in the mail as second class mail matter, or to deposit any
handbills, circulars, cards, posters or other advertising matter in secure
boxes or receptacles provided for the receipt of such matter on privately owned
premises. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
5-2-2: SWEEPING DEBRIS INTO STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep any dirt, trash or rubbish from
the interior of any building in the City onto any street, alley or sidewalk in
the City. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
5-2-3: WEAPONS, DISCHARGE OF:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the
corporate limits of the City except on any property twenty (20) acres in size
or larger when the discharge will not endanger persons or property or on any
property owned by the Bureau of Land Management. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in
the performance of his or her duties, nor to prohibit any person from
discharging a firearm when lawfully defending any person or property or when
lawfully discharging a firearm on a sport shooting range as defined in Idaho
Code. (Ord. 145, 1-24-1989; amd. Ord. 861, 10-12-2021)
5-2-4: PROHIBITION OF THE USE OF WHEELED APPARATUS ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY AND IN
CERTAIN AREAS OF THE CITY:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section:
   DISMOUNT/WHEELS DOWN ZONE: The area designated as the Dismount/Wheels Down
Zone shall be known as the Central Business District. The area affected by this
section consists of the following description and the map on file in the Office
of the City Clerk and incorporated by reference herein: Eagle Road south of
Mission Drive through to State Highway 44 and including the North Channel
Center subdivision; West State Street from Cobblestone Lane through to East
State Street extending eastward to Edgewood Lane; Palmetto Avenue south of
Amanita Street including the United States Post Office; Stierman Way south of
Amanita Street including the Eagle Public Library; the entire area south of
State Street including the Rocky Mountain Business Park bounded by Eagle Road
on the west and Edgewood Lane on the east; all the following retail business
areas: Bosanka Village, King's Plaza, Eagle Plaza, Albertson's, Eagle Pavilion
Shopping Center, Rocky Mountain Business Park, Eagle Center, including any and
all businesses running along State Street, Eagle Road and within North Channel
Center.
   ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLE ("E-BIKE"): An e-bike that conforms to the
following description and classifications is not a motor vehicle for purposes
of this chapter. A vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels or two (2) parallel
wheels and one forward wheel, any two (2) of which are not less than twelve
inches (12") in diameter, that is designed to be operated by human power with
the assistance of an electric motor that has a power output of not more than
seven hundred fifty (750) watts that disengages or ceases to function when the
vehicle's brakes are applied.
    Class I Electric Bicycle Or Low-Speed Pedal-Assisted Electric Bicycle: Is a
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling, and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the
speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
    Class II Electric Bicycle Or Low-Speed Throttle- Assisted Electric Bicycle:
Is a bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the
bicycle, and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle
reaches the speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
    Class III Electric Bicycle Or Speed Pedal-Assisted Electric Bicycle: Is a
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling, and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches speed
of twenty eight (28) miles per hour, and equipped with a speedometer.
   FOOTHILLS TRAILS: Natural surface trails that are located entirely and
solely on property owned by the City, or on private property where public
access easements have been granted to the City of Eagle and are in effect,
including, but not limited to, multi-user single-track trails, bike-optimized
trails and hiking trails.
   GREENBELT PATHWAYS: Wide improved-surface pathways that are located entirely
and solely on property owned by the City, or on private property where public
access easements have been granted to the City of Eagle and are in effect.
These may include, but are not limited to, paved pathways along the Boise
River, in and near City parks, and pathways set back from roadways.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Property owned by nongovernmental entities.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any public property in the City limits of the City of Eagle
including, but not limited to, parking lots, public sidewalks, Heritage Park,
Eagle City Hall/Senior Center, Eagle City Library, Friendship Park, Orville
Krassen Park, Arboretum Park, and the property on the east side of Eagle Road
from Plaza Street north to the drainage ditch.
   WHEELED APPARATUS: A nonmotorized vehicle or toy consisting of one or more
wheels constructed or covered with polyurethane, rubber, or other material,
which can transport persons or property, including, but not limited to,
bicycles, electronic bicycles (e-bikes), carts, in line skates, skateboards,
and skates; provided, however, any apparatus used to assist the physically
handicapped and/or to transport a baby or small child shall be excluded from
this definition.
   B.   Purpose: It is the desire of the Eagle Mayor and City Council to place
reasonable limits on the recreational use of wheeled apparatus in certain areas
of the City limits to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to
protect private and public property from damage, injury, and/or liability
occasioned as a result of the exercise of recreational use of wheeled
apparatus.
   C.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any nonmotorized
apparatus constructed or covered with polyurethane, rubber, or other material
limited to: skateboards, skates and in line skates in the Dismount/Wheels Down
Zone.
      2.   Bicycles and e-bikes may only be used in the Dismount/Wheels Down
Zone so long as all wheels remain on the ground while the bicycle or e-bike is
in motion. Any other use of bicycles or e-bikes in the Dismount/Wheels Down
Zone is unlawful. Use of bicycles or e-bikes is also prohibited on City owned
facilities and structures not designated for wheeled-apparatus.
   D.   Penalty: Any person or persons who is in violation of the provisions of
this section shall pay to the City Clerk a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
or, in lieu of the fine upon the first offense only, participate in an optional
method of compliance specified by the City Clerk. All subsequent offenses are
subject to the twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine. The fine must be paid to the
City Clerk within seven (7) days of the date of the notice of violation.
Failure to pay such fine, or in the case of a first offense, request in writing
the optional method of compliance within the seven (7) day period, shall make
any violator subject to an additional twenty five dollar ($25.00) fine within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice of violation.
   E.   Notice Of Violation: The failure of any person or persons receiving a
notice of violation to make the above described payments to the City Clerk
within the designated times shall render the person or persons subject to the
general penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   F.   Severability: If any portion of this section is found to be
unenforceable by a court of proper jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this
section remain in full force and effect.
   G.   Exceptions: The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply
to law enforcement personnel acting within the scope of their employment. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to City parks specifically posted
and designated as a skateboard park, bike park, or area designated as a pathway
or trail for the use of a wheeled apparatus.
      1.   Class II and III e-bikes may not be operated on foothills trails.
      2.   Class III e-bikes may not be operated on greenbelt pathways. (Ord.
798, 8-14-2018)
5-2-5: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously injure, deface,
mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner destroy public property.
(Ord. 211, 10-27-1992)
5-2-6: OVERNIGHT CAMPING:
No person shall camp or sleep overnight on public property located within the
City limits unless such property is specifically posted allowing the same.
(Ord. 216, 12-22-1992)
5-2-7: PROHIBITED ACTS ON THE BOISE RIVER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from, or throw or drop any object
from any bridge except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 318, 4-14-1998)
CHAPTER 3
PROHIBITED PARKING
SECTION:
5-3-1: Manner Of Parking
5-3-2: Disabled Persons Parking
5-3-3: Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic
5-3-4: Stopping, Standing, Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
5-3-5: Campers, Motor Homes, Trailers And Storage Containers
5-3-6: Parking Tickets And Procedures
5-3-7: Penalties
5-3-8: Parking Of Vehicles For Sale Prohibited
5-3-9: Parking In Fire Lane
5-3-1: MANNER OF PARKING:
All vehicles shall be parked on the right hand side of the street facing the
direction in which traffic is permitted to move; except that on the one-way
streets in the city, vehicles may park on either side of the one-way street in
the direction in which traffic is permitted to move.
Any vehicle parked within a parking or loading zone shall be parked entirely
within markings designating one parking space; shall be parked parallel or
diagonal to the curb in accordance with markings of the parking space; and in
case of diagonal parking, shall be parked so that the front of the vehicle is
nearest the curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this section every vehicle stopped or parked
upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked
with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen
inches (18") of the right hand curb. (Ord. 338, 3-23-1999)
5-3-2: DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
   A.   Reserved Parking: Parking a vehicle in a space reserved for the
disabled, which space is marked in conformance with the requirements specified
in Idaho Code 49-410, is prohibited, unless a vehicle is momentarily in the
space for the purpose of allowing a disabled person to enter or leave the
vehicle, or unless a special license plate card for the disabled as prescribed
in Idaho Code 49-410, or a special temporary card as described in Idaho Code
49-410, is displayed on the vehicle. The registered owner of a vehicle parked
in violation of provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction.
   B.   Parking Violations:
      1.   The parking or standing of a vehicle in a space reserved for the
disabled, which space is signed in conformance with Idaho Code, is prohibited,
unless a vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a
person with a disability to enter or leave the vehicle, or unless a special
license plate or card or temporary card for the disabled as prescribed in Idaho
Code, or a special temporary card for the disabled is displayed on the vehicle.
The registered owner of a vehicle parked in violation of provisions of this
section is guilty of an infraction pursuant to Idaho Code 49-410.
      2.   Any unauthorized use of the plate or card shall constitute an
infraction. Law enforcement officials shall enforce the provisions of this
section and are empowered, using reasonable discretion, to check personal
identification to determine if the user of the plate or placard is the disabled
person so authorized to use such disabled persons parking privileges pursuant
to Idaho Code 49-410. (Ord. 338, 3-23-1999)
5-3-3: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than twelve feet (12') of such roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 338, 3-23-1999)
5-3-4: STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   A.   Park a motor vehicle, or motor vehicle and trailer, exceeding thirty
feet (30') in length, whether or not occupied, on State Street between Eagle
Road and First Street, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or merchandise.
   B.   Park a motor vehicle at any place where official traffic control
devices prohibit parking.
   C.   On or over any portion of a sidewalk, parkway or alley, or on any
required front yard setback area, unless within an area specifically permitted
by this code.
   D.   In front of a public or private driveway.
   E.   On a designated bike lane or bike path.
   F.   On a crosswalk.
   G.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection, except at
those intersections controlled by a pedestrian control.
   H.   Within twenty feet (20') of the corner of an intersection at an
intersection where no crosswalk is indicated. The said corner of the
intersection shall be the intersection of the projecting edge of paving.
   I.   Within twenty feet (20') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of the street opposite the entranceway to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
   K.   No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in or upon any
alley for a period of time longer than reasonably necessary for the purpose of
loading or unloading a vehicle.
   L.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
   M.   Within twenty feet (20') of a bike path approach.
   N.   Within an intersection.
   O.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure. (Ord. 724, 10-28-2014;
amd. Ord. 851, 9-14-2021)
5-3-5: CAMPERS, MOTOR HOMES, TRAILERS AND STORAGE CONTAINERS:
   A.   Parking Certain Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to park any of
the following defined vehicles on any street in the city for more than seventy
two (72) hours, except in accordance with provisions of this section:
      1.   Camper: A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which
can be attached or detached from a motor vehicle.
      2.   Motor Homes: A self-contained vehicle, designed for human
habitation, with its own motor power, and with a passageway from the body of
the home to the driver's and front passenger's seat.
      3.   Trailer: A vehicle without motor power designed for carrying persons
or property on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motor power.
The term trailer shall include coach, boat trailer, semitrailer, travel trailer
or utility trailer.
      4.   Storage Or Shipping Container: A self-contained motorless enclosed
structure designed for moving and/or storing property. No person shall park any
such container upon a sidewalk, public street or highway within the Eagle city
limits.
   B.   Parking On Residential Streets:
      1.   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
parking of any vehicle on a street remains subject to regulation of parking
established pursuant to the city or state traffic and zoning regulations.
      2.   Any vehicle may be parked on any street for a period not to exceed
seventy two (72) continuous hours.
   C.   Time Limit: At the expiration of the applicable time limit (72 hours)
set forth in this section, a new time may begin only upon removal of the motor
home, recreational vehicle, utility trailer, boat trailer or vehicle from the
block, or five hundred feet (500') from the locations in which it was
previously parked, whichever is farther, for a minimum of forty eight (48)
hours. (Ord. 724, 10-28-2014)
5-3-6: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURES:
The city clerk, sheriff, deputy sheriff, code enforcement officer, fire
marshal, and any other individual designated by the city council shall have
authority to issue parking tickets as follows:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the city clerk, sheriff, deputy sheriff, code
enforcement officer, fire marshal, or any other individual designated by the
city council, upon observing a motor vehicle or motor vehicle and trailer,
parked, standing, or stopped in violation of the provisions of this chapter, to
leave upon such vehicle a separate parking ticket as frequently as every two
(2) hours that such vehicle has been parked, standing, or stopped in violation
of the provisions of this chapter. In addition, at the expiration of the posted
time limit, it will be required that all vehicles be removed from the block
face of the area in which it was parked in a posted time limit for the
remainder of the calendar day. Such parking ticket shall bear the hour and date
of leaving the same upon the vehicle, the make of the vehicle, the vehicle's
license number, the specified code section violated, and the amount of the fine
for such violation. Each parking ticket shall instruct the operator of the
vehicle to report to the city clerk at the city hall.
   B.   To avoid burdening the judicial system with parking violations and for
the convenience of the public, each person receiving a parking ticket under
this chapter shall:
      1.   Within seventy two (72) hours of the time the ticket was left upon
the vehicle, pay to the city clerk, in full satisfaction of the parking
violation, fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each parking ticket left upon his/her
vehicle.
      2.   Within ten (10) days from the date a parking ticket was issued, if
the parking ticket has not been paid within the seventy two (72) hours
prescribed above, pay to the city clerk an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00)
for each parking ticket, the additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each
ticket being deemed necessary to defray administrative and clerical expenses.
The failure to report and/or make such payments to the clerk's office within
the times prescribed herein shall additionally render the owner or operator
thereof subject to penalties as provided in section
5-3-7 of this chapter.
   C.   If any vehicle is found stopped, standing, or parked in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, the fact that the vehicle is registered or
leased to a person shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person
was in control of the vehicle at the time of such violation.
   D.   Within seventy two (72) hours of the time the ticket was left upon the
vehicle, if the vehicle has not been moved as provided herein, the owner or
operator shall be liable for the expense incurred by the city for towing or
otherwise removing said vehicle. The owner or operator of any vehicle shall be
liable for any and all other reasonable expenses for storage charged by the
company removing said vehicle and causing said vehicle to be stored. (Ord. 724,
10-28-2014)
5-3-7: PENALTIES:
Any operator of a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle and trailer who shall stand,
stop, or park such vehicle in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to have committed a parking violation. In the event that a parking
ticket is not paid in accordance with the administrative procedure set forth in
section
5-3-6 of this chapter and the city's collecting agency is unable to collect the
unpaid debt or if the ticketed party contests such parking ticket, an
infraction citation or complaint punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code shall be filed in the magistrate division of the district
court. (Ord. 724, 10-28-2014)
5-3-8: PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE PROHIBITED:
No person shall park to sell any vehicle in the rights of way of Eagle Road,
Highway 44, Highway 55, State Street, Floating Feather Road, Hill Road,
Edgewood, and Ballantyne.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and shall have their vehicle towed and impounded by the Ada
County sheriff's department. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
5-3-9: PARKING IN FIRE LANE:
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known and cited as the CITY OF EAGLE
FIRE LANE PARKING ORDINANCE.
   B.   Policy: No person shall stop, stand or park in designated marked fire
lane access or within fifteen feet (15') of a "fire hydrant" as defined herein.
This action is necessary and desirable to assure that access is available to
emergency service providers.
   C.   Definitions:
   FIRE HYDRANT: An area described as fifteen feet (15') within every direction
of the fire hydrant. This also includes any clearly marked red curbs painted in
front of the hydrant.
   FIRE LANE: An area adjacent to a business on private property or which is
clearly marked with a red curb with appropriate signs located at each end of
the curb or at one hundred foot (100') intervals, whichever is less and
designating the area to be a fire lane.
      1.   A fire lane additionally includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   An area designated by a fire code official which has been clearly
marked with a "No Parking Fire Lane" sign.
         b.   A public roadway that is less than thirty two feet (32') in
width, which is posted with one fire lane sign on either side of the roadway.
         c.   A public roadway that is less than twenty six feet (26') in
width, which is posted on both sides of the roadway and is designated as
emergency apparatus access route.
   D.   Leaving Vehicle In Fire Lane: It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this section for the registered owner or operator of any vehicle to park or
leave it unattended in a designated fire lane. A vehicle shall be deemed
unattended if it does not contain a licensed responsible driver who is in
control of the vehicle.
   E.   Enforcement And Penalties:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the sheriff, deputy sheriff, code
enforcement officer, fire marshal, or any other individual designated by the
city council, upon observing a motor vehicle or motor vehicle and trailer,
parked, standing, or stopped in violation of the provisions of this section, to
leave upon such vehicle a separate parking ticket as frequently as every hour
that such vehicle has been parked, standing, or stopped in violation of the
provisions of this section.
      2.   In addition to the issuance of a citation as provided herein, any
vehicle found parked in violation of this section or is otherwise blocking the
emergency apparatus access route such owner or operator shall be liable for the
expense incurred by the city for towing or otherwise removing said vehicle and
all other reasonable expenses for storage charged by the company removing said
vehicle and causing said vehicle to be stored.
      3.   Violation of this section shall be an infraction pursuant to Idaho
Code section 18-113A and punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 725, 10-14-2014)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
(Rep. by Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
CHAPTER 5
SUBDIVISION ROADWAYS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Subdivision Roadways, Use Of
5-5-1: SUBDIVISION ROADWAYS, USE OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial motor vehicle, as
defined by section 49-123 of the Idaho Code as it now exists, upon any minor
street within a platted subdivision of the city; provided, this section shall
not be construed to prohibit any person operating a commercial motor vehicle
from using an arterial or collector street within the subdivision for any
purpose or a minor street to provide goods or services to a property owner or
lessee of property within the subdivision. A violation of this section shall
constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
EA424   5-6.txt ()
CHAPTER 6
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Short Title And Purpose
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Allocation Of Revenues
5-6-4: Automatic Dialing Device Restrictions
5-6-5: Alarm Procedures And Regulations
5-6-6: Intentional Falsification Prohibited
5-6-7: False Alarm, Special Service Fee
5-6-8: Enforcement And Penalties
5-6-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF EAGLE ALARM ORDINANCE. The
purpose of this chapter is to protect the law enforcement and emergency
services of the city from misuse. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter, the definitions of which are not
herein given, shall be given their ordinary, commonly understood and accepted
meanings.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to
signal the occurrence and illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent
attention, and to which law enforcement officers are expected to respond,
provided this chapter is not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor
vehicles, nor to fire alarm systems.
ALARM USER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind in control of any residence, building, structure or
facility wherein an alarm system is installed.
AUDIBLE ALARM: Any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry
on the premises, and which, when activated, generates an audible sound on the
premises.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: Any device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number, and transmit
by voice, message, or code signal, an emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
FALSE ALARM: Any alarm signal eliciting a response by a law enforcement agency
when a situation requiring such response does not, in fact, exist, but does not
include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature, or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
user.
INTERCONNECT: Any connection to an alarm system including an automatic dialing
device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that
utilizes a telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the
alarm system.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line connected to the Ada County law
enforcement building housing the sheriff's department, Boise police department
and Ada County jail, or to any law enforcement agency designated to receive
emergency calls.
SHERIFF: The sheriff of Ada County, Idaho or his designated representative.
(Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-3: ALLOCATION OF REVENUES:
All service fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the Eagle
city clerk/treasurer. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-4: AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to a
primary trunk line; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect
or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a
primary trunk line within twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice that
it is so programmed.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to
select any telephone line assigned to any law enforcement agencies of Ada
County or the municipalities adopting this chapter; and it is unlawful for an
alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within twelve (12)
hours of receipt of written notice that it is so programmed.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, all
existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line
shall be reprogrammed or disconnected.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to
select any telephone line assigned to any law enforcement agencies of Ada
County or the municipalities adopting this chapter; and it is unlawful for an
alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within twelve (12)
hours of receipt of written notice that an automatic dialing device is so
programmed. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-5: ALARM PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any audible
alarm system, which creates a sound similar to that of a civil defense warning
system.
   B.   Every person maintaining an alarm system shall provide to the Ada
County 911 communications center at the Ada County Sheriff's Department, 7200
Barrister Dr., Boise, Idaho 83704, information containing the names and
telephone numbers of persons to be notified in order to render repairs or
service the premises during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system
is actuated within fifteen (15) days of installation of the alarm system.
   C.   Every person maintaining an alarm system shall make readily visible
either on or immediately adjacent to the exterior of the device emitting the
alarm, the name and telephone number of the responsible party to be notified in
order to render repairs and service and secure the premises during any hour of
the day or night that the alarm system is activated.
   D.   Every audible alarm system shall have a timing device, which
automatically shuts off the alarm within thirty (30) minutes after it has been
activated.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for an alarm user or his representative to fail to
respond to the alarm location within sixty (60) minutes after being requested
to do so by a representative of the sheriff's office or the responding law
enforcement agency. Such person responding to the alarm location shall take
whatever action necessary to secure the property from further intrusion, or
take whatever action is necessary to render service to the alarm or to provide
response by another person who is able to render the necessary action after the
responding law enforcement agency has rendered the area safe from possible
entry by an intruder. Unless specifically requested, the law enforcement agency
responding shall be under no obligation to remain at the location of the alarm
for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes while waiting for the responding
party to arrive unless illegal entry has occurred. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-6: INTENTIONAL FALSIFICATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to activate an alarm system for the purpose
of summoning police except in the event of what is reasonably believed to be an
unauthorized entry on the premises for the purposes of carrying out a robbery
or burglary therein. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-7: FALSE ALARM, SPECIAL SERVICE FEE:
   A.   An alarm user whose alarm has elicited two (2) responses within one
calendar year, which were subsequently shown to be false, will be assessed a
service fee for each additional false alarm that occurs within that period of
time.
   B.   If two (2) false alarms within one calendar year are received from any
alarm system:
      1.   The sheriff shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of such
fact.
      2.   The sheriff will advise the alarm user that any additional false
alarms within the calendar year will result in the assessment of a service fee
for each additional false alarm that has been responded to, as determined by
the following fee schedule below:
 
Third false alarm within the calendar year                    $ 25.00
Fourth false alarm within the calendar year                   50.00
Fifth false alarm within the calendar year                    75.00
Every successive false alarm over 5 within the calendar year  100.00
 
   C.   A fifteen (15) day grace period will be extended to all alarm users
after the initial installation of an alarm system. The official recording of
false alarms will not commence until after the expiration of the fifteen (15)
day grace period.
   D.   To avoid burdening the judicial system with false alarm violations and
for the convenience of the public, each person receiving a notice of assessment
of a service fee under this chapter shall:
      1.   Within seventy two (72) hours of the date the notice was sent, pay
to the city clerk, in full satisfaction the so stated service fee assessment.
      2.   Within ten (10) days from the date the notice of assessment was
sent, if the service fee has not been paid within the seventy two (72) hours
prescribed above, pay to the city clerk an additional twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each assessment, the additional twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
each assessment being deemed necessary to defray administrative and clerical
expenses.
The failure of any person receiving an assessment of the service fee notice to
make the above described payments to the city clerk within the designated times
shall be subject to the penalties provided by section
5-6-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
5-6-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement of this chapter may be by civil action or by criminal
prosecution. (Ord. 339, 3-23-1999)
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 7
AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES
SECTION:
5-7-1: Air Compression Brakes
5-7-1: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
   A.   Use Of Air Compression Brakes Prohibited: The use of air compression
brakes (also known as "jake brakes") by vehicles or trucks, as defined in Idaho
Code title 49, chapter 1, within city limits is hereby prohibited and shall be
unlawful, except under emergency circumstances where the use of air compression
brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to persons or property.
(Ord. 340, 4-13-1999)
   B.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be deemed guilty of an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 8
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
SECTION:
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Prohibited Conduct
5-8-3: Enforcement
5-8-4: Penalty
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
                                   A device linked to a financial institution's
                                   account records, which is able to carry out
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE:          transactions, including but not limited to,
                                   account transfers, deposits, cash
                                   withdrawals, balance inquiries, and
                                   mortgage, loan, and credit card payments.
                                   The area comprised of one or more automatic
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE FACILITY: teller machines and any adjacent space which
                                   is made available to banking customers after
                                   regular banking hours.
                                   Any bank, industrial bank, credit union,
                                   savings and loan, check cashing business, or
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:             other financial business. (Ord. 375, 9-12-
                                   2000; amd. Ord. 429, 8-13-2002; Ord. 743,
                                   11-17-2015; Ord. 847, 5-11-2021)
 
5-8-2: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in acts of aggressive
solicitation which includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Soliciting a person by accosting or speaking to the individual or
individuals in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or
upon property in his immediate possession;
      2.   Soliciting by touching someone without that person's consent;
      3.   Using obscene or abusive language toward someone while attempting to
solicit that person;
      4.   Forcing oneself upon the company of another by continuing to solicit
in close proximity to an individual who has made a negative response by verbal
or physical signs or by attempting to leave the presence of the person
soliciting, or by other negative indication;
      5.   Blocking the path of the individual being solicited; otherwise
engaging in conduct that could reasonably be construed as intending to force a
person to accede to a solicitation;
      6.   Soliciting within fifty feet (50') of the entrance to any financial
institution, any automatic teller machine or any automatic teller facility;
      7.   Soliciting persons seated at any permitted outdoor dining area or
outdoor merchandise area, provided such areas are in active use at the time;
      8.   Soliciting while the person being solicited is standing in line
waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment;
      9.   Soliciting after dark, which shall mean one-half (1/2) hour after
sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise;
      10.   Soliciting in a school zone during the time of arrival of students
at the beginning of the school day and/or during the time of the departure of
students at the end of the school day.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in acts of disorderly
conduct which includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Loitering, prowling, or wandering upon private property of another
without lawful business, permission or invitation from the owner or person in
lawful possession of the private property;
      2.   Refusing to vacate a municipal park facility which they have not
reserved the time and paid the appropriate fee for, at a time that has been
reserved for another person;
      3.   Occupying, lodging or sleeping in any building, structure or place,
whether public or private, or any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
similar vehicles or equipment without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession or in control thereof;
      4.   Urinating or defecating in any public place not designated as a
public restroom or in any place exposed to public view;
      5.   Willfully fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer after being
lawfully ordered to stop by an identified peace officer;
      6.   Any conduct which may be deemed to be in a riotous, violent, or
noisy manner;
      7.   Any conduct that results in a breach of the peace of another person
(s) or endangers the health and safety of another person(s).
   C.   Person To Vehicle Transactions (Public Right-Of-Way): Unless otherwise
permitted within title 3, chapter 4 of this code, it shall be unlawful for any
person, while standing in any portion of a public right-of-way, including but
not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks, and driveways, to exchange
or attempt to exchange goods, wares, merchandise, personal property,
contributions of money or any other property from any person traveling in a
vehicle along any public right-of-way or private street.
   D.   Person To Vehicle Transactions (Private Property): It shall be unlawful
for any person, while standing on private property to exchange or attempt to
exchange goods, wares, merchandise, personal property, contributions of money
or any other property from any person occupying a vehicle while on private
property unless that person has written permission from the property owner and
the following:
      1.   The owner or person in lawful possession of the private property
establishes a written policy which provides area(s) for the lawful solicitation
of employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, in
locations which are accessible to the public;
      2.   A copy of said policy shall be submitted to the City to be
maintained in City files;
      3.   The owner or person in lawful possession of the private property has
caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the
property not less than eleven inches (11") by seventeen inches (17") in size
with lettering not less than one inch (1") in height and not to exceed six (6)
square feet in total area. The notice shall be substantially in the following
form:
      "It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment,
business or contributions of money or other property in areas of this property
which are not approved for such activity by the property owner."
   E.   Vehicle to Person Transactions: It shall be unlawful for any person,
while the occupant of any vehicle, to solicit, or attempt to solicit,
employment, business or contributions of money or other property from a person
who is within the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to a public
street, highway, sidewalk, or driveway unless otherwise permitted within title
3 of this code. (Ord. 847, 5-11-2021)
5-8-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Peace Officer Citation: Any peace officer or person empowered to
enforce this provision of this code is authorized to issue a uniform citation
upon his own observation of a violation without the necessity of a citizen
complainant's signature on said citation. By signing the citation officer or
person is certifying that he has reasonable grounds to believe that the person
cited has committed the offense contrary to law.
   B.   Citizen Citation: A uniform citation may also be signed by any citizen
or person in whose presence an alleged violation of this chapter occurred and
be witnessed by a peace officer or person empowered to enforce this provision
of this code whose name shall be endorsed on the citation. (Ord. 375, 9-12-
2000; amd. Ord. 847, 5-11-2021)
5-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 726, 10-14-2014, eff. retroactive to 5-14-2013; amd.
Ord. 847, 5-11-2021)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
5-9-1: Behavior
5-9-2: Enforcement
5-9-3: Penalties
5-9-1: BEHAVIOR:
No person shall violate any rules and regulations for the use of a park, or any
of its facilities, approved by the city council and duly posted. (Ord. 458, 9-
9-2003)
5-9-2: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Officials: Police officers or duly authorized representatives of the
city of Eagle shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Ejection: A police officer, or duly authorized representatives of the
city of Eagle shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting
in violation of this chapter. Any person ejected from the park shall leave
promptly and peaceably and shall not return to the park for any reason on the
same calendar day of his ejectment.
   C.   Seizure Of Property: A police officer shall have the authority to seize
and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used in violation
of this chapter.
   D.   Removal Of Vehicles: Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle left
standing or parked after closing hours of the park, such officer may provide
for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest available garage or place of
safety. (Ord. 458, 9-9-2003)
5-9-3: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction and punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 10
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
5-10-1: General Speed Limits
5-10-2: Penalty
5-10-3: School Zone And Penalty
5-10-1: GENERAL SPEED LIMITS:
No person, other than authorized emergency vehicle personnel, shall drive a
vehicle at a speed in excess of the following:
   A.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted, on any public
street within the corporate city limits.
   B.   Ten (10) miles per hour on any throughway, or in any parking lot in a
public park.
   C.   Ten (10) miles per hour on any public alley.
   D.   Twenty (20) miles per hour in the following locations:
      1.   On State Street from Cobblestone Lane east to Stierman Way.
      2.   On Eagle Road from Ranch Drive south to Plaza Drive. (Ord. 600, 4-
15-2008; amd. Ord. 869, 1-11-2022)
5-10-2: PENALTY:
Any person that violates any provision(s) of this section shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and subject to the penalties set forth in Idaho
infraction rule 9(b) (other infractions). (Ord. 600, 4-15-2008)
5-10-3: SCHOOL ZONE AND PENALTY:
   A.   No person, other than authorized emergency vehicle personnel, shall
drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in a marked
school zone when any of the following exist:
      1.   A school speed limit sign with flashing lights attached and the
words "when flashing" posted and the lights are activated; or
      2.   A school speed limit sign with "when children are present" included
thereon, and there is a child or children present. "When children are present"
shall be defined to mean whenever one or more children are present and clearly
visible on the roadway, shoulder area, sidewalk, or other area immediately
adjacent to the roadway on which the school zone is located. This definition
applies to children present on the same side of the street as the school
building, as well as across the street from the school building or in any
direction within the marked school zone, and is not restricted to school days
or hours; or
      3.   A school zone speed limit sign with "7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m."
included thereon.
   B.   Any person that violates this subsection shall be guilty of an
infraction and shall be assessed a fixed penalty of one hundred dollars
($100.00) excluding court costs and fees. (Ord. 600, 4-15-2008)
CHAPTER 11
DISORDERLY HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES
SECTION:
5-11-1: Disorderly Household Or Premises Prohibited
5-11-2: Definitions
5-11-3: Penalty
5-11-1: DISORDERLY HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to host a party,
gathering or event on private property within any residential area of the city:
      1.   Which is disruptive to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare
due to the magnitude of the crowd, loud music or other noise, disturbances,
unruly behavior by those attending the party, excessive traffic or destruction
of property; or
      2.   Where a person under the age of twenty one (21) years is in
possession of, is consuming or is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage
and the person or persons responsible for the party knew or reasonably should
have known that the person in possession of, consuming, or under the influence
of an alcoholic beverage is under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 696,
5-14-2013)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Words Defined:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol, including liquor,
spirits, beer, and wine.
   HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES: Any home, apartment, condominium, premises or other
dwelling unit or meeting room or hall, including the yard and curtilage of such
household or premises which are owned, rented, leased or under the control of
the person or persons responsible for the party, regardless of whether such
premises are occupied on a permanent or temporary basis, or merely occupied as
a premises for a social function.
   KNOWINGLY: For purposes of this chapter means having a general knowledge of
or reason to know which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
   MINOR: A person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   PARTY: A party, gathering or event or other assembly of persons for a social
occasion or activity.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PARTY: 1. The person or persons in charge of the
premises where the party takes place; and/or
      2.   The person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the
party; and/or
      3.   The person or persons who organized the party. (Ord. 696, 5-14-2013)
5-11-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   B.   In addition to the penalty, the court may order restitution to be paid
by the person or persons responsible for a party or gathering that requires a
subsequent law enforcement or emergency response. Such restitution, if ordered,
would include actual costs for law enforcement or other emergency services
incurred for the purpose of abating any of the conditions or violations
described herein. (Ord. 696, 5-14-2013)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY, ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
6-1-1: Utility Service, Building Permit Required
6-1-1: UTILITY SERVICE, BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the safety,
promote the health and prosperity, and for the protection of the property of
the citizens of the city by prohibiting utility companies from providing any
service to any structure until a building permit has been issued.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and terms when used in this section
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   BUILDING PERMIT: That permit in standard form adopted and in use by the
city, pursuant to existing ordinances 1 .
   SERVICE: Providing, attaching or hooking up to any building, mobile home or
other structure any line or pipe, which line or pipe is intended to provide any
of the following services: telephone, gas, electricity, water or sewage
disposal.
   UTILITY: Any public or private corporation or company which supplies the
public or a group of individuals with the following commodity, service or both:
telephone, gas, electricity, water or sewage disposal.
   C.   Building Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any utility company
to provide any service to any building, mobile home or other structure situated
in the confines of the city, until such utility company has been furnished with
a copy of a building permit which has been issued for such building, mobile
home or other structure by the city.
   D.   Copies Of Permit: The city clerk shall, from the effective date hereof,
issue building permits to successful applicants in number and amount sufficient
for such successful applicant to furnish all utility companies with a copy
thereof. (Ord. 19, 7-9-1974, eff. 8-1-1974; amd. 1985 Code)
   E.   Violation And Penalty: A violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 743, 11-17-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See sections 7-1A-2 and 8-7-2 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
SECTION:
6-2-1: Required Sidewalk Construction
6-2-2: Notice To Construct
6-2-3: Construction By City, Costs A Lien
6-2-4: Sidewalk Repairs
6-2-1: REQUIRED SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
The mayor and city council may, at any regular meeting or at any special
meeting called for that purpose, by a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the
members of the city council or by a vote of a majority of the council upon a
petition of three- fourths (3/4) of the property owners of not less than one
side of a block, by an order entered upon the minutes of such meeting, direct
the construction of sidewalks on any street, block or part of a block within
the city, assessing the cost thereof to the property in front of which the same
shall be laid, and may direct the owner thereof to lay the same at his/her own
expense. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
6-2-2: NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT:
Whenever the mayor and city council shall order any sidewalk constructed, as
provided in section
6-2-1 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk, within five (5)
days after the passage of such order, to serve a written or printed notice to
construct such sidewalks within thirty (30) days upon the owner or his/her
agent of all of the property in front of which such sidewalk has been ordered
laid. If the owner resides out of the city and his/her address is known, such
notice shall be sent by registered mail, and if s/he cannot be found and his/
her address is unknown, such notice shall be published at least once a week for
two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the city 1 . (Ord. 1, 5-
24-1971)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-11-2 of this code.
6-2-3: CONSTRUCTION BY CITY, COSTS A LIEN:
If, within thirty (30) days after serving of such notice or after the first
publication if the address of the owner is not known or if s/he cannot be
found, the owner fails and neglects to construct such sidewalk in front of his/
her property as ordered, such sidewalk may be constructed by the city, under
the direction of the city engineer, who shall keep an account of the
construction of such sidewalk and the cost thereof in front of each lot or part
of lot, and after the same has been completed s/he shall present to the city
council a detailed statement of the cost thereof and the amount assessed
against the property owned by each person in front of whose property such
sidewalk shall have been constructed by the city, after such account shall have
been approved by the city council, if not paid by the owner within ten (10)
days thereafter, the same shall be and constitute a lien against such property
in favor of the city, and shall be recoverable, together with all costs as
provided by law, for the foreclosure of liens. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
6-2-4: SIDEWALK REPAIRS:
   A.   Duty Of Owner: It shall be the duty of the owner in front of whose
property there is a sidewalk, within the city, to keep the same in good repair.
(Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
   B.   Notice To Repair: Whenever a sidewalk shall be found in a defective
condition, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to serve a written notice on
the owner of the property adjoining such sidewalk to repair the same within ten
(10) days. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. 1985 Code)
   C.   Repair By City, Costs A Lien: On the failure of the owner to so repair,
the city engineer may order the same done by the city, and after the costs
thereof shall have been approved by the city council as in section
6-2-3 of this chapter provided, the same shall be a lien upon the property
adjoining, and recoverable as provided in said section
6-2-3 of this chapter.
   D.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall apply
to all sidewalks now in existence, or that may hereafter be constructed within
the city, so far as applicable, of whatsoever kind. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC LIBRARY
SECTION:
6-3-1: Library Fund
6-3-2: Real Estate Acquisitions
6-3-3: Library Borrower's Cards
6-3-4: Prohibited Acts
6-3-5: Violation And Penalty
6-3-1: LIBRARY FUND:
   A.   Fund Created, Administration: There is hereby created in the city
treasury a fund to be known as the "library fund", and the council shall
include in its annual budget an appropriation for such fund. All vouchers paid
out of said fund shall be drawn upon the recommendation of the board of
trustees of the library 1 , with the approval of the council, and shall be for
the uses and purposes authorized by law.
   B.   Use Of Funds: The library fund, including all monies or property
derived by gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, for the purposes of the library,
shall be applied to the purposes herein authorized. If such payment into the
treasury should be inconsistent with the conditions or terms of any such gift,
devise or bequest, the board shall provide for the safety and preservation of
the same and the application thereof to the use of the library and reading
rooms, in accordance with the terms and conditions of such gift, devise or
bequest. (Ord. 151, 3-14-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 3 of this code.
6-3-2: REAL ESTATE ACQUISITIONS:
The title of all property, real and personal, now owned or hereafter acquired
by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, for the purpose of the library
and reading rooms, when not inconsistent with the terms of its acquisition,
shall vest in the city, and in the name of the city may be sued for and
defended by action at law or otherwise. (Ord. 151, 3-14-1989)
6-3-3: LIBRARY BORROWER'S CARDS:
   A.   Residents: All Eagle city residents with valid identification and
verified proof of current Eagle residence may obtain an Eagle library card. The
card shall be valid for a period of three (3) years. A resident library
borrower is such a person or spouse, child or parent living in the same
household who pays ad valorem taxes on real and/or personal property situated
in the city of Eagle.
   B.   Nonresidents: All nonresidents of the city of Eagle may be issued an
Eagle library card valid for one year. A nonresident patron is one who is not
in the LYNX! consortium. A nonresident payment of an annual fee equal to the
amount of the per household residential support, plus Idaho sales tax will be
charged. Nonresident senior citizens over the age of sixty two (62) may
purchase an individual card for an annual fee that is not less than twenty five
percent (25%) of the current annual nonresident household fee. To utilize
patron services, LYNX! consortium members in the service areas of Eagle Public
Library, Boise Public Library, Ada Community Library, Meridian library district
and Garden City Public Library may obtain library cards at Eagle Public Library
or at their home library. Cards will be issued according to the patron's taxing
district as determined by the Ada County assessor's division of land records.
All other consortium members must first obtain their library card from their
home library to access patron services at Eagle Public Library. (Ord. 685, 11-
13-2012)
6-3-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Defacing Library Property: No person shall wilfully or intentionally
cut, tear, deface, break, injure or destroy any book, map, chart, picture,
engraving, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property
belonging to the Eagle Public Library or any branch thereof.
   B.   Unlawful Retaining Of Library Property: No person shall retain any
book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging to
the Eagle Public Library, or any branch thereof, for more than three (3) days
after notice in writing to return the same. Giving notice shall be deemed
sufficient if given in person or if mailed to the address of such person as
shown by the library records. Service by mail is complete at time of mailing.
(Ord. 151, 3-14-1989)
6-3-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and shall, upon conviction or a finding of guilt
thereof in the court of Ada County, Idaho, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 4
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Grant Of Authority
6-4-3: Franchise Conditions
6-4-4: Grantee Rules And Service Standards
6-4-5: Conditions On Street Occupancy And Use
6-4-6: Erection, Removal And Common Use Of Poles
6-4-7: System Construction And Extension
6-4-8: Rate Regulation
6-4-9: Annual Report And Audit
6-4-10: Preferential Or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
6-4-11: Company Liability, Indemnification
6-4-12: Faithful Performance Bond
6-4-13: Operational Standards
6-4-14: Public, Educational, Or Governmental (PEG) Use
6-4-15: Franchise Fee
6-4-16: Customer Service
6-4-17: Enforcement
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense,
words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the
plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory.
            Hereinafter referred to as "CATV", "CATV system" or "system", shall mean a
CABLE       system of antennas, coaxial cables, wave guides or other conductors, equipment
TELEVISION  or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing
SYSTEM:     television, FM radio, or other services by cable through its facilities as
            herein contemplated.
CERTIFICATE
OF          A certificate issued by the Idaho secretary of state to a video service
FRANCHISE   provider pursuant to the Idaho Video Service Act, Idaho Code §§ 50-3001 et seq.
AUTHORITY:
            The city of Eagle, a municipal corporation of the state of Idaho, in its
CITY:       present incorporated form or in any other reorganized, consolidated or changed
            form.
COUNCIL:    The present governing body of the city or any future body constituting the
            legislative body of the city.
            The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, including a written agreement
            entered into by the city and a cable operator of a CATV system, or between the
            city and a video service provider, which authorizes the construction,
FRANCHISE:  maintenance and operation of a CATV system for the purpose of offering cable
            service or video service to subscribers within the territorial limits of the
            City. A certificate of franchise authority issued pursuant to Idaho Code § 50-
            3003 shall also constitute a franchise.
FRANCHISE   The agreement entered into between the city and a cable operator or video
AGREEMENT:  operator that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions
            under which a franchise will be granted and exercised.
FRANCHISE   The area of the city that a cable operator or video operator is authorized to
AREA:       serve by its franchise.
FRANCHISE   The amount paid by a cable operator or video service provider to the city.
FEE:
            Any cable television provider, or video service provider, their lawful
            successors or assignees of said persons, firms or corporations, to whom or to
GRANTEE:    which franchises under this chapter are granted by the council, and the lawful
            successors or assignees of said persons, firms or corporations. A grantee also
            includes a video service provider who has been issued a certificate of
            franchise authority.
            All revenues, calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting
            principles (GAAP), that are received by the cable service provider or video
            service provider from subscribers for the provision of cable service or video
            service to subscribers within the jurisdictional limits of the political
            subdivision. Gross revenues shall include the following:
            A.   All recurring charges and fees paid by subscribers for the provision of
            cable service or video service; equipment rental charges, late fees and
            insufficient funds fees; and fees attributable to video service when sold
            individually or as part of a package or bundle, or functionally integrated with
GROSS       services other than cable services or video services. The term "gross revenues"
REVENUES:   shall not include any charges resulting from action by a federal agency or
            taxes or surcharges imposed by a governmental body which are separately
            itemized and billed by a cable provider or video service provider to its
            subscribers;
            B.   Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including pay-per-
            view and video-on-demand; and
            C.   Any other consideration a cable provider or video service provider
            receives from its subscribers for providing cable service or video service when
            it is received in a transaction that would evade imposition of a franchise fee
            if such consideration is not included in revenue.
            The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road,
STREET:     highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive or other public
            property, hereafter existing as such within the city.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service or video
            service of the grantee by means of its CATV system or video system.
            The delivery of video programming to subscribers, which programming is
            generally considered comparable to video programming delivered to viewers by a
            television broadcast station, cable service or digital television service,
            without regard to the technology used to deliver the video service, and which
VIDEO       service is provided primarily through equipment or facilities located in whole
SERVICE:    or in part in, on, under or over any streets. The term includes cable service,
            but excludes any video programming provided to persons in their capacity as
            subscribers to commercial mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), or
            video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables end users
            to access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over
            the public internet.
VIDEO
SERVICE     A provider of video service, as defined herein. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
PROVIDER:
 
6-4-2: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
There is hereby granted by the city of Eagle, state of Idaho, to any grantee
and their successors and assigns, the right and privilege to construct, operate
and maintain a CATV system or video service system within the city, and to use
and occupy the streets and public ways therefor, subject to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-3: FRANCHISE CONDITIONS:
Every franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following conditions:
   A.   Any franchise granted hereunder by the city shall authorize a grantee,
subject to the provisions herein contained and the provisions of its franchise
agreement:
      1.   To engage in the business of operating and maintaining a CATV system
to provide and sell cable service or video service to subscribers within the
city; and
      2.   For the sole purpose of providing cable service or video service, to
erect, install, construct, repair, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on,
over, under, upon, across and along any street, such amplifiers and appliances,
lines, cables, fiber, conductors, vaults, manholes, pedestals, attachments,
supporting structures, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant
to the cable system; and, in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar
facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons for the sole
purpose of providing cable service or video service, including but not limited
to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business
in the city. No privilege, right of eminent domain or exemption shall be
granted or conferred upon a grantee by any franchise, except those specifically
prescribed therein, and any use of any street shall be consistent with any
prior lawful occupancy of the street or any subsequent improvement or
installation therein.
   B.   In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights are
subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the city to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the
public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the
city pursuant to such power.
   C.   A franchise issued by the city shall be subject to the right of the
city to revoke the same for misuse, or failure to comply with any material
provisions of this chapter, or any federal, state or local laws, ordinances,
rules or regulations, or failure to comply with any material provision of a
franchise agreement.
   D.   If a cable franchise terminates, and the franchisee does not have
authority independent of that franchise to maintain and operate its system in
the city's streets, then, to the extent not inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 541
(b)(3), the city may order the grantee to remove its facilities from the
franchise area within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city. In
that case, any property owned by the grantee and not removed from the streets
within six (6) months from the date of the city's order shall be considered to
have been abandoned by the grantee and will become the property of the city to
do with as it may choose. If a grantee fails to remove its facilities as
provided in this section, the city may have the removal done at the grantee's
expense, and any cost incurred by the city in removing the grantee's facilities
from the city's streets or property will be a claim against the grantee.
   E.   The grant of a franchise by the city shall be non-exclusive. It shall
not preclude the city from granting other or further franchises or permits, or
preclude the city from using any streets or other public properties or affect
its jurisdiction over them or any part of them, or limit the full power of the
city to make such changes, as the city shall deem necessary, including the
dedication, establishment, maintenance, and improvement of all new streets and
thoroughfares and other public properties.
   F.   The grant of a franchise shall be for a term as provided in the
franchise agreement, which shall not exceed ten (10) years.
   G.   Nothing in a franchise agreement shall be deemed to waive the
requirements of the various codes, laws, and ordinances of the city regarding
permits, zoning, fees to be paid, or right-of-way or street management, or to
take the place of any general license or permit required for the privilege of
transacting or carrying on a business within the city as required by the
ordinances and laws of the city, or for attaching devices to poles or other
structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or
performing other work in or along the streets or rights-of-way.
   H.   The city shall have the right, without cost, to make attachments to
poles owned and used by the grantee in connection with its fire or police
signal systems or other city use, such attachments to be installed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the national electrical
safety code and only after written notice to the grantee; provided however,
that the grantee shall assume no liability or expense in connection therewith,
and provided further, that the city's use thereof shall be in such a manner as
not to interfere with the television operations of the grantee. In case of any
emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the city council,
make available it facilities to the city for emergency use.
   I.   A franchise grated under this chapter shall be a privilege to be held
in personal trust by the grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred,
leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or
involuntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, without the prior
written consent of the city expressed by a resolution.
   J.   A grantee issued a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall, within
thirty (30) days after the passage of an ordinance granting such franchise fill
with the city clerk, in writing, duly executed by the proper officials, the
following documents:
      1.   The grantee's unconditional acceptance of the franchise;
      2.   The grantee's surety bond as provided in section
6-4-12 of this chapter; and
      3.   Its certificate of insurance as provided in section
6-4-11 of this chapter.
   K.   A grantee issued a franchise under this chapter shall assume and pay
all publication costs in connection with the granting of a franchise, as
required by Idaho Code § 50-329. A statement for all costs shall be prepared by
the city treasurer and presented to the grantee upon the filing of its
acceptance of the franchise with the city clerk. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-4: GRANTEE RULES AND SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   Grantee Rules: The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business
as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said grantee to exercise its rights
and perform it obligations under its franchise and to assure uninterrupted
service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with this chapter,
the rules of the Federal Communications Commission or the laws of the state of
Idaho.
   B.   Service Standards: The grantee shall maintain and operate its system
and render efficient service in accordance with such rules and regulations as
are, or may be hereinafter promulgated by the city, the state of Idaho, or by
the Federal Communications Commission. Whenever it is necessary to interrupt
service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the
grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of
inconvenience to its customers. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-5: CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY AND USE:
   A.   Use: All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and
places, and not to interfere with existing public utility installations. In all
areas of the city where the cables, wires or other like facilities of public
utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires or
other like facilities underground.
      1.   To the extent the grantee constructs and maintains its cables and
other equipment on or about private property, and an easement for such use has
already been granted to a telephone company or other public utility, said
easement shall, if at all possible, be interpreted so as to grant the grantee
the same rights and privileges as have been granted to telephone companies and
other public utilities. In such easements, the words "telephone company" shall
be interpreted to include the grantee.
      2.   The grantee shall furnish to and file with the city, maps, plats and
permanent records of the location and character of all facilities constructed,
including underground facilities.
   B.   Restoration: In case of any disturbance of rights of way, pavement,
sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own expense,
and in the manner provided by the city, replace and restore all rights of way,
paving, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any street or alley disturbed.
The grantee shall, for a period of one year, guarantee such restoration and in
the event there is a problem, shall, upon given notice, repair same within
fifteen (15) days after notice. If the grantee fails to complete such repairs
as requested, then the city may do so at the expense of the grantee.
   C.   Relocations: If at any time during the period of this franchise the
city shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade or location of any
street, alley or other public way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by
the city, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance
comply with the requirements of the city.
   D.   Placement Of Fixtures: The grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or
other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any
gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrant or other utility, and all such
poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to
comply with the requirements of the city.
   E.   Temporary Removal Of Wires And/Or Fixtures For Building Moving: The
grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the
city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings,
the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the
same, and the grantee shall be given not less than forty eight (48) hours'
advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
   F.   Tree Trimming: The grantee shall have authority to trim any trees upon
and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the city
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cable of the grantee, except that at the option of the city, such
trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction, at the
expense and liability of the grantee. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-6: ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES:
   A.   No poles or other wire holding structures shall be erected by the
grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height,
type and other pertinent aspects. However, location of any pole or wire holding
structure of the grantee shall not be a vested interest and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the city determines that public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
   B.   Where poles or other wire holding structures of any public utility
company are available for use by the grantee, the city may require the grantee
to use such poles and structures if the permission and consent of such public
utility company may be obtained by the grantee and if the terms of the use
available to the grantee are just and reasonable.
   C.   Where a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the
poles or other wire holding structures of the grantee, but agreement therefor
with the grantee cannot be reached, the city may require the grantee to permit
such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall
determine to be just and reasonable, if the use will enhance the public
convenience and if it would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operation.
   D.   Where city owned utility poles are available for use of the grantee,
the grantee shall pay the city the same pole rental per annum as paid by the
grantee for the use of poles owned by public utilities. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-7: SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND EXTENSION:
   A.   The grantee is hereby authorized to extend the system within the
franchise area to the extent that such extension is or may become technically
and economically feasible.
   B.   Wherever the grantee shall have received written requests for service
from at least ten (10) subscribers within one thousand six hundred twenty five
(1,625) cable meters (5,280 cable feet) of its aerial trunk cable, or from at
least fifteen (15) subscribers within one thousand six hundred twenty five
(1,625) cable meters (5,280 cable feet) of its underground trunk cable, it
shall extend its system to such subscribers solely for the usual connection and
service fees for all subscribers.
The one thousand six hundred twenty five meters (1,625 m) shall be measured in
extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the
public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary drop to the
subscriber's home or premises.
   C.   No person in the grantee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused
service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual
circumstances, including, without limitation, instances when the distance from
distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than forty
five meters (45 m) (150 cable feet) or when a subscriber density exists less
than the density specified hereinabove, service may be made available on the
basis of costs of materials, labor and easements, in order to prevent
inequitable burdens on cable subscribers in more densely populated areas.
   D.   For all residential structures hereinafter erected which are to be
served by underground utilities, the developer of the subdivision or
development may acquire CATV service or video service for the development under
the following conditions; but otherwise the grantee shall not be obligated to
construct a CATV system or video service system in such new development:
Developer shall perform all trenching and backfilling necessary for the
provision of cable television service, or video service, including furnishing
of any imported backfill material required, and will furnish and install for
the grantee any necessary distribution conduit and substructures, including
pedestals, required in accordance with the grantee's plans and specifications.
Developer may enter into a written agreement with the grantee whereby such
costs may be reimbursed to the developer by grantee at the rate of fifty
percent (50%) of basic subscriber revenues generated from the CATV service or
video service supplied within the development over a period not to exceed three
(3) years.
In addition to providing plans and specifications to the developer, the grantee
shall inspect the facilities required hereunder, and certify to the city prior
to final approval of the subdivision or development that the facilities
required herein are properly installed. The city shall have the right to review
and require its approval of the maps and specifications provided by the
grantee. The cost of the portion of an extension to a subdivision or
development from the grantee's existing facilities in excess of sixty meters
(60 m) (200 feet) outside the boundaries of the subdivision or development
shall be borne by the developer. Facilities installed hereunder shall be owned,
operated, and maintained by the grantee. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-8: RATE REGULATION:
The city reserves the right to regulate all rates and charges of the grantee
except to the extent it is prohibited from doing so by applicable federal or
state law. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-9: ANNUAL REPORT AND AUDIT:
   A.   Report: Payment of the franchise fee as required in this chapter shall
be accompanied by a written report identifying the amount of revenues received
from subscribers for the provision of cable services or video services to the
subscribers and identifying exclusions from gross revenues, if any.
   B.   Audit: The city may, upon reasonable advance written notice, but not
more frequently than once in any calendar year, review the business records of
a grantee to the extent necessary to ensure proper and accurate payment of the
franchise fee. A grantee shall provide sufficient information about such
revenues to the city to allow a proper compliance review by the city. The
grantee shall keep all business records reflecting any gross revenues, even if
there is a change in ownership, for at least three (3) years after those
revenues are recognized by the grantee on its books and records. All records
reasonably necessary for the audit shall, at the discretion of the city, be
made available by the grantee at the location within the jurisdiction where the
records are kept in the ordinary course of business, or may be provided
electronically to the city with its consent. The city and the grantee shall
each be responsible for their respective costs of the audit, unless the audit
discloses that the grantee has underpaid the franchise fee by more than seven
percent (7%) during the examination period, in which case the grantee shall pay
all of the reasonable and actual costs of the audit. Any undisputed amount or
refund due to the city or the grantee shall be paid within sixty (60) days,
plus interest at the statutory rate on civil judgments. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-10: PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Discrimination in Rates and Charges Prohibited: The grantee shall not,
as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other
respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject
any person to any prejudice or disadvantage; provided, that nothing in this a
franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedule to which any customer coming within such
classification would be entitled.
   B.   Discrimination Among Residential Subscribers Prohibited: Cable service
or video service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential
subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which
such group resides. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-11: COMPANY LIABILITY, INDEMNIFICATION:
The grantee shall save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the city by
reason of any suit, judgment, execution, claim, or demand resulting from the
construction, operation or maintenance by the grantee of its system in the
city. The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award
of a franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk and at all
times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such
franchise or renewal thereof, at the grantee's sole expense, a general
comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the city, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees, in a company authorized
to do business in the state of Idaho, and in a form satisfactory to the city
attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or
damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the
operations of the grantee under such franchise in the minimum amount of:
$   250,000.00 for property damage to any person.
   500,000.00 for property damage in any 1 occurrence.
   500,000.00 for personal injury to any 1 person.
   1,000.000.00 for personal injury in any 1 occurrence.
(Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-12: FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE BOND:
Upon the commencement of construction, the grantee shall provide a construction
performance bond that will faithfully guarantee the payment of all labor and
material costs incurred by it or its subcontractors during construction of the
system. The performance bond will be issued by a company licensed to do
business in the state of Idaho and in a form approved by the city attorney. In
addition, the grantee shall maintain throughout the construction period, a
corporate surety bond issued by a company licensed to do business in the state
of Idaho and in a form approved by the city attorney in the principal sum of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), naming the city as an insured. The
surety bond shall guarantee performance of each term and condition of a
franchise agreement executed under this chapter and in the event of a breach of
condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the
principal by the city for all damages resulting from failure of the grantee to
well and faithfully perform and observe any provision of its franchise. (Ord.
676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-13: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards set by the applicable rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-14: PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, OR GOVERNMENTAL (PEG) USE:
On, or within a reasonable period of time after, the date on which a grantee
first provides cable service or video service to a subscriber within the
service area of the city, the grantee shall designate a sufficient amount of
capacity on its cable service or video service network to allow the provision
of public, educational and governmental access channels or their functional
equivalents, hereinafter referred to as PEG channels, for noncommercial
programming as provided in Idaho Code § 50-3010. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-15: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Payment of Franchise Fee: During the term of any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter, every grantee shall pay to the city for the use of
the streets, as well as the maintenance, improvements, and supervision thereof,
a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the gross revenues,
as defined in this chapter, of the grantee. For purposes of calculation of
gross revenues, the following shall apply:
      1.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications, the
portion of the system operator's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in gross revenues unless the
provider can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records, which may include the provider's tax billing records,
that are kept in the regular course of business.
      2.   Revenue of an affiliate shall be included in the calculation of
gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate would have the effect of evading the payment of the franchise fee
that would otherwise be paid for cable service or video service.
   B.   Quarterly Payments: The franchise fee shall be paid to the city on a
quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of each calendar quarter.
   C.   Report: As provided in section
6-4-11A of this chapter, each payment shall be accompanied by supporting
information, verified by an officer of the grantee, containing a detailed,
accurate statement of the grantee's gross revenues and the computation of the
payment amount.
   D.   Billing: The grantee may identify and collect the amount of the
franchise fee as a separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber.
(Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-16: CUSTOMER SERVICE:
The grantee shall maintain a toll free telephone listing in the city of Eagle
in order that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to all
subscribers. Complaints during other than regular business hours may be made to
a separate telephone maintained for that purpose, which shall be listed in the
telephone directory, or the same telephone number may be used at the option of
the grantee. The grantee shall investigate, respond to, or act upon all
complaints and inquiries within six (6) hours. The grantee shall maintain a
maintenance service log indicating the date and time complaints are received
and resolved and the nature of the complaint and resolution. This record shall
be made available for reasonable inspection by the city. (Ord. 676, 9-25-2012)
6-4-17: ENFORCEMENT:
In the event that the grantee does not perform according to the provisions of
this chapter, the city shall give written notice of the particular items
wherein said grantee has failed to perform and said grantee is hereby given a
period of sixty (60) days to correct the defaults of which the notice
complains. If no correction is made during said period, the city may, at its
discretion, assess a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day until such
default is corrected. Provided, however, the grantee may petition the city for
an extension of time to comply for good cause shown. The determination of what
constitutes good cause shall be determined by the city and the decision of the
city shall be accepted as final. The following shall be deemed good cause for
an extension: strikes, floods, fire, acts of God, force majeure, labor
disputes, unavailability of building materials beyond the control of the
grantee or any other cause beyond the control of the grantee. (Ord. 676, 9-25-
2012)
CHAPTER 5
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
6-5-1: Rules And Regulations
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Service Area And Connection Requirement
6-5-4: Description Of Service
6-5-5: Application For Service
6-5-6: Main Extensions
6-5-7: Services
6-5-8: Meters
6-5-9: Water Charges; Review And Revision Of Rates
6-5-10: Notices
6-5-11: Billing And Payments
6-5-12: Meter Error
6-5-13: Discontinuance Of Service
6-5-14: Restoration Of Service
6-5-15: Unusual Demands
6-5-16: Access To Property
6-5-17: Responsibility For Equipment
6-5-18: Fire Hydrants
6-5-19: Violations And Penalties
6-5-20: Suspension Of Rules
6-5-21: Easement
6-5-22: Construction And Design Standards
6-5-23: Donation Of Water Systems To The City
6-5-24: Contribution Of Proportionate Off Site Construction Costs
6-5-25: Cooperative Agreements
6-5-26: Authority To Issue Rules And Regulations
6-5-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Short Title: This chapter shall be known as RATES, RULES AND
REGULATIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF THE WATER SYSTEM OF THE CITY OF EAGLE, ADA
COUNTY, IDAHO, and may be so cited and pleaded.
   B.   Scope: The water department and all customers receiving services from
the water department, whether inside or outside the city limits, are bound by
this chapter and the rules and regulations of the water department. (Ord. 202,
5-26-1992)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: The person or persons, firm or corporation, making application for
water service from the water department under the terms of this chapter and any
regulations issued by the water department.
AUTO COURT, MOTOR COURT, TRAVEL TRAILER COURT, MOTEL, HOTEL, ETC.: The
combination or group of two (2) or more dwelling units occupying a building
site or area under one ownership, used for the purpose of furnishing transient
living accommodations.
BACKFLOW: The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign
liquids, gases or substances into the distribution system of a public water
supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent
back siphonage.
CITY: The legally constituted municipal government of the city of Eagle, Ada
County, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The legally elected group of members composing the
city council, including the mayor, of the city of Eagle, Idaho.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any
substances which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer,
drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which
contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquids of
unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to
the public water supply as a result of backflow.
CUSTOMER OR USER: The owner or tenant of a residence, building, or structure
who has made application and who has been accepted under the terms of this
chapter and regulations issued by the water department and who receives water
service from the water department. The term "customer" or "user" generally will
not include tenants as it will generally be the owner's responsibility to apply
for service and to pay for service.
DIRECTOR: The director of the Idaho department of environmental quality, or
his/her authorized agent.
DUPLEX: A building designed, built, rented, or leased for occupancy by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
ENGINEER: The engineer for the city of Eagle who shall be a registered
professional engineer in the state of Idaho.
HEALTH OFFICER: The director of the Idaho department of environmental quality,
or other authorized agent.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING OR APARTMENT HOUSE: Any building or portion thereof which
is designed, built, rented, leased, lent, or hired out to be occupied or which
is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families or persons
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the
premises, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: A system for the provision to the public of water for
human consumption through pipes or, after August 5, 1998, other constructed
conveyances if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections,
regardless of the number of water sources or configuration of the distribution
system, or regularly serves an average of at least twenty five (25) individuals
daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year. Such term includes: any
collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities under the control
of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such
system; and any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such
control which are used primarily in connection with such system.
PURVEYOR: The city of Eagle or its authorized agent.
REGULATIONS: The Idaho rules for public drinking water systems version 2009
(IDAPA 58.01.08), the Idaho department of environmental quality, and all as may
be subsequently amended or modified.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed for or occupied by one family for
living or sleeping purposes, and having kitchen or cooking facilities.
SUPERINTENDENT: The director of public works for the city of Eagle, or his/her
authorized agent.
TRAILER HOUSE OR MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit used or so
constructed as to permit its being transported upon the public streets or
highways and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a
dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
WATER DEPARTMENT: An agent or other representative, appointed or under
contract, to conduct installation, repair and maintenance of the water system
for the city. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992; amd. Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
6-5-3: SERVICE AREA AND CONNECTION REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Service Area: The area serviced by the city shall be only that area
within the corporate limits of the city, which is so designated by the city
council, and such other contiguous and neighboring territory as the city
council shall, from time to time, deem necessary to serve and identified on the
water service development plan map contained in the city of Eagle water service
master plan. (Ord. 517, 5-10-2005)
   B.   Connection To Water System Required: Every parcel of land or premises
within the boundaries of the city, improved by new construction for occupancy
and occupied or used by any person or persons, or as a commercial business,
shall be connected to the city water department public water system so long as
the area is within the service area of the city water system. The owner or
person in charge of such land shall make or cause to be made, such connection
within sixty (60) days after receiving official notice from the city to so
connect. All charges associated with the laying of pipe from the home or
facilities to be served by the city's mains shall be the responsibility of the
user and shall be properly designed and constructed in conformity with
requirements specified by the city. If a parcel of land is not within three
hundred feet (300') of a water main, connection may not be required unless the
city elects to extend the water main to within three hundred feet (300') of the
applicant's property. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-4: DESCRIPTION OF SERVICE:
   A.   Supply: The water department will exercise reasonable diligence and
care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer at
a reasonable pressure and to avoid so far as reasonably possible any shortage
or interruption in delivery.
The water department and city shall not be liable for damage resulting from an
interruption in service or from a lack of service. Temporary suspension of
service by the water department for improvements and repairs will be necessary
occasionally. When time permits, all customers affected will be notified prior
to shutdowns.
   B.   Quality: The water department will exercise reasonable diligence to
supply safe and potable water at all times.
   C.   Ownership Of System: All water mains, valves, meters, fittings,
hydrants, service connections and other appurtenances, except "customer service
lines", as defined in subsection
6-5-7A of this chapter, shall be the property of the city.
   D.   Classes Of Service: The classes of service shall be residential,
commercial, standby fire and contract as further qualified after the class as
follows: inside city limits; outside city limits:
      1.   Residential Service: Residential services shall consist of all
services for domestic purposes, single-family dwellings, homes and municipal
purposes.
      2.   Commercial Service: Commercial services shall consist of those
services where water is used for commercial services, such as businesses and
multi-family dwellings.
      3.   Standby Fire: Standby fire services shall consist of those services
where water is available or used for fire protection only.
      4.   Contract Service: Contract services shall consist of those services
for industrial or independent water district purposes under contracts
authorized by the city council.
   E.   Special Contracts: When the applicant's requirements for water are
unusual or large, such as an independent water district, or necessitate
considerable special or reserve equipment or capacity, the city, by
authorization of the city council, reserves the right to make special
contracts, the provisions of which are different from and have exceptions to
the regularly published water rates, rules and regulations. The special
contracts shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and approved by the city
council.
   F.   Resale Of Water: Resale of water shall be permitted only under special
contract, in writing, between the city, as approved by the city council, and
the persons, parties or corporation purchasing the water.
   G.   Service Preference: In case of shortage of supply, the city reserves
the right to give preferences in the manner of furnishing service to customers
as is in the interest of the city from the standpoint of public convenience or
necessity. Domestic water use shall be a preferential use to an irrigation use.
(Ord. 570, 4-17-2007)
6-5-5: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Application Form: Each applicant for water service shall sign an
application form provided at city hall giving the date of application, location
of premises to be served, the date applicant desires services to begin, purpose
for which services are to be used, the address for mailing of the billings, the
class and the size of the meter service and such other information as the water
department may reasonably require. In signing the application, the customer
agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the water department. The
application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the water
department to provide service.
   B.   Deposits And Establishment Of Credit: At the time application for
service is made, the applicant shall establish credit with the water department
at city hall. Deposits shall be held for one year from the date of deposit.
      1.   Deposit Requirements And Establishment Of Credit: With each and
every application for water service to be supplied through the water system of
the city, there may be a deposit required by the city clerk, or its designee, a
sum in cash, the amount to be determined by resolution of the city council upon
the passage of this chapter and reviewed at least annually and updated by
resolution of the council.
      2.   Deposits: At the time the deposit is given to the city clerk, or its
designee, the applicant will be given a receipt for the same. The deposit is
not to be considered as a payment on account. In the event the service is
discontinued, the deposit will be applied to the closing bill and any amount in
excess of the closing bill will be refunded. The city will not pay interest on
any deposits. Deposits shall not be eligible for refund until after one year of
service indicating a satisfactory payment history.
      3.   Forfeiture Of Deposit: If an account becomes delinquent and it is
necessary to turn off the service, the deposit shall be applied to the unpaid
balance due. Water service will not be restored to that premises or that
customer at different premises until all outstanding bills due the city have
been paid and the cash deposit replaced, together with any service charge
provided in subsection
6-5-11F of this chapter.
   C.   Application Amendments: Customers desiring a material change in the
size, character or extent of equipment or operation which would result in a
material change in the amount of water used, shall give the city written notice
of such change prior to the change and the application for service shall be
amended. Customers desiring a change in the size, location or number of
services shall fill out an amended application. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-6: MAIN EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Within The City Limits: Water main extensions to areas within the city
limits not presently served with water shall be installed under procedures to
be established by the city council. Developers who subdivide property for newly
partitioned properties will assume all costs of main extensions with the
approval of the city council, except in those cases where the city is
interested in entering into a cooperative agreement as described in section
6-5-25 of this chapter.
   B.   Outside The City Limits: Water mains outside the city limits shall be
extended only at the expense of the customers serviced, except in those cases
where the city is interested in entering into a cooperative agreement as
described in section
6-5-25 of this chapter.
   C.   Locations Of Extensions: The city will make water main extensions only
on rights of way, easements or publicly owned property. Easements or permits
secured for main extensions shall be obtained in the name of the city, along
with all rights and title to the main at the time the service is provided to
the customers paying for the extension.
   D.   Extensions Property Of City: The main extensions shall become the
property of the city at the time installed. The city council shall determine
the size of the main extensions and all extensions shall be of suitable
materials approved by the city council. Extensions both inside and outside the
city limits shall be installed by the water department or by contractors
approved by the water department. The installation procedures and materials
used shall be in accordance with the city and the state of Idaho standards. The
city shall inspect all main extensions and shall not accept ownership until the
work, materials and installation has been inspected and approved by the city
engineer. The cost for the city engineer to make any such inspection shall be
included in the costs of the main extension under subsection A of this section.
Such extensions shall be established according to the city's construction and
design standards for domestic water systems. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-7: SERVICES:
   A.   Definition: The "service connection" shall be that part of the water
distribution system which connects the meter to the main and shall normally
consist of corporation stop, service pipe, curb stop and box, meter, meter yoke
and meter box. The customer service line shall be that part of the piping on
the customer's property that connects the service to the customer's
distribution system.
   B.   Ownership, Installation And Maintenance: The city shall own, install
and maintain all service connections and installation and maintenance shall
only be performed by authorized employees of the city or their designated
agents. The customer shall own, install and maintain the customer service line.
   C.   Service Connection Charge: At the time the applicant files for service
where no service previously existed, or if he is filing for a change in service
size or location, he shall submit with his application the service connection
charge. This charge is to cover, but not be limited to, the actual cost to the
water department to install the service connection from the main, to and
including the meter and meter housing customer service line. The service
connection charge shall be established by the council by resolution upon the
passage of this chapter and may be reviewed and updated by resolution of the
council as the city council so desires.
   D.   Size Of Service: The water department will furnish and install a
service of such size at such locations as the applicant requests, provided such
requests are reasonable and that the size requested is one that is consistent
with the rules and regulations of the city. The minimum size of service shall
be determined by the water department. The water department may refuse to
install a service line which is undersized or oversized as determined by the
rules and regulations of the city.
   E.   Changes In Service Size: Permanent changes in the size of the service
line requested by the customer shall be paid by the customer on the basis of
the fee established by the council by resolution upon passage of this chapter
and may be reviewed and updated by resolution of the council as the city
council so desires.
   F.   Length Of Service: Where the main is in a public right of way, the
service connection will be placed at the right of way line nearest the property
to be served, for the standard connection fee, by the city, provided the length
of service line does not exceed the width of the right of way.
Where the main is on an easement or publicly owned property other than
designated rights of way, the service connection shall be installed at the
boundary of the easement or public property nearest the property to be served,
for the standard connection fee, by the city, provided the length of service
does not exceed thirty feet (30').
If, in either case cited above, the length of service line to the meter
location exceeds the maximum stated, the applicant shall pay the extra cost of
the line on the basis of actual cost to the water department for labor,
materials and equipment, including any costs for repair of streets and
sidewalks, plus ten percent (10%).
   G.   Joint Service Connections: The city may, at its option, serve two (2)
or more premises with one service connection. On new service connections, the
inside diameter of such joint lines shall be sufficient to provide a carrying
capacity of not less than the combined capacity of the individual service lines
of the same size.
Service extensions from an existing service to other occupancies or ownerships
than that for which the existing service was intended shall not be permitted
nor shall separate residences be permitted to receive service through one
service connection except under special considerations approved by the city
council.
   H.   Number Of Service Connections On Premises: The owner of a single parcel
of property may apply for and receive as many services as he and his tenants
may require, provided his application or applications meet the requirements of
the policies, rules, and regulations. However, the owner shall be required to
pay for all services.
   I.   Standby Fire Protection Service Connections:
      1.   Purpose: Standby fire protection connections of two inch (2") size
and larger will be installed only if adequate provisions are made to prevent
the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing.
Sealed fire sprinkler systems with water operated alarms shall be considered as
having such provisions. The superintendent may require that a suitable detector
check meter be installed in the standby fire protection service connections, to
which hose lines or hydrants are connected. All piping on the customer's
premises shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the state
of Idaho 1 .
      2.   Charges For Service: Charges for standby fire protection service
shall be determined by resolution by city council. No charge will be made for
water used in the standby fire protection service to extinguish accidental
fires or for routine testing of the fire protection system. The customers shall
pay the full cost of the standby protection service connection, any required
detector check meters, and any required special water meters installed for the
service to the standby connection.
      3.   Violations Of Regulations: If water is used from a standby fire
protection connection service in violation of this chapter, an estimate of the
amount used will be computed by the water department. The customer shall pay
for the water used at the regular rates, including the minimum charge based on
the size of the service connection and subsequent bills rendered on the basis
of the regular water rates.
   J.   Fire Service Connections Other Than Standby: A service having fire
protection facilities on the premises and water for other purposes flowing
through the same service connection shall be considered as an ordinary service
and metered as such. All water used through that service, regardless of its
use, will be charged at the regular rates.
   K.   Temporary Service Connections: For water service of a temporary nature,
applicants shall be required to pay in advance the estimated cost of
installation and removal of metering equipment and materials, plus a reasonable
depreciation charge for the use of equipment and material furnished by the
city. At the option of the water department, the applicant shall also pay his
water bill in advance and based on an estimate of the quantity to be used or he
shall otherwise establish satisfactory credit.
      1.   Time Limit: Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and
terminated within six (6) months after installation unless an extension of time
is granted in writing by the city.
      2.   Charge For Water Served: Charges for water furnished through a
temporary service connection shall be at the established rates set forth in the
current water rate schedule.
      3.   Installation Charge And Deposits: The applicant for temporary
service may, at the option of the city, be required:
         a.   To pay the city in advance, the estimated cost of installing and
removing all facilities necessary to furnish each service.
         b.   To deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during
the entire period such temporary service may be used, or to otherwise establish
credit approved by the city.
         c.   To deposit with the city an amount equal to the value of any
equipment loaned by the city to such applicant under the terms of subsection K4
of this section.
      4.   Responsibility For Meters And Installation: The customer shall use
all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned
facilities of the city. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the
temporary customer shall be responsible for the cost of making repairs,
including, but not limited to, a charge against the deposit fund. If the loaned
materials are returned in satisfactory condition and all bills paid, the full
amount of the equipment deposit will be returned to the temporary customer at
the termination of service.
   L.   Customer's Plumbing:
      1.   Plumbing Code: The customer's plumbing, which shall include the
customer's service line and all plumbing, piping, fixtures and other
appurtenances carrying or intended to carry water, sewer or drainage, shall
comply with the plumbing code of the state of Idaho.
It shall be a violation of these rules and regulations for the customer to
operate, cause or permit unauthorized operation of the meter stop or any
appurtenances on the service connection. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. I.C. § 54-2601.
6-5-8: METERS:
   A.   Ownership: The city will own and maintain all water meters. The city
will not pay rent to any user or customer or any other charge for a meter or
other water facilities, including housing and connections on a customer's
premises.
   B.   Installation: Installation of water meters shall be performed only by
authorized employees or agents of the city. All meters shall be sealed by the
water department at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or
broken except by one of its authorized employees or agents.
   C.   The Size And Type Of Meter: Applicant may request and receive any size
meter regularly stocked or furnished by the water department, provided the
request is reasonable and further provided that the meter is not greatly
oversized or undersized, as determined by the water superintendent. The water
department reserves the right to determine the type of meter to be installed.
   D.   Location Of Meters: Meters shall normally be placed approximately two
feet (2') from the property lines on the customer's property, but within the
designated easement; the meter will be installed wherever the applicant desires
within reason, but the location must be approved by the water department. The
meters will not be located in driveways or other location where damage to the
meter or its related parts may occur.
   E.   Joint Use Of Meters: The joining of several customers to take advantage
of the single minimum charges and large quantity rates shall be prohibited,
except under special contract, in writing, with the city council.
   F.   Changes In Size Or Location: If for any reason a change in the size of
a meter and service is required, the installation will be accomplished on the
basis of a new connection, and the customer's application shall be amended.
Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated
only at the customer's expense. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-9: WATER CHARGES; REVIEW AND REVISION OF RATES:
   A.   Setting, Review And Revision Of Rates: The water user charges shall be
established by resolution by the council upon the passage of this chapter.
Water user charges shall be reviewed at least annually but may be reviewed and
adjusted as frequently as the council so desires, by resolution of the council,
to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing
the water system and its facilities. Any revisions of the user charges shall be
based on actual operation, expansion, maintenance, replacement, and financing
expenses and the total water usage.
   B.   Outside City Limits: Water charges for the use of the water system
outside of the city shall be established according to the class of the
individual user by resolution of the council and may be changed from time to
time by resolution of the council. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-10: NOTICES:
   A.   Notices To Customers: Notices from either the city or the water
department to the customer will normally be given in writing and either mailed
or delivered to him at his last known address. Where conditions warrant and in
emergencies, the water department may notify the customer either by telephone
or messenger.
   B.   Notices From Customer: Notices from the customer to the water
department may be given by the customer or his authorized representative orally
or in writing at city hall or to the water department. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-11: BILLING AND PAYMENTS:
   A.   Meter Readings: Meters will be read and customers billed on the basis
of the meter reading to the nearest cubic foot.
The water department will keep an accurate account on its books of all readings
of meters and such account, so kept, shall be prima facie evidence of the use
of water service by the customer.
   B.   Rendering Of Bills:
      1.   Billing Period: All meters shall be read or estimated according to
subsection D of this section, and shall be billed monthly.
      2.   Bills For Other Than Normal Billing Period: Opening or closing
bills, or bills that for any other reason cover a period containing ten percent
(10%) more days or ten percent (10%) less days than in the normal billing
period shall be prorated.
      3.   Bills For More Than One Meter: All meters supplying a customer's
premises shall be billed separately, except where the water department has for
operating purposes installed two (2) or more meters in place of one, the charge
may be combined for billing purposes.
   C.   Disputed Bills: When a customer disputes the correctness of a bill, he
shall deposit with the city the amount of the disputed bill at the time the
complaint is lodged, to preclude discontinuance of service pending final
settlement of the bill or bills. Subsequent bills shall be paid or placed on
deposit in a similar manner. Failure of the customer to make such a deposit
may, at the city's option, warrant late charges, discontinuance of service or
legal action, as provided under subsection F of this section.
   D.   Failure To Read Meters: In the event that it shall be impossible or
impractical to read a meter on the regular reading date or that the water
department, for whatever reason, fails to read a meter, the water consumption
shall be prorated on the basis of thirty (30) days per month and the total
water consumption for billing purposes for that period shall be estimated.
   E.   Payment Of Bills: Each bill rendered shall contain the final date on
which payment is due. If the bill is not paid by that date, the account shall
be considered delinquent, unless other arrangements have been made with the
city, in writing, that specify another due date.
   F.   Delinquent Accounts:
      1.   Delinquent Notice: A reminder of account delinquency may be sent, at
the discretion of the city clerk, to each delinquent account on or about
fifteen (15) days after the account becomes delinquent.
      2.   Late Charges: Thirty (30) days after an account becomes delinquent,
late charges shall be assessed. Delinquent account late charge shall be
established by the council by resolution upon the passage of this chapter and
may be reviewed and updated by resolution of the council as the council so
desires.
      3.   Turn Off Notice: On or about sixty (60) days after an account
becomes delinquent, a turn off notice may be sent to the customer. Said notice
shall state a date on which water will be turned off if the delinquent account
is not paid in full prior thereto. Prior to shutting off a user's water, the
user shall be permitted to have a hearing in front of the city clerk.
      4.   Service Turn Off: A water department employee or other agent of the
city shall deliver a written notice to the customer stating that the water
service is being turned off until all delinquent amounts have been paid ("final
notice"). The water department, no sooner than twenty four (24) hours after
delivery of the final notice, excluding weekends and holidays, between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M., shall
discontinue water service to the user. Delivery of notice to the premises
served by the water department shall be considered as delivery of notice to the
customer.
      5.   Service Charge: In all instances where water has been turned off
because of delinquent accounts, a service charge shall be made for the
restoration of services and replacement of cash deposit as stated in subsection
6-5-5B of this chapter, will be required. The service charge for restoration of
delinquent accounts shall be established by the council by resolution upon the
passage of this chapter and may be reviewed and updated by resolution of the
council at the council's desire.
      6.   Legal Collection Action: On or about sixty (60) days after an
account becomes delinquent, the water department may initiate an action in the
small claims court of Ada County or state district court to collect any amounts
past due.
   G.   Installment Payment Of Delinquent Accounts: In cases of extreme
hardship, the city clerk shall have the discretion of renewing service to a
delinquent account upon receipt of a satisfactory installment plan for the
payment of the overdue amount, the installment period not to exceed the period
of time the account was delinquent. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-12: METER ERROR:
   A.   Meter Accuracy: All meters will be tested prior to installation. No
meter will be placed in service or allowed to remain in service which is known
to have an error in registration in excess of two percent (2%) under conditions
of normal operation.
   B.   Meter Test:
      1.   Standard Test: Meter tests will be conducted in accordance with
standards of practice established by the American water works association or
some other test method recommended by the meter manufacturer.
      2.   On Customer Request: A customer may, by giving not less than seven
(7) days' notice, request the superintendent to test the meter servicing the
customer's premises. The city will require the customer to pay to the city a
testing fee. This fee shall be based upon the cost of testing the meter as
determined by the city council. The fee deposit will be returned to the
customer if the test reveals the meter to over measure the water flow by more
than two percent (2%) under standard test conditions, otherwise, the fee shall
be retained by the city. Customers may, at their option, witness any meter
tests which they request, although the time and date of the test shall be
determined solely by the water department.
      3.   On Water Department Request: If, upon comparison of past water
usage, it appears that a meter is not registering properly, the water
department may, at its option, test and adjust the charges accordingly if the
meter either over measures or under measures the water flow. No charge for
meter testing will be made to the customer for the meter test under these
conditions.
   C.   Adjustments Of Bill For Meter Error:
      1.   Liability: Neither the city nor the customer will be liable to the
other for any over or under payment of water usage due to a meter which shows
readings either above or below the accuracy standard defined in subsection A of
this section. This subsection C1 will not apply as to nonregistering meters.
      2.   Nonregistering Meters: The water department will bill the customer
for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be
computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer's prior
use during the same season of the year, or upon a reasonable comparison with
the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same
season and under similar circumstances and conditions. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-13: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   On Customer Request: Each customer about to vacate any premises
supplied with water service by the water department shall give the water
department written notice of its intentions at least two (2) business days
prior thereto, specifying the date service is to be discontinued; otherwise, he
will be responsible for all water supplied to such premises until the water
department shall receive notice of such removal.
At the time specified by the customer that he expects to vacate the premises
where service is supplied or that he desires to be discontinued, the meter will
be read and a bill rendered which is payable immediately. In no case will the
bill be less than the monthly minimum specified in the schedule applying to the
class or classes of service furnished.
   B.   Nonpayment Of Bills: A customer's water service may be discontinued if
the water bill is not paid in accordance with the procedures listed in
subsection
6-5-11F of this chapter.
   C.   Improper Customer Facilities:
      1.   Unsafe Facilities: The water department may refuse to furnish water
and may discontinue services to any premises without prior notice where
plumbing facilities, appliances or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe
or not in conformity with the plumbing code of the state. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
      2.   Cross Connections: A "cross-connection" is defined as any physical
connection between the potable water system and another water supply.
The city or its agent will not permit any unprotected cross connection and will
discontinue service to any persons or premises where an unprotected cross
connection exists. Service will not be restored until the cross connection is
properly protected. Violation of this chapter is subject to penalties as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code; as such section shall be amended from time to time. (Ord.
350, 6-22-1999)
   D.   Water Waste: Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a
customer's premises, seriously affecting the general service, the water
department may discontinue service if such conditions are not corrected after
notice by the water department.
   E.   Service Detrimental To Others: The city may refuse to furnish water and
may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demands by one customer
will result in inadequate service to others.
   F.   Fraud Or Abuse: The city and/or the water department will refuse or
discontinue service to any premises where it is deemed necessary to protect the
city from fraud or abuse. Discontinuance of service from one or both of these
causes will be made immediately upon receipt of knowledge by the water
department that the condition or conditions exist.
   G.   Unauthorized Turn On: Where water service has been discontinued for any
reason and the water is turned on by the customer or other unauthorized person,
the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed. The charges
for shutting off the water at the main or removing the meter shall be
established by the council by resolution after passage of this chapter and may
be reviewed and updated by resolution of the council as the council so desires.
These charges shall be billed to the offending customer and water shall not be
furnished to the premises or customer until such charges are paid and the city
has reasonable assurance that the violation will not reoccur.
   H.   Noncompliance With Regulations: The city may, upon five (5) days'
notice, discontinue service to a customer's premises for failure to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter or city rules and regulations. (Ord. 202,
5-26-1992)
6-5-14: RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
Restoration of service after discontinuance for nonpayment of bills shall be
made after payment of current and past due charges plus a restoration of
service charge and posting a deposit as provided in subsections
6-5-11F5 and
6-5-5B of this chapter.
Restoration of service after discontinuance of service for unsafe facilities,
water waste, fraud, abuse, unauthorized turn on or for noncompliance with this
chapter or any of the policies, rules and regulations of the city will only be
made after the irregularity has been corrected and the city has been assured
that the irregularity will not reoccur. In addition, a rule violation
restoration charge shall be required in addition to any other charges due or
past due that the city may have incurred to correct the irregularity. (Ord.
202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-15: UNUSUAL DEMANDS:
When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a pond, or
for other purposes, arrangements must be made with the city prior to taking
such water.
Permission to take water in unusual quantities will be given only if the city
facilities and other consumers are not inconvenienced. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-16: ACCESS TO PROPERTY:
All duly appointed employees of the water department, under the direction of
the water superintendent, shall have free access, after reasonable notice to
the customer is given, at all reasonable hours of the day to any and all parts
of structures and premises in which water is or may be delivered for the
purposes of inspecting connections, the conditions of conduits and fixtures,
and the manner and extent in which the water is or may be delivered for the
purposes of inspecting connections, the conditions of conduits and fixtures,
and the manner and extent in which the water is being used. The water
department or city does not, however, assume the duty of inspecting the
customer's line, plumbing and equipment, and shall not be responsible therefor.
(Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-17: RESPONSIBILITY FOR EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Responsibility For Customer Equipment: The city shall not be liable for
any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defect in the
customer's line, plumbing or equipment, nor shall the city be liable for loss
or damage due to interruption of service or temporary changes in pressure. The
customer shall be responsible for valves on his premises being turned off when
the water service is turned on.
   B.   Responsibility For Water Department Equipment: Water department
equipment on the customer's premises remains the property of the city and may
be repaired, replaced or removed by the water department employees at any time
without consent of the customer and the city and water department shall not be
liable for any damage resulting therefrom. No payment will be made to the
property owner for the right to install, maintain, replace or remove city
equipment on his premises. The property owner must keep vicious dogs or other
animals secured or confined to avoid interference with the water department
operations and maintenance.
   C.   Damage To City Equipment: The customer shall be liable for any damage
to equipment owned by the city which is caused by an act or negligence of the
customer, its tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees.
Damage to equipment shall include, but not be limited to, breaking of seals and
locks, tampering with meters, injury to meters, including, but not limited to,
damages by hot water, steam, and damaged meter boxes, curb stops, meter stops
and other appurtenances. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-18: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Operation: No person or persons, other than those designated and
authorized by the water department shall open any fire hydrant belonging to the
city, attempt to draw water from it or in any manner damage or tamper with it.
Any violation of this regulation will be prosecuted under applicable state and
federal law. No tool other than special hydrant wrenches shall be used to
operate a hydrant valve. In cases where a temporary service has been granted
and the temporary service received water through a fire hydrant, an auxiliary
external valve will be provided to control the flow of water.
   B.   Moving A Fire Hydrant: If a property owner or other party desires to
change the size, type, or location of the hydrant, the property owner shall
bear all costs of such changes. Any changes in the location of a fire hydrant
must be approved by the city, which shall obtain consent from the local
firefighting authorities. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this chapter or the
rules and regulations as adopted by this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall for each offense be punished by
a fine as provided in Idaho state code. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
6-5-20: SUSPENSION OF RULES:
No employee of the water department is authorized to suspend or alter any of
the policies, rules and regulations cited herein without specific approval or
direction of the city council, except in cases of emergency involving loss of
life or property or which would place the water system operation in jeopardy.
(Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-21: EASEMENT:
Each applicant and user gives and grants to the city of Eagle an easement and
right of way on and across his property for the installation of water mains and
the necessary valves and equipment in connection therewith. (Ord. 202, 5-26-
1992)
6-5-22: CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
The standards for construction and design pertaining to this chapter shall be
established by the council by resolution upon passage of this chapter and shall
be reviewed annually and updated by resolution of the council. (Ord. 202, 5-26-
1992)
6-5-23: DONATION OF WATER SYSTEMS TO THE CITY:
   A.   Design Standards: All newly constructed water systems shall be designed
according to the city construction and design standards as it pertains to water
systems.
   B.   Water Systems Shall Be Dedicated To The City: All newly constructed
domestic drinking water systems, constructed after the enactment of this
chapter within the water service area, must be dedicated to the city, at the
city's option, after the city inspects such system for compliance with the
construction and design standards. Included in the public dedication of the
water system, the water system owner must also provide a reasonable right of
way and easement to allow for maintenance and service of the water system.
(Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
   C.   Conditions Of Annexation And/Or Approval Of New Development: As a
condition of annexation into the city and/or as a condition of approval of new
development within the city, the landowner and/or developer shall:
      1.   Secure suitable surface water rights adequate to satisfy all
irrigation, aesthetic, amenity, or recreation needs of the proposed development
and/or property proposed to be annexed. Said water rights must be valid,
existing water rights recognized by the Idaho department of water resources
(the "department"). If any transfer, amendment or other proceedings are
required under Idaho Code or department rule or regulation for the city's use
of such water, the owner and/or developer shall be solely responsible for the
city's costs of completing the same and the city's costs of obtaining all
necessary approvals from the department as a condition of annexation and/or
development, including costs associated with mitigation;
      2.   Secure suitable ground water rights adequate to satisfy all ground
water needs of the proposed development and/or property proposed to be annexed
and transfer or assign said water rights to the city for inclusion into the
city's municipal water supply system. Said water rights must be valid, existing
water rights permitted or licensed by the department. If any transfer,
amendment or other proceedings are required under Idaho Code or department rule
or regulation for the city's use of such water, the owner and/or developer
shall be solely responsible for the city's costs of completing the same and the
city's costs of obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from the
department as a condition of annexation and/or development, including costs of
mitigation;
      3.   Pay for the city's costs of construction of municipal supply well(s)
necessary to meet the demands of the proposed annexed property and/or new
development. The city engineer shall determine the necessary location, number,
and capacity of well(s) based upon the proposed development or other
improvements. Said wells shall be constructed to city standards. The owner and/
or developer shall be solely responsible for the city's costs of obtaining all
necessary permits and approvals for such wells as a condition of annexation
and/or development, including the costs of any required mitigation. The design
and construction of municipal supply wells shall be reviewed and inspected by
the city engineer;
         a.   At the option of the city, demands arising from more than one
development may be served by a single well or centralized well with the costs
thereof apportioned to the participating developments in proportion to their
water demands.
      4.   Any well construction or development of ground water resources shall
be prohibited within the city's municipal water service area except as may be
set forth in a development agreement or by a special purpose permit issued by
the building official and approved by the city council.
      5.   The requirements for obtaining surface water rights for irrigation,
aesthetic, amenity, or recreation needs may be waived if the city determines
that the landowner and/or developer is entitled to a waiver under subsection 9-
4-1-9C2 of this code and that the landowner and/or developer cannot secure
surface water rights by appropriation or transfer to the proposed development
and/or property proposed to be annexed.
      6.   Nothing in this subsection shall require the transfer or assignment
of a water right represented by shares of stock in a canal company. (Ord. 530,
10-18-2005)
6-5-24: CONTRIBUTION OF PROPORTIONATE OFF SITE CONSTRUCTION COSTS:
   A.   Water Construction Equivalency Fee: Notwithstanding any of the
provisions of this chapter, any person or property owner who has not otherwise
paid for, or contributed proportionately toward the costs and expenses of
constructing a water line, drilling necessary wells, development of storage
facilities or reservoirs, or construction of distribution lines whether that
construction has been performed by the city, a local improvement district or a
private entity, or combination thereof, and who subsequently desires to connect
to the city water system, shall be required to pay, in addition to the required
service connection charges and the monthly user charges, an additional
connection charge which shall be known and referred to as the "Water
Construction Equivalency Fee".
   B.   Determination Of Payment: In determining who has or has not paid, or
contributed proportionately, toward the costs and expenses of constructing a
water line, the sole factor shall be whether that user, or a predecessor in
title of the user's property, has in fact, paid consideration to the city in
cash, services, or in kind, for the construction of the water main or trunk
line to which the user now desires to connect, which consideration is
commensurate with what the user, or his predecessor in title, would have paid
under this section had the user not paid or contributed previously to the cost
of construction of the water line.
   C.   Water Construction Equivalency Fee Established By Council Resolution:
The water construction equivalency fee for each parcel of ground served by the
new water line shall be established and set by the council by resolution upon
passage of this chapter and shall be reviewed annually and updated by
resolution of the council, which shall consider the use to which the property
will be put, the expected water demand, and the amount of delivery capacity of
the line that will be used by the proposed use.
   D.   Considerations For Determination Of Water Construction Equivalency Fee:
The council shall also take into consideration the amount of land that might be
able to be serviced by the water line whether the land to be benefited is
directly adjacent to the line or not and shall also take into consideration the
cost of the engineering and construction of the line, in current dollars and
shall consider the interest that could have been earned on the money used to
pay for the original water line. The water construction equivalency fee may be
different for residential, commercial, and industrial uses and may be different
for different uses within those classifications depending upon the
considerations referenced above and may also vary as to whether the property to
be served is within or outside the city limits. (Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-25: COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Cooperative Agreements: Should a customer or developer, at its own
expense, construct an extension to the water system in a public right of way or
easement according to the city's construction and design standards, with prior
approval of the city, and which water line extension has been determined by the
city to be able to benefit properties other than the customer's or developer's,
the customer or developer constructing the extension may request that the city
enter into an agreement with the customer or developer such that all or a
portion of the costs of extending the water line will be reimbursed to that
water developer from the service connection charges collected from those
property owners who will benefit from the water line extension and who
otherwise have not paid or contributed their proportionate share to the
construction costs of that water line and who are required to pay the water
construction equivalency fee. The city may require the customer or developer to
construct an oversized line, where it is determined that a larger water line is
necessary to serve other areas in the future.
   B.   Discretion Of Council: The city shall not be required to enter into any
such agreement and the decision as whether or not to enter into any such
agreement shall be at the sole discretion of the city council.
      1.   Duration: No reimbursement agreement shall have a duration greater
than ten (10) years unless the city is a beneficiary of the agreement.
      2.   Reimbursement Limitation: No reimbursement agreement shall pay to
the water user, paying for or constructing a water line extension, more than
one hundred percent (100%) of their actual engineering and construction costs,
it being noted that in most cases at least some of the cost would ordinarily be
assessed to the water user's own property.
      3.   Interest: A reimbursement agreement may provide for interest to be
paid to the customer or developer.
      4.   Administrative Fee: The city shall charge a ten percent (10%)
administrative fee for handling the accounting, auditing, and payment of the
reimbursement payments made to the developer or customer so extending the water
line under the reimbursement agreement with the city.
      5.   Nonassignable: The reimbursement agreement shall be personal to the
user entering into it and shall not be assigned without the written consent of
the city, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld.
      6.   Termination: The agreement will terminate when the user has been
fully reimbursed.
      7.   Binding On Successors: The agreement shall be binding on the water
user and its assigns, successors, heirs, and executors and may be recorded as
an encumbrance against the property of the water user.
   C.   Indemnification: The water user shall be required to indemnify and hold
the city harmless from any and all liability whatsoever until the water line
has been accepted for maintenance by the city; said lines, after acceptance,
shall become part of the city water system and become the sole property of the
city.
   D.   City May Initiate: Where the city constructs a water line extension, in
conjunction with another person or entity, the city may enter into a
reimbursement agreement as authorized above such that the city is reimbursed
for its costs of construction, engineering, legal costs and interest. (Ord.
202, 5-26-1992)
6-5-26: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city is authorized and empowered to issue rules and regulations necessary
for operation of the water system consistent with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 202, 5-26-1992)
CHAPTER 5
WATER SYSTEM
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Purpose And Scope
6-5A-2: Protection Of Water Supply
6-5A-3: Use Of Backflow Prevention Devices
6-5A-4: Cross Connection Inspections
6-5A-5: Additional Remedies
6-5A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this article, in conjunction with the 2009 Idaho state plumbing
code and Idaho Code section 37-2102, is to protect the health and safety of
water consumers that are provided water service from the city of Eagle
municipal water system by the control of actual and/or potential cross
connections through the installation, inspection, and testing of approved
backflow prevention devices. The city of Eagle is empowered to eliminate or
control all cross connections throughout its service area. (Ord. 636, 11-24-
2009; amd. Ord. 690, 1-8-2013)
6-5A-2: PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in
use by the purveyor unless the water supply is protected by backflow prevention
devices whenever required by this article. The installation or maintenance of a
cross connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable water
supply of the city shall be unlawful and is prohibited and shall be penalized
as hereinafter provided. Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter
installed is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the same shall be
abated as provided by law for any public nuisance. The control or elimination
of the cross connections shall be in accordance with this article and the
regulations, together with the latest edition of appropriate manuals of
standard practice pertaining to cross connections control, approved by the
director. The engineer shall have the authority to establish requirements more
stringent than state regulations, if he deems that the conditions so dictate.
Such requirements shall be published and available to the public at the city
hall. The purveyor shall adopt and publish rules and regulations as necessary
to carry out the provisions of this article, and shall have such rules and
regulations available in published form to the public. Backflow prevention
devices required by this article are intended to protect the city of Eagle
municipal water system. Once water, supplied by the city, has been provided to
a customer, and backflow prevention devices have been required and installed by
the customer, that customer shall be responsible for the installation of any
additional, on premises, backflow prevention devices for the further protection
of waters supplied to the premises downstream of the backflow prevention device
required by this article. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
6-5A-3: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Location Of Backflow Prevention Devices: Backflow prevention devices
shall be installed at the point of entry of any premises where, in the judgment
of the purveyor or the health officer, the nature and extent of the activities
or the materials stored on the premises would present an immediate and/or
dangerous hazard to health and/or be deleterious to the quality of the water
should a cross connection occur; even though such cross connection does not
exist at the time the backflow prevention device shall be installed in all
premises under circumstances including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply.
      2.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable,
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain
whether or not cross connections exist.
      3.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist.
      4.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
      5.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters.
      6.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
or stored in such a manner that if backflow should occur, a serious health
hazard might result.
      7.   The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above
categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public
water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these
facilities unless the purveyor and the director determine that no hazard
exists:
   Car washes.
   Chemical plants using a water process.
   Fire sprinkler systems.
   Food or beverage processing plants.
   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, laboratories.
   Irrigation and/or residential sprinkler systems.
   Metal plating industries.
   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
   Piers and docks.
   Radioactive material processing plants.
   Sewage treatment plants.
   Water processing plants.
      8.   Other premises, as specified by the engineer, superintendent or
health officer, where backflow prevention devices are required to protect the
public water supply.
   B.   Type Of Device: The type of protective device required shall depend on
the degree of hazard which exists. The following backflow prevention devices
shall be installed in accordance with the current edition of the "Accepted
Procedures And Practices In Cross Connection Control" manual of the American
Water Works Association or the following requirements whichever is the more
stringent. The following backflow prevention devices shall not be installed in
such a manner as to be subject to flooding, freezing, incidental damage, or
exposed to corrosive fumes:
      1.   Air gap separation: To be installed in situations where elimination
of cross connection or backflow is critical. Separation between the end of the
potable water system and the rim of the receiving vessel, tank, or fixture,
shall be not less than one inch (1") or two (2) times the inside diameter of
the potable water system piping, whichever is greater.
      2.   Reduced pressure backflow assembly: To be installed where the public
water supply may be contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic
nature or other contaminant which, should backflow or cross connection occur,
would create a serious threat to the public water supply. This device shall be
installed, as a unit, between two (2) resilient seated valves, to allow
testing, twelve inches (12") from the finish grade or floor to the bottom of
the backflow assembly and not more than five feet (5') above finish grade. Must
be installed horizontally.
      3.   Double check valve assembly: Shall be installed, as a unit, between
two (2) resilient seated valves, for testing, twelve inches (12") from the
finish grade to the bottom of the backflow preventer, and not more than five
feet (5') above finish grade. Must be installed horizontally.
      4.   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly: Shall be installed, as a unit,
between two (2) resilient seated valves, to allow testing, twelve inches (12")
above all downstream piping, openings, and sprinkler heads and not more than
five feet (5') above finish grade.
      5.   Atmospheric vacuum breaker: Shall be installed twelve inches (12")
above all downstream piping, openings, and sprinkler heads, and not more than
five feet (5') high. There shall be no valves of any type or size downstream of
an atmospheric breaker.
   C.   Location Requirement: Backflow prevention devices required by this
article shall be located within the facility requiring the backflow prevention
so as to be readily accessible for maintenance, testing, and inspection,
furthermore, where no part of the device will be submerged. Installation in
pits is prohibited.
   D.   Installation Requirement: Backflow prevention devices required by this
article shall be installed under the supervision of and/or with the approval of
the purveyor.
   E.   Facility And Design Standards; Cross Connection Control: There shall be
no connection between the distribution system and any pipes, pumps, hydrants,
water loading stations, or tanks whereby unsafe water or other contaminating
materials may be discharged or drawn into a public water system. The water
purveyor is responsible through its cross connection control program to take
reasonable and prudent measures to protect the water system against
contamination and pollution from cross connections through premises isolation
or containment, internal or in plant isolation, fixture protection, or some
combination of premises isolation, internal isolation, and fixture protection.
      1.   Testable Assemblies: All double check valve backflow prevention
assemblies, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies, spill
resistant vacuum breakers, and pressure vacuum breakers used, must pass a
performance test conducted by the University Of Southern California Foundation
For Cross-Connection Control And Hydraulic Research.
      2.   Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers: All atmospheric vacuum breakers shall
be marked approved either by the International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) or by the American Society Of Sanitation Engineers
(ASSE).
      3.   Resilient Seated Shutoff Valves: Resilient seated shutoff valves
shall be used when double check valve backflow prevention assemblies, reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies, and pressure vacuum breakers
are installed. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
      4.   Assembly Selection: Appropriate and adequate backflow prevention
assemblies for various facilities, fixtures, equipment, and uses of water must
be selected either from the "Pacific Northwest Cross Connection Control
Manual", the 2009 Idaho state plumbing code, the environmental protection
agency's "Cross Connection Control Manual", the USC "Manual Of Cross-
Connection Control" or other sources deemed acceptable by the department. The
selected assembly must comply with local ordinances. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009;
amd. Ord. 690, 1-8-2013)
These devices shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the
customer.
   F.   Facility And Design Standards; Operating Criteria For Public Water
Systems:
      1.   Cross Connection Control Program; Community Water Systems: The water
purveyor is responsible through its cross connection control program to take
reasonable and prudent measures to protect the water system against
contamination and pollution from cross connections through premises isolation,
internal or in plant isolation, fixture protection, or some combination of
premises isolation, internal isolation, and fixture protection. Pursuant to
section 543 of IDAPA 58.01.08, all suppliers of water for community water
systems shall implement a cross connection control program to prevent the
entrance to the system of materials known to be toxic or hazardous. The water
purveyor is responsible to enforce the system's cross connection control
program. The program will at a minimum include:
         a.   An inspection program to locate cross connections and determine
required suitable protection. For new connections, suitable protection must be
installed prior to providing water service. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
         b.   Required installation and operation of adequate backflow
prevention assemblies. Appropriate and adequate backflow prevention assemblies
for various facilities, fixtures, equipment, and uses of water must be selected
from either the "Pacific Northwest Cross Connection Control Manual", the 2009
Idaho state plumbing code, the environmental protection agency's "Cross
Connection Control Manual", the USC "Manual Of Cross- Connection Control", or
other sources deemed acceptable by the department. The assemblies must comply
with local ordinances. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009; amd. Ord. 690, 1-8-2013)
         c.   Annual inspections and testing of all installed backflow
prevention assemblies by a tester licensed by a licensing authority recognized
by the department. Testing shall be done in accordance with the test procedures
published by the University Of Southern California Foundation For Cross-
Connection Control And Hydraulic Research. See the USC "Manual Of Cross-
Connection Control".
         d.   Discontinuance of service to any facility where suitable backflow
protection has not been provided for a cross connection.
   G.   Inspections: Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this
chapter, except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be inspected and tested upon
installation and annually thereafter, or more often if necessary. Inspections,
tests and maintenance shall be conducted by persons certified by the state of
Idaho and shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever a device is found to be
defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the customer's
expense. Copies of all test reports shall be sent to the city of Eagle public
works department. Copies of all test reports shall be maintained at the
premises and shall be available for inspection if so requested by the
superintendent or state health official.
   H.   Underground Sprinkling Devices: No underground sprinkling device will
be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from
which the water for irrigation is taken from the public water supply.
   I.   Termination Of Water Service: Failure of the customer to cooperate in
the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention
devices required by this article and the regulations, shall be grounds for
termination of water service to the premises. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
6-5A-4: CROSS CONNECTION INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the
city or within areas served by the city water until the same shall have been
inspected by the purveyor for possible cross connections and have been approved
as being free of the same.
   B.   Any construction for industrial or other purposes which is classified
as hazardous facilities pursuant to section 6-5A-3 of this article, where it is
reasonable to anticipate intermittent cross connections, or as determined by
the director, shall be protected by the installation of one or more backflow
prevention devices at the point of entry from the public water supply into the
premises or any other location designated by the purveyor.
   C.   Inspections shall be made periodically of all buildings, structures or
improvements of any nature now receiving water through the city's system, for
the purpose of ascertaining whether cross connections exist. Such inspections
shall be made by the purveyor. Advance notification of inspections for all
properties shall be made in writing no later than five (5) business days prior
to the inspection. Properties which are not made available for inspection may
be deemed a potential cross connection hazard and water services may be
terminated until the required inspection is completed. In such instances that
cross connections are found to exist, those buildings, structures and/or
improvements shall have an established schedule for annual inspections and
reports to be completed by a licensed inspector and sent to the city of Eagle.
(Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
6-5A-5: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected within the time
limit set by the superintendent, or in the event the purveyor is refused access
to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections
exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is
corrected to the purveyor's satisfaction. In addition, the purveyor may effect
the necessary repairs or modifications at the expense of the property owner and
refuse delivery of water to the property until the costs thereof shall have
been paid. (Ord. 636, 11-24-2009)
CHAPTER 6
UTILITY OPERATION FRANCHISES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Grant Required
6-6-2: Application
6-6-3: Bond
6-6-4: Term Of Franchise
6-6-5: Rights Of City
6-6-6: Rights Of State
6-6-7: Lease Or Assign Franchises
6-6-8: Termination Or Forfeiture
6-6-9: Conditions And Restrictions
6-6-1: GRANT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate any water system, electric, telecommunication
distribution system or gas distribution system over, under or upon any real
property within the limits of the city, unless he or she shall have obtained a
franchise therefor, pursuant to this chapter, except insofar as he or she may
be entitled to do so by direct authority of the constitution or statutes of the
state of Idaho or of the United States; provided, that nothing herein shall be
construed to preclude a person presently operating such a system and holding a
certificate of convenience and necessity therefor from operating such system
within the territory to which said certificate pertains as of the date of
enactment of this chapter. Where an existing electric, natural gas,
telecommunication or water public utility exists, and no franchise has been
applied for, the city, may adopt an ordinance creating such franchise. (Ord.
416, 5-21-2002)
6-6-2: APPLICATION:
An applicant for a franchise shall file with the council an application
therefor, accompanied by a deposit of money to be set by the council to
guarantee the payment of all expenses connected with such application, which
application shall state the rights sought to be obtained and the amount of the
bid of the applicant for such rights and privilege. If the city is applying for
a franchise for an existing public utility, a fee need not be provided. Within
thirty (30) days from the adoption, approval and publication of a franchise
ordinance, the franchisee shall provide the Idaho public utilities commission
with a certification of the franchise fee. (Ord. 416, 5-21-2002)
6-6-3: BOND:
The successful bidder for any franchise or privilege awarded hereunder shall
file a bond running to the city if required by the council in a sum by it to be
prescribed and set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise, conditioned
that such bidder shall well and truly observe and faithfully perform each and
every term and condition of such franchise and that in case of any breach or
default of any condition of such franchise the city shall be entitled to actual
damages suffered and incurred as the result of such breach or default and such
damages shall be recoverable from the principal and surety upon such bond.
(Ord. 416, 5-21-2002)
6-6-4: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The maximum length of time for which a franchise may be granted to any person,
except for railroads, shall be fifty (50) years. (Ord. 416, 5-21-2002)
6-6-5: RIGHTS OF CITY:
The grant of every franchise shall be subject to the right of the city, whether
reserved or not, to make all regulations which shall be necessary to secure, in
the most ample manner, the safety, welfare and accommodations of the public,
including among other things, the right to pass and enforce ordinances to
protect the public from danger and inconvenience in the operation of any work
or business authorized by the grant of the franchise, and the right to make and
enforce all such regulations as shall be reasonably necessary to secure
adequate, sufficient and proper service and accommodations for the people and
ensure their comfort and convenience. (Ord. 208, 7-28-1992)
6-6-6: RIGHTS OF STATE:
The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right of the
state, whether reserved or not, to prescribe and regulate the rates, fares,
rentals or charges made for the service rendered under such franchise. (Ord.
208, 7-28-1992)
6-6-7: LEASE OR ASSIGN FRANCHISES:
Any franchise granted by the city shall not be leased, assigned or otherwise
alienated without the express consent of the city, and no dealings with a
lessee or assignee on the part of the city to require the performance of any
act or payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee shall be deemed to
operate as such consent; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the grantees of such franchise from including it in a mortgage or trust
deed executed for the purpose of obtaining money for corporate objects. (Ord.
208, 7-28-1992)
6-6-8: TERMINATION OR FORFEITURE:
Every ordinance granting any franchise shall provide for the termination or
forfeiture thereof upon breach or failure to comply with any of the terms,
limitations or conditions thereof, and in all such cases the council shall have
power to declare the termination and forfeiture of any such franchise the same
as though in each instance such power was expressly reserved. (Ord. 208, 7-28-
1992)
6-6-9: CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
The enumeration and specification of particular matter which must be included
in every franchise granted, shall not be construed to impair or limit the right
and power of the city to insert in such franchises all such other and further
conditions and restrictions as the council may deem proper to protect the
city's interests. (Ord. 208, 7-28-1992)
CHAPTER 7
PARKS COMMITTEE
SECTION:
6-7-1: Creation And Purpose Of Parks Committee
6-7-2: Duties
6-7-3: Expenditures
6-7-4: Regulations
6-7-5: Tree Planting
6-7-6: Removal Of Trees
6-7-7: Removal Of Traffic Hazards
6-7-8: Pruning
6-7-9: Injurious Pests Or Diseases
6-7-10: Action By The City
6-7-11: Authority Of The City
6-7-12: Appeal
6-7-13: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
6-7-14: Penalties
6-7-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE OF PARKS COMMITTEE:
The city hereby establishes and creates a committee which shall be called the
parks committee. The committee shall follow the guidelines of the "The Eagle
Tree Plan" in the Eagle comprehensive plan as well as the regulations
stipulated herein.
The purpose of the committee is to carry out the parks program, as constituted
by the duties of the committee set forth in this chapter, within the city. The
committee shall serve under the direction and supervision of the city council
and shall consist of a minimum of five (5) members: one member shall be the
planning and zoning administrator, one member shall be a parks maintenance
worker, one member shall be a council member, and one or more members shall be
at large.
In lieu of appointing a parks committee the council may direct the design
review board to act as the parks committee. For the purpose of this chapter, if
the design review board is directed to act as the parks committee, wherever
"Parks Committee" is referred to, "Design Review Board" shall apply and where
"Committee" is used, "Board" shall apply. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-2: DUTIES:
   A.   The parks committee shall have the following duties:
      1.   The committee shall review and approve or reject all landscaping
applications required to be submitted by this chapter for the development of
parks and landscaped areas and planting of street trees, and shall oversee such
development and planting, for the welfare of trees, shrubs and other
vegetation, in and upon public rights of way, public lands, entrances to
subdivisions and commercial district property within the city.
      2.   The committee shall supervise the planting, spraying, pruning and
maintenance of trees and shrubs in and upon public rights of way, public lands,
entrances to subdivisions and commercial and industrial district property
within the city.
      3.   The committee shall take measures to assure preservation or removal
of trees and shrubs to ensure the symmetry and beauty of landscaping in and
upon public rights of way, public lands, entrances to subdivisions and
commercial district property within the city.
      4.   The committee shall seek to preserve any trees or areas of trees
within the city determined by the committee to be of significant value or of
historical significance. A study shall be initiated by the committee to list
such trees or areas of trees, which list shall be known as the city tree
inventory list.
      5.   The committee shall require the pruning, spraying or removal of
trees and shrubs upon private property upon finding such action is necessary to
prevent the spread of injurious pests or disease to trees and shrubs in and
upon public rights of way, public lands, entrances to subdivisions and
commercial district property within the city.
      6.   The committee shall prepare a street tree list consisting of
acceptable trees for planting in and upon public rights of way, public lands,
entrances to subdivisions and commercial district property within the city. The
list shall describe varieties, including their cold hardiness and size, and
proper planting, including tree spacing, and post planting care instructions.
The guidelines for planting and maintenance set forth in the "Sunset Western
Garden Book", 1992 edition, shall be followed.
      7.   The committee shall ensure that trees and shrubs are pruned as
required in section
6-7-8 of this chapter.
      8.   The committee shall review and approve or reject applications for
planting, pruning or removing trees in or upon public rights of way, public
lands, entrances to subdivisions and commercial and industrial district
property within the city.
   B.   In performing the duties set forth in this section, the committee shall
consult, as appropriate, with the Ada County highway district or any other
governmental entity having control of public rights of way or public land
within the city. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-3: EXPENDITURES:
The committee may expend, subject to the approval of the city council, funds
and goods that it receives from public or private sources. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-4: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Irrigation: All persons occupying commercial or industrial property
shall design and develop it with a pressurized irrigation system in accordance
with the Eagle design review ordinance 1 . All entrances to subdivisions shall
be designed and developed by the developers thereof with sprinkler systems.
   B.   Landscaping: Landscaping applications and plans must be submitted to
and approved by the committee, prior to any person landscaping public rights of
way, public lands, entrances to subdivisions or commercial or industrial
district property within the city.
   C.   Perimeter Screening: When perimeter screening is required by this code,
it shall be done in a manner approved by the committee.
   D.   Subdivision: Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, the
entrance to a subdivision within the city shall be landscaped by the developer
of the subdivision in the manner approved by the committee no later than six
(6) months after approval by the city of the subdivision final plat. The
developer shall maintain the entrance until it is conveyed to a homeowners'
association or another entity able to consistently maintain the entrance. (Ord.
300, 9-9-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 2, article A of this code.
6-7-5: TREE PLANTING:
No person shall plant a tree in or upon a public right of way, public land,
entrance to a subdivision or commercial or industrial district property within
the city without first submitting an application to the committee and obtaining
the committee's approval thereon. The approval of the Ada County highway
district must also be obtained by an applicant prior to planting any tree in
any right of way controlled by Ada County highway district. Applications for
tree planting shall be filed with the zoning administrator. (Ord. 300, 9-9-
1997)
6-7-6: REMOVAL OF TREES:
No person shall remove a tree from a public right of way, public land, or
commercial or industrial district property within the city without submitting
an application to the city and obtaining the city’s approval thereon.
Applications for tree removal shall be filed with the zoning administrator.
(Ord. 300, 9-9-1997; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; amd. Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
6-7-7: REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC HAZARDS:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to remove
from his or her property any tree, shrub or other vegetation obstructing sight
so as to constitute a traffic hazard. Sight obstruction shall not extend more
than three feet (3') in height above the existing center line highway elevation
within the vision triangle of vehicle operators. The boundaries of the vision
triangle are defined by measuring from the intersection of the edges of two (2)
adjacent highways forty feet (40') along each highway and connecting the two
(2) points with a straight line. The sight distance obstruction is also
applicable to railroad-highway grade crossings with the vision triangle defined
by measuring forty feet (40') along the railroad property line.
   B.   When the city determines upon the basis of an engineering investigation
that a traffic hazard exists, it shall notify the owner of the property upon
which the traffic hazard exists, it shall notify the owner of the property upon
which the traffic hazard is located and order that the traffic hazard be
removed within fifteen (15) days. The failure of the owner to remove the
traffic hazard shall constitute a misdemeanor, and every day the owner fails to
remove the obstruction shall be a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 300, 9-
9-1997)
6-7-8: PRUNING:
   A.   All trees and shrubs located within an entrance to a subdivision shall
be pruned by the developer or the homeowners' association.
   B.   All trees and shrubs located within a public right of way shall be
pruned by the abutting property owner, with the exception of a city maintained
right of way, which shall be pruned by the city.
   C.   All trees and shrubs located upon property within a commercial or
industrial district within the city shall be pruned by the owner of said
property or the person occupying the property.
   D.   Pruning shall not be done in a manner that negatively impacts the shape
of the tree, as shall be determined by the city. Exceptions may be permitted if
approved in writing by the city in cases such as when undesirable pruning is
needed to protect overhead utility lines. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-9: INJURIOUS PESTS OR DISEASES:
   A.   All injurious pests and diseases infecting any tree within the city are
hereby declared to be public nuisances.
   B.   The owner of the property abutting a public right of way, public land,
entrance to a subdivision or commercial or industrial district property within
the city, the trees or shrubs upon which property are infected with any
injurious pests or diseases, shall stop the infestation of said pests, and
their eggs or larvae, and spread of said disease, to any tree or shrub located
in or upon said right of way, public land, entrance to a subdivision or
commercial or industrial district property. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-10: ACTION BY THE CITY:
In the event the owner of, or the owner of property abutting, a public right of
way, public land, entrance to a subdivision or commercial or industrial
district property within the city fails to eradicate injurious pests, including
their eggs or larvae, or disease, the city, after reasonable notification to
the owner, may take appropriate action to eradicate the injurious pests of
disease, under the supervision of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 300, 9-9-
1997)
6-7-11: AUTHORITY OF THE CITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city from
eradicating injurious pests and disease or pruning trees or shrubs in or upon a
public right of way, public land, entrance to a subdivision or commercial or
industrial district property. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-12: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the zoning administrator may appeal to
the committee by submitting an appeal application and required fee. The
committee shall hold a hearing upon reasonable notice being given to the
appellate. Any person aggrieved by the action of the committee may appeal to
the city council by submitting an appeal application and required fee. (Ord.
300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-13: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for
processing applications required by this chapter and for other matters
pertaining to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Said schedule
shall be posted in Eagle City Hall and may be amended only by the city council.
Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application appeal. (Ord. 300, 9-9-1997)
6-7-14: PENALTIES:
Any violation of a provision of this chapter shall be an infraction and shall,
upon conviction or a finding of guilt thereof in the court of Ada County,
Idaho, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL FIBER-OPTIC SYSTEM
SECTION:
6-8-1: Purpose
6-8-2: Definitions
6-8-3: Ownership, Control And Management
6-8-4: No Obligation To Serve
6-8-5: Applicability
6-8-6: Transfer Of Rights Prohibited
6-8-7: Billings
6-8-8: Limitations
6-8-9: Rights Of Way
6-8-10: Liability For Interruptions
6-8-11: Shut-Down For Repairs
6-8-12: Interference With The Fiber-Optic System
6-8-13: Protection Of The Customer’s Equipment
6-8-14: Tampering With Fiber-Optic System Prohibited
6-8-15: Theft Of Access Or Use
6-8-16: Violations And Penalties
6-8-17: Required Municipal Fiber Infrastructure Construction
6-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a City owned municipal fiber-optic
system which provides digital access to meet the needs of:
   A.   Residents;
   B.   Businesses;
   C.   City departments;
   D.   Public safety;
   E.   Community anchor institutions;
   F.   Other publicly owned and operated facilities.
To protect the public right of way by improving both the management and
regulation of competing demands through the elimination of duplicate fiber-
optic facilities within the public right of way.
To reduce the cost of maintaining the sidewalk, pavement and public facilities
located within the public right of way by minimizing the number of pavement
cuts and dislocation of other public facilities necessitated by the
construction or installation of multiple fiber-optic facilities.
To foster competition among retail broadband service providers by providing
open access to the Eagle municipal fiber-optic system.
To protect the cost of broadband services by eliminating anti-competitive
pricing schemes or monopolistic practices which contribute to higher costs for
broadband services.
To protect the ability of retail broadband service providers to reach
subscribers and provide service without undue competition or regulation by a
tax-supported entity.
To encourage the systematic development of the Eagle municipal fiber system and
in turn maximize the availability of network, Internet Protocol, and broadband
services to residents and businesses within the City of Eagle.
To protect and control access to public right of way, and to extend life of
City streets and other publicly owned infrastructure and reduce the cost of
ongoing maintenance by encouraging cooperation between utility companies,
public agencies, and City departments.
To create local resilience and the ability to support local communication if
access to an internet exchange point is temporarily cut off or in the event of
a cyber-attack on public internet infrastructure.
To enable network services which require a greater level of privacy, security,
or reliability than is available across the public internet. (Ord. 864, 5-24-
2022)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed below:
                              Access to or use of the fiber system in the form
ACCESS:                       of either lit transport service or dark fiber
                              strand leasing.
CITY:                      The City of Eagle, Idaho.
                              Refers to a tube, duct, structure, boxes or other
CONDUIT:                   device designed for enclosing fiber optic or
                              copper networking cables.
CUSTOMER:                     A retail or wholesale user of the fiber-optic
                              system.
                              The point of connection on an Optical Network
                              Terminal or Network Interface Device at which the
DEMARCATION POINT:         municipal fiber-optic system ends, and a point of
                              interconnection is established for the customer's
                              use.
                              Refer to wires, cables, conduit, switches,
                              transmission equipment or other equipment for use
FACILITIES OR INFRASTRUCTURE: in transmitting or processing network, Internet
                              Protocol, or broadband services or for providing
                              support or connection to such equipment.
                              A high-speed data transmission medium. It
FIBER-OPTIC CABLE:            contains tiny glass or plastic filaments that
                              carry light beams. Digital data is transmitted
                              through the cable via rapid pulses of light.
                              The designee appointed by the Mayor that is
FIBER-OPTIC DIRECTOR:         responsible to oversee fiber-optic operations as
                              set forth in City Code and policy.
FIBER-OPTIC SYSTEM:           The City owned fiber-optic system, including all
                              fiber, facilities, equipment, and appurtenances.
                              A set of rules for routing and addressing packets
INTERNET PROTOCOL (IP):       of data so that they can travel across networks
                              and arrive at the correct destination.
PROVIDER:                     A retail Internet Protocol (IP) service provider.
                              Means the area across, along, beneath, in, on,
                              over, under, upon, and within public alleys,
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY or ROW:   boulevards, courts, lanes, roads, sidewalks,
                              spaces, streets, and other publicly owned
                              property within the City of Eagle.
                              Any future or current, retail or customer
SERVICE:                      network, IP, or broadband service which may be
                              transported utilizing the fiber-optic system.
SUBSCRIBER:                   A current or potential provider customer.
                              Lit transport service consisting of Ethernet
TRANSPORT:                    services as supported by the municipal fiber-
                              optic system. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
 
6-8-3: OWNERSHIP, CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT:
The City shall have exclusive and complete ownership, control, and management
of the fiber-optic system within all demarcation points, which shall include
the device or interface provided for interconnection. The City may make such
rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation of the fiber-optic
system both inside and outside the City limits. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-4: NO OBLIGATION TO SERVE:
The City shall have no obligation to provide access to any provider or
subscriber. The City reserves the right to limit or refuse access at its sole
discretion, provided access shall not be denied or limited contrary to law
including, but not limited to, on the basis of race, religion, age, national
origin, or gender. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-5: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the fiber-optic system.
Nothing herein shall be construed or deemed to regulate the delivery of
communications or data services over or across lines, facilities, or equipment
owned by a private communications provider, or which may be in the public right
of way pursuant to a franchise, lease, or other license or privilege granted by
the City. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-6: TRANSFER OF RIGHTS PROHIBITED:
All rights to access and any rights or privileges arising under the provisions
of this chapter shall not be transferred to any person or entity without the
express written approval of the Fiber Optic Director. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-7: BILLINGS:
Municipal fiber-optic system access and installation shall be billed to the
customer in accordance with a schedule of fees and rates as established by
Resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-8: LIMITATIONS:
Fiber-optic system access may be supplied under a given rate schedule provided
that the fiber-optic system can meet the requirements of the rate schedule
applicable thereto. The City shall not be obligated to construct extensions or
install additional facilities necessary to meet a customer's needs, except as
explicitly authorized by the Fiber Optic Director.
Nothing herein shall be construed or deemed to prevent the City from
negotiating separate contracts with any customer solely for the purpose of
obtaining assistance in constructing or installing additional infrastructure
for the benefit of said customer. Such negotiations shall be handled by the
Fiber Optic Director and approved by City Council. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-9: RIGHTS OF WAY:
At the City's discretion in order to receive access, transport, or
infrastructure services, the City may require the customer and/or the land
owner's dedication or conveyance of a utility easement in order to facilitate
the installation, operation, and maintenance of the City's fiber system, over,
across and upon property owned or controlled by the customer/land owner. Such
utility easement may also be used for the purpose of connecting and providing
access to other customers of the City. Such utility easement shall permit
access thereto by authorized representatives of the City both for initial
installation and for maintenance and/or repairs thereafter at all reasonable
hours or at any time in any emergency. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-10: LIABILITY FOR INTERRUPTIONS:
The City shall not be liable for any loss, injury, or damage of any kind,
including, but not limited to, consequential, special, and punitive damages,
resulting from the interruption, reduction, loss, or restoration of access from
any cause, including without limitation any loss by fire, flood, accident,
casualty, sabotage, terrorist act, strike, labor slow-down, act of God or the
public enemy or failure or inadequacy of the fiber-optic system. The City
disclaims any express or implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose and the delivery of access to any customer shall not be
construed as or deemed to be the delivery of goods under the Idaho Uniform
Commercial Code. By acceptance of transport or infrastructure, the customer
agrees to, and shall be deemed to, waive all claims for damage or loss to the
customer's lines, facilities, or communications equipment caused by any act or
omission of the City, however, nothing herein shall be deemed or construed as a
waiver of any claim for damage or liability arising out of the gross negligence
or malicious act of the City, or its agents. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-11: SHUT-DOWN FOR REPAIRS:
For the purpose of making necessary repairs, upgrades, or changes to the
municipal fiber-optic system, or to avoid damage to property or to persons, the
City may without prior notice to the customer suspend access for such periods
as may be reasonably necessary to make such repairs, upgrades or changes and
the City shall not be liable for damage of any kind, direct or indirect,
because of such discontinuance of access. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-12: INTERFERENCE WITH THE FIBER-OPTIC SYSTEM:
The City may refuse to supply access where there is a possibility that the
delivery of such may seriously impair or disrupt any other customers, or which
may disrupt the operation of the fiber-optic system. The City may also
discontinue or disconnect access for a customer if the customer, by their use
of the fiber-optic system, impairs any other customer's use of the fiber-optic
system. The City may also, without prior notice, suspend or disconnect any
customer using the fiber-optic system for the purposes of delivering any virus,
spam, spyware, denial of service attacks, or any other illegal or malicious
purpose which has the effect of or is intended to impair or impede the
operation of the fiber-optic system, the internet, or any public or private
computer or computer network connected thereto or for the purpose of obtaining
illegal or unauthorized access to other computers or networks connected to the
fiber-optic system. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-13: PROTECTION OF THE CUSTOMER'S EQUIPMENT:
The customer is solely responsible for the selection, installation and
maintenance of all equipment and wiring on the customer side of the demarcation
point. The customer shall install and maintain suitable protective devices and
equipment to protect life and property from harm or injury and the City assumes
no duty to warn or otherwise assist the customer in the selection or use of
such protective devices. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-14: TAMPERING WITH FIBER-OPTIC SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
Other than City representatives working under the supervision of the Fiber
Optic Director, no person shall connect to, adjust, tamper with, or make any
alteration or addition to the fiber-optic system, without having first obtained
written permission from the Fiber Optic Director. Any person who willfully or
maliciously causes damage to, interference with or obstruction to the efficient
operation of the fiber-optic system shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
person who causes such damage shall in addition to any criminal fines or
penalties, be liable to the City for any reasonable damages which may be
proximately caused by such damage or interference. Such amounts may be included
upon the customer's regular monthly billing statement for utility service and
upon the customer's failure or refusal to pay such charges, fiber-optic system
access or any other public utility service provided by the City, may be
terminated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-15: THEFT OF ACCESS OR USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to or install or
construct any facility or equipment with the specific intent of obtaining
access from or making use of the fiber-optic system, without paying for such
access or without paying the fees and charges established by the provisions set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor
and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 864, 5-24-2022)
6-8-17: REQUIRED MUNICIPAL FIBER INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Requirements For Public Development:
      1.   Unless waived by the City Council based on undue burden, or an
unfavorable cost-benefit analysis, or the consideration of other relevant
factors, the City of Eagle will install or have installed communications
conduit whenever the City undertakes or authorizes the following types of
projects:
         a.   New street, road, sidewalk, bike path, or other transportation
infrastructure construction.
         b.   Maintenance, repaving, or other significant work on the above
infrastructure.
         c.   Excavations for the purpose of installing utilities, including,
but not limited to, communications, electrical, gas, water, wastewater, storm
drainage.
         d.   Other excavations, or work on public property on in the public
right of way that provide a similar opportunity to install conduit for future
use at a low additional cost.
      2.   When determining if a particular specification is feasible or
practicable, the Fiber-Optic Director will consider the added cost, the length
of the conduit installed (and therefore its potential future value), the impact
on the overall project, and other relevant factors.
         a.   In general, the cost of purchasing, installing, and documenting
conduit may be included in the cost of the overall project. However, other
sources of funds may also be used if available.
      3.   Conduit installed by or on behalf of the City, will be owned by the
City.
      4.   A record of all City-owned conduits will be maintained and
transferred into a geographic information system (GIS) whenever feasible.
   B.   Requirements For Private Development:
      1.   A private developer or development entity will install or have
installed communications conduit and fiber-optic cable whenever the developer
or applicant undertakes the following types of projects that are contiguous
with existing communications conduit infrastructure or fiber-optic cable:
         a.   New street, road, sidewalk, bike path, or other transportation
infrastructure construction.
         b.   Maintenance, repaving, or other significant work on the above
infrastructure.
         c.   Excavations for the purpose of installing utilities, including
but not limited to communications, electrical, gas, water, wastewater, sewer,
or storm drainage.
         d.   Other excavations, or work on public property on in the public
right of way that provide a similar opportunity to install conduit and fiber-
optic cable for future use at a low additional cost.
      2.   Conduit installed by or on behalf of the City, will be owned by the
City.
      3.   All fiber-optic cable will be installed by the City unless otherwise
approved by the Director.
      4.   A record of all City-owned conduits will be maintained and
transferred into a geographic information system (GIS) whenever feasible. (Ord.
864, 5-24-2022)
TITLE 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Short Title And Purpose
7-1A-2: Codes Adopted
7-1A-3: IBC Building Code Amendments
7-1A-4: IRC Building Code Amendments
7-1A-5: Minimum Standards For Modular Non-HUD Structures
7-1A-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF EAGLE BUILDING CODE
ORDINANCE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and
requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare, by
regulating and controlling, the design, construction, erection, alteration,
moving, demolition, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and
maintenance of all buildings and structures in the city. (Ord. 506, 1-25-2005)
7-1A-2: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   The following codes, except as herein amended are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein, and shall apply in the
city as the amended building code for the city of Eagle. This chapter shall
include rules and regulations governing all grading and building activity
including: erection, construction, enlargement, alterations, repair, moving,
removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and
maintenance of buildings or structures, installation requirements for
manufactured homes. It shall be unlawful to engage in any grading or building
activity without complying with the rules and regulations as contained in this
chapter and the codes adopted herein. The following codes and portions thereof
are on file in the office of the city clerk, in accordance with Idaho Code,
section 50-901. That the approved editions of the following nationally
recognized codes, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code
board, are adopted as the official building codes of the city of Eagle, Idaho,
except as otherwise provided in this code:
International building code, 2012 edition, including all rules promulgated by
the board to provide equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with
disabilities act accessibility guidelines and the federal fair housing act
accessibility guidelines.
International building code, 2012 edition, appendix J, grading, as amended.
Idaho residential code, 2012 edition, parts I-IV and IX.
International energy conservation code, 2012 edition.
International mechanical code, 2012 edition.
International fuel gas code, 2012 edition.
Uniform code for building conservation, 1997 edition, published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials.
International existing building code, 2012 edition, published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials.
International fire code, 2012 edition.
National electrical code, 2014 edition.
Uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition, published
by the International Conference Of Building Officials.
Safety code for elevators and escalators; elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators
and moving walks, ASME A17.1-1996, published by the American National Standards
Institute.
The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by
successive versions of such codes as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho
building code board effective on the date any such codes are made effective by
the Idaho building code board. (Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
7-1A-3: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
IBC section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the city
of Eagle, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
IBC section 101.4, Reference Codes, subsections 101.4.3, 101.4.4 are deleted.
IBC section 105.2, subsections on electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing are
deleted and repealed.
IBC section 105.3.2 is amended to read as follows:
105.3.2 Expiration Of Plan Review. Applications for which no permit is issued
within 180 days following the date of receipt of application shall expire by
limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be
returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building
official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not
exceeding 180 calendar days on request by the applicant showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from
being taken. No application shall be extended more than twice. In order to
renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit
plans and pay a new plan review fee.
IBC section 105.5 is amended to read as follows:
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the
provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180
calendar days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work
is commenced for a period of 180 calendar days.
The timeframe by which a project shall be deemed to be suspended or abandoned
shall be measured from the date of the last major inspection that resulted in
an approval to move to the next stage of construction by the city of Eagle or
if no inspection has been required then a project shall be deemed to be
suspended 180 calendar days from the date the permit was issued. The major
inspections that can be required from the city of Eagle include grading
inspection, footing/foundation inspection, concrete slab or under-floor
inspection, lowest floor elevation inspection, framing inspection, lath or
gypsum board inspection, fire resistant penetration inspection, energy
efficiency inspection or special inspections. However, the building official
may extend a permit based on a good faith effort made by the permit holder as
determined by the building official. A good faith effort may include but is not
limited to an inspection performed by city inspectors to verify that
substantial amount of code compliant work has been performed and that
significant progress has occurred towards the next stage of inspection.
   a. New Permit Required After Expiration. Before work on the site can be
recommenced after expiration, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so,
and the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit
provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work, that the work is still possible given current
conditions, and that work has not been suspended or abandoned for more than one
year from the last recorded major inspection or good faith effort determined by
the building official. In such cases, a new permit shall not be issued after
expiration when the original review was performed using a previously adopted
code.
   If more than one year has passed since the permit has expired or the city
has adopted a new version of the building code, then the applicant shall apply
for a new permit and the plans will be subject to a new plan review process and
related permit fees.
   The building official shall have the authority to deny the new permit which
utilizes the requirements of the expired permit unless the permittee made a
good faith effort to complete the project and reasons beyond their control
resulted in suspension or abandonment of the project. The permittee must show
that the building or work will be duly completed without further delay, if the
building official renews the permit.
   b. Permit Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply
for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit,
when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this
section. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee
for a period not exceeding 180 calendar days on written request by the
permittee with written evidence provided demonstrating that a good faith effort
to complete the project has been made and that reasons beyond the control of
the permittee have resulted in a delay. Under no condition shall a permit be
extended more than once.
   c. Demolition And/Or Restoration Of Property After Permit Expiration. Once a
permit has expired and the building official has determined that said permit
shall not be renewed, the permittee/owner shall have 90 calendar days to
demolish any partially erected structures and/or restore the property to the
same condition that it was in at the time of the issuance of the original
permit, or to a condition acceptable to the building official.
   d. Council Action. If the permittee/owner does not return the property to
the condition that it was in at the time the original building permit was
issued, or to a condition acceptable to the building official, then, after
providing adequate notice to the permittee/owner, the building official shall
cause the matter to be heard before city council. The council shall hear the
matter and may order the property to be restored to the same condition it was
in at the time of the issuance of the original building permit, or to the
condition that was ordered by the building official, or any other action it
deems necessary. This action may result in the demolition or restoration of a
structure or portion thereof. A tax lien shall be placed against the property
for any work that the building official must undertake to restore the property.
If demolition/restoration is necessary, the city shall follow the procedure set
forth in the city code for abatement of dangerous buildings.
IBC section 105.7 is amended to read as follows:
105.7 Permit Transfer. A building permit shall be transferable to another party
if such party can provide a document signed and notarized by the original
permit holder consenting to the transfer itself and all agreements and
conditions incorporated into the original permit approval. A permit may also be
transferred back to the property owner or owner's designated legal agent in
cases where the property owner has terminated their legal relationship with
their contractor or owner's designated legal agent. An administrative fee for
the transfer of the permit will be assessed for the work performed by city
staff to facilitate the transfer based on an hourly rate of $50.00.
IBC section 105.7 is to be renumbered to section 105.8 and is to read as
follows:
105.8 Placement Of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the
site of the work until completion of the project.
IBC section 107.1 and the exception are amended and add subsection 107.1.1 to
read as follows:
107.1 General. Submittal documents, special inspection and structural
observation programs, and other data as required by the city of Eagle
commercial construction guidelines shall be submitted with each application for
a permit. These plans and specifications shall be prepared, signed and sealed
by an architect licensed by the state of Idaho under section 54-309, Idaho
Code, as amended. For buildings or structures, not principally architectural,
the design of which involves principally engineering considerations, the plans
and specifications may be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer licensed by the state of Idaho and qualified in the engineering
specialty involved.
Exceptions: Nothing contained above shall be held or construed to have any
application to or prevent or affect the following:
1. Buildings which are multiple living units not to exceed four (4) units.
2. Groups R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding three (3) stories in height above
grade.
3. Interior tenant improvements not exceeding a total for the entire tenant
space of 1,500 square feet for existing A, B, E, F1, F2, M, S1, and S2
occupancies.
107.1.1 Food-Products Preparations Or Sales. Plans and specifications to
construct, build, repair or alter a building or structure wherein foods, food
products or beverages are prepared, manufactured, concocted or stored for
either sale at retail or wholesale shall be submitted to and approved by
Central district health prior to applying for a building permit.
For the purpose of this subsection the term foods, food products or beverages
shall mean and include all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or
condiment, whether simple, mixed or compound, and all substance or ingredients
used in the preparation thereof designed for human consumption.
IBC section 107.2.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
107.2.5.1 Design Flood Elevations. All construction within flood hazard areas
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Eagle city Flood
Control Regulations, title 10, Eagle city code.
IBC section 108.1 is amended to read as follows:
108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures and temporary uses having an overnight stay. Such permits
shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more
than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for
demonstrated cause. Approvals for other temporary structures and uses that do
not involve an overnight stay shall be regulated by the zoning ordinance and
fire department.
IBC section 109.6 is amended to read as follows:
109.6 Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize a refund of any fee paid
hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
The building official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the
plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review
fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.
The building official shall not authorize a refund of any fee paid except on
written application filed by the original permittee or owner's representative
not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
IBC section 110.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
110.3.3 Lowest Floor Elevation. In addition to the initial certificate required
at the time of permit application in flood hazard areas, upon placement of the
lowest floor, including the basement, a second elevation certification is
required in accordance with the Eagle city Flood Control Regulations, title 10,
Eagle city code, and shall be submitted to the building official prior to the
request for a framing inspection.
IBC section 111.1.1 is a new section to read as follows:
111.1.1 Commercial Occupancy Request. Where work not requiring a building
permit is occurring and a commercial tenant lacks a certificate of occupancy,
desires to obtain a certificate of occupancy or is required to obtain a
certificate of occupancy from the city agency, the Eagle city building
department shall create a permit application with a review and inspection
process in order to issue a new certificate of occupancy. A fee of $50 will be
assessed for this process.
IBC section 111.3 is amended to read as follows:
111.3 Temporary Occupancy. If the building official finds that no substantial
hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the
same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for the
use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion
of the entire building or structure. A temporary occupancy is set at a time
period of 90 days. Multiple time extensions of a maximum of 90 days each may be
granted when requested in writing to the building official when a good faith
effort is demonstrated by the permit holder. In no case shall a temporary
occupancy extend beyond one (1) year.
IBC section 112.1 is amended to read as follows:
112.1 Connection Of Service Utilities. A final inspection and approval is
required upon completion and prior to occupancy and use of all buildings and
structures for connection of service utilities. Lack of building official
approval may result in the termination of utility services to said building or
structure and prosecution under IBC section 114.3.
IBC section 112.3 is amended to change title only. The title to read as
follows:
112.3 Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities For Unsafe Conditions.
IBC section 112.4 is a new section to read as follows:
112.4 Authority Of Disconnect For Occupancy Violations. Whenever any building
or structure or equipment therein regulated by this code is being used contrary
to the provisions of this code and/or other laws which are enforced by the city
of Eagle, the building official may order such use discontinued and the
structure, or portion thereof, vacated and the utility services disconnected by
notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall
discontinue the use or make the structure or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of this code, and/or other laws which are enforced by the city of
Eagle, within a time period of thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice or as
designated by the building official.
IBC section 113.1 is amended to read as follows:
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals consisting of all members of the Eagle city council. The building
official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said
board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board may
adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the
building official.
IBC section 113.3 is deleted and repealed.
IBC section 113.4 is a new section to read as follows:
113.4 Appeals To The Board.
   A.   Application For Appeal. Any applicant for a permit, whose application
has been rejected by the city, or any person who has been ordered by the city
to modify, alter, remove or install any building code provisions as defined in
the Eagle city code may within ten (10) days thereafter, request an appeal by
filing notice in writing with the city. The city shall deliver such notice to
the board, who shall fix and establish a time, date, and place of hearing
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the receipt of notice and cause a
copy of the notice of hearing to be mailed to the appealing parties. At the
hearing the board may, by a majority vote, affirm, annul, or modify the action
of the city. If the actions of the city are modified or annulled, a permit
shall be issued accordingly.
   B.   Appeal Fee. Any person appealing from the decision of the city shall
attach to the written request for appeal a certified check for two-hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) made out in favor of the city of Eagle.
IBC section 113.5 is a new section to read as follows:
113.5 Appeal Procedure. The building code board may receive all evidence on
appeal, in accordance with the following procedure:
   A.   The building official or designee shall present background information
on the project in question, including relevant code sections and their
interpretation. The board may ask questions during or after each presentation.
   B.   Applicant shall be allowed to present any information or applicable
code sections to support a reversal of the building official's decision. The
applicant shall have up to twenty (20) minutes to present such evidence.
   C.   The chair shall open the hearing to receive public testimony. Each
person wishing to provide public testimony shall be given up to five (5)
minutes to do so.
   D.   Following the close of public testimony, the building official or
designee shall be allowed up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal.
   E.   The applicant then shall have up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal and
any final comments.
   F.   The chairman of the board may allocate equivalent additional time to
the applicant and the building official or his designee if the clarity of the
issue at hand can be enhanced by receiving additional testimony.
   G.   Thereafter, the board may deliberate and render a final decision by a
roll call vote, may request more information before a final decision is made,
or may take the matter under advisement and reconvene at a reasonable time not
to exceed fifteen (15) days to make their final decision. The final decision
shall be in writing and a copy provided to the applicant and any parties of
record. The decision by the board may be appealed to the city council within
ten calendar (10) days following the date of issuance of a written decision.
IBC section 114.4 is amended to read as follows:
114.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for not more than one hundred and eighty
(180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any
portion thereof during which any violation of this code occurs or continues
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable as herein provided.
IBC section 114.4.1 is a new section to read as follows:
114.4.1 Civil Penalties. Any person or its agent violating any provision of
this code may have civil penalties assessed against them. Notice of said
penalties shall be served upon the violator personally by a city code
enforcement officer. If personal service is not made, service may be
effectuated by certified mail to the last known business address or residential
address of the violator. A new violation may be filed for each day the
violation continues. The violation will have a date by which the civil penalty
shall be paid and if it is not paid by that date, the city may pursue
collections through court and ask the court to reimburse for all costs and fees
associated with collecting the penalty.
Civil penalties shall be issued pursuant to the following guidelines:
If the violation does not create a serious life safety hazard, the city shall
warn the person violating the code. If the violation continues or a subsequent
violation is discovered, the city may issue a civil penalty. If the violation
creates a serious life safety hazard, then a civil penalty may be imposed even
though a prior warning was not given.
IBC section 114.3.2 is a new section to read as follows:
114.3.2 Civil Penalties Appeal Procedure.
   1.   Upon receipt of written notice of a civil penalty, the violator shall
within ten (10) days pay the penalty or file a written request for a hearing
with the city of Eagle building code board hereafter referred to as "the
board". Such written notice shall be accompanied by a check for one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) made payable to the city of Eagle. If the civil penalty
imposed against the applicant is overturned by the board, the review fee shall
be returned. Notice of the public hearing for the review hearing shall be given
by the department mailing the notice to the last known address provided by the
applicant. Upon issuance of the decision, applicant shall have fourteen (14)
calendar days within which to pay the civil penalty.
   2.   When determining if a civil penalty is warranted, the board shall
consider the following:
      (1)   If the violation does not create a serious life safety hazard, did
the city warn the person or his agent violating the code prior to issuing a
civil penalty; (2) Did the violation continue or was a subsequent violation
discovered, that warranted the city to issue a civil penalty; (3) Did the
violation create a serious life safety hazard, so that the city was warranted
in issuing a civil penalty even though a prior warning was not given; (4) Did
the person or his agent regularly take out permits, and thus should have had
knowledge of what the code required; (5) Did the person or his agent receive
adequate warning notice of the code violation or a similar code violation; (6)
Does the person or his agent regularly violate the code.
The decision by the building code board may be appealed to the city council
within ten calendar (10) days following the date of issuance of a written
decision. If the city council renders a final decision imposing the civil
penalty against the appellant, the appellant shall have fourteen (14) calendar
days from such decision within which to pay the civil penalty.
IBC section 115.4 is a new section and reads as follows:
115.4 Investigation Fees, Work Without A Permit. Whenever any work for which a
permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for
such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by
this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee
set forth in section 109.2. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law. All re-inspections shall be charged at a
rate of fifty ($50.00) dollars or as otherwise set by resolution duly adopted
by the city council.
IBC section 116.1 is amended to read as follows:
116.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment deemed unsafe shall be taken
down and removed or made safe in accordance with provisions of the uniform code
for the abatement of dangerous buildings as adopted by the city of Eagle, and
as set forth in other applicable local, state and/or federal laws.
IBC sections 116.2 through 116.5 are deleted and repealed.
IBC section 202 Definitions: Townhouse is amended as follows:
202 Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached
units, separated by property lines and each unit extends from the foundation to
roof and with open space on at least two sides.
IBC section 305.2.3 is amended to read as follows:
305.2.3 Twelve Or Fewer Children In A Dwelling Unit. A facility within a
dwelling unit and having twelve or fewer children receiving such day care shall
be classified as a group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the international
residential code and applicable city, state and federal laws.
IBC section 308.6.4 is amended to read as follows:
308.6.4 Persons Receiving Care In A Dwelling Unit. A facility within a dwelling
unit and having twelve or fewer children receiving day care or having five or
fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a group R-
3 occupancy or shall comply with the international residential code and
applicable city, state and federal laws.
IBC section 310.5 Residential Group R-3 is amended to read as follows:
310.5 Residential Group R-3. Residential occupancies where the occupants are
primarily permanent in nature and not classified as R-1, R-2, R-4, E or I,
including:
i. Buildings that do not contain more than two (2) dwelling units;
ii. Boarding houses (nontransient) with sixteen (16) or fewer occupants;
iii. Boarding houses (transient) with ten (10) or fewer occupants;
iv. Care facilities that provide accommodations for five (5) or fewer persons
receiving care;
v. Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with sixteen (16) or fewer
occupants;
vi. Congregate living facilities (transient) with ten (10) or fewer occupants;
or
vii. Dwelling units providing day care for twelve (12) or fewer children.
IBC section 310.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
310.5.1 Care Facilities Within A Dwelling. Care facilities for twelve (12) or
fewer children receiving day care or five (5) or fewer persons receiving care
that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the
international residential code and applicable city, state and federal laws.
903.2.7 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in accordance
with sections 903.2.8, 903.2.9 and 903.2.10 of the 2012 international building
code.
IBC section 1503.1 is amended to read as follows:
1503.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings
secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Roof coverings shall be designed, installed and maintained in
accordance with this code and the approved manufacturer's installation
instructions such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or
structure.
IBC table 1507.9.6 Wood Shake Material Requirements is amended and reads as
follows:
      TABLE 1507.9.6
      WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
 
Material                               Minimum Grades Applicable Grading Rules
Wood shakes of naturally durable wood  1              CSSB
Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable 1              CSSB
wood
Preservative-treated shakes and        1              CSSB
shingles of naturally durable wood
Fire-retardant-treated shakes and      1              CSSB
shingles of naturally durable wood
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes
of southern yellow pine treated in
accordance with AWPA standard U1       1              TFS
(commodity specification A, use
category 3B and section 5.6)
 
   CSSB = Cedar shake and shingle bureau.
   TFS = Forest products laboratory of the Texas forest services.
IBC table 1507.9.8 Wood Shake Weather Exposure And Roof Slope is amended and
reads as follows:
      TABLE 1507.9.8
      WOOD SHAKE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE
 
Roofing Material            Length (Inches) Grade Exposure (Inches) 4:12 Pitch
                                                  Or Steeper
Shakes of naturally durable 18              No. 1 7.5
wood                        24              No. 1 10a
Preservative treated taper  18              No. 1 7.5
sawn shakes of southern     24              No. 1 10
yellow pine
Taper sawn shakes of        18              No. 1 7.5
naturally durable wood      24              No. 1 10
 
   For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
   a.    For 24 inch by 0.375-inch handsplit shakes, the maximum exposure is
7.5 inches.
IBC section 1608.1 is amended to read as follows:
   1608.1 General. Design snow loads shall be determined in accordance with
section 7 of ASCE 7, but the design roof load shall not be less than a uniform
snow load of 25 psf.
IBC section 1608.2 is amended to read as follows:
   1608.2 Ground Snow Loads. The ground snow load to be used in determining the
design snow loads for the city of Eagle shall be 20 psf (Pg).
IBC sections 1612.1 through 1612.5 are repealed and replaced with the
following:
   All construction within flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with and as defined by title 10, Flood Control, of the Eagle city
code.
IBC section 1809.5 is amended to read as follows:
   1809.5 Frost Protection. Except where erected on solid rock or otherwise
protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of
buildings and structures larger than 400 square feet (37 m2) in area or 10 feet
(3048 mm) in height shall extend below the frost line of the locality, and
spread footings of adequate size shall be provided where necessary to properly
distribute the load within the allowable load-bearing value of the soil.
Alternatively, such structures shall be supported on piles where solid earth or
rock is not available. Footings shall not bear on frozen soils unless such
frozen condition is of a permanent character. Frost depth for the city of Eagle
to be 24 inches below grade unless another depth is recommended upon a
foundation investigation.
IBC section 1809.5 Exception is deleted and repealed.
IBC table 2902.1 Footnote F is amended to read as follows:
   Table 2902.1 Footnote F. Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant
load of thirty (30) or fewer.
IBC table 2902.1 Footnote G is amended to read as follows:
   Table 2902.1 Footnote G. For business occupancies, excluding restaurants,
and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of thirty (30) or fewer,
service sinks shall not be required.
IBC section 3401.5 Dangerous Conditions is amended to read as follows:
   3401.5 Dangerous Conditions. The building official shall have the authority
to require the elimination of conditions deemed dangerous. Conditions deemed
dangerous shall be removed or made safe in accordance with provisions of this
code or the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings as adopted by
the city of Eagle and applicable city, state and federal laws.
IBC section 3401.6 Alternative Compliance is amended to read as follows:
   3401.6 Alternative Compliance. Work performed in accordance with the
international existing building code shall be deemed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Where life safety issues are not specifically
addressed by the IEBC the provisions of the IBC shall apply at the discretion
of the building official.
IBC sections 3403.2, 3404.2, 3405.5 and 3409.2 Flood Hazards are amended to
read as follows:
   3403.2, 3404.2, 3405.5 And 3409.2 Flood Hazards. All construction within
flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with title
10, Flood Control, of the Eagle city code.
2012 international building code appendix J, "Grading", is hereby adopted
subject to amendments as a part of the building code of the city of Eagle:
Subject to the amendments included herein and to the provisions of design
standards adopted by resolution or as further described herein and to those
other requirements of Eagle city code that pertain to grading and drainage as
regulated under said appendix J , "Grading".
IBC appendix J is hereby amended as follows:
   IBC building code amendment, appendix J, section J101.2 Flood Hazard Areas
is deleted and replaced with the following:
   Other Pertinent Sections: Other sections of Eagle city code that pertain to
requirements for grading and drainage include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   EC 9-4-1-10, "Storm Drainage; Flood Controls";
   EC 9-5-3, "Hillside Subdivisions";
   EC 9-5-7, "Subdivision Within A Floodplain";
   EC 9-5-8, "Subdivision Within An Area Of Critical Concern";
   EC title 10, "Flood Control".
IBC building code amendment, appendix J, section J103.1 Permits Required is
amended to add the following text:
   Grading permit applications shall be presented to the city of Eagle. The
application form as adopted for this purpose by resolution of the city council
shall be accompanied by the required grading plan, volume calculations, and
grading permit fee as determined from the grading permit fee schedule as
adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. Grading and earth-
moving work shall not begin until a grading permit has been issued by the city
of Eagle.
IBC building code amendment, appendix J, section J103.1.1 Grading Fees is a new
section to read as follows:
   J103.1.1.1 General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by the Eagle city council.
   J103.1.1.2 Plan Review Fees. A plan review fee shall be paid at the time of
submitting plans and specifications for review by the zoning administrator.
Plan review fees shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted
by the Eagle city council.
   J103.1.1.3 Grading Permit Fees. A fee for each grading permit shall be paid
to the building official upon issuance of building permits. Grading permit fees
shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the Eagle city
council.
IBC appendix J, section J103.2 Exemptions J103.2.1 is deleted and replaced with
the following:
   1. Lawn and garden grading involving less than 1,000 cubic yards of material
and not changing drainage flow patterns nor the soil supporting any permanent
structure or rigid (cement concrete, asphaltic concrete, or mortared masonry)
surfacing, nor affecting neighboring properties nor public easements, may be
approved by the building official without submittal of a grading plan as
hereafter described, but is not exempt from permitting or any provision of this
ordinance.
IBC appendix J, section J103.2.8 is a new section to read as follows:
   8. Agricultural earth moving at locations in agricultural zones or that are
being farmed are exempt from permitting under this section.
IBC J104.2 IBC building code amendment, appendix J, section J104.2 Site Plan
Requirements is amended to add the following text:
   The grading plan required per IBC J104.2 shall show, in addition to the
items therein listed: a reference bench mark with reference point elevation,
location (plane coordinates or bearing-distance tie to legal corner) and
description, for each 10 (ten) acres of surface or part thereof; design finish
elevations at finish change-of-slope points; and elevation basis equation if
elevations shown are on a basis other than current NGVD datum. The grading plan
required per IBC J104.2 shall be accompanied by a drainage report, referenced
to drainage pathways and retention facilities shown on the grading plan, that
sets forth the provisions for compliance with the storm water retention
requirements included in EC 9-4-1-10, with supporting design calculations per
the "design standards for storm drainage retention facilities" as referenced in
EC 9-4-1-10.H.
IBC J104.3 IBC building code amendment, appendix J, section J104.3 Soils Report
is amended to add the following text:
   Information given in the soils report as required by IBC J104.3 shall also
include water table data adequate to infer peak-season water table at all
points where excavation will be performed. In particular, such information
shall be sufficiently detailed and accurate to support evaluation of the
probability of seasonal flooding of crawl spaces. Soils study shall contain
site specific study data prepared by a soils engineer or geologists licensed in
the state of Idaho and must include the following items:
      1. Soil classifications at all horizons
      2. In place soil density at all horizons
      3. Safe load baring capacity at normal footing depth
      4. Any identified usage limitations
   For every grading project, the grading permit applicant shall provide a
storm water pollution prevention plan certification. If the project is exempt
from the requirements of the EPA construction general permit, the applicant
shall certify in writing that it is exempt. If a storm water pollution
prevention plan is required pursuant to the requirements of the EPA
construction general permit, the applicant shall certify that the plan has been
prepared and duly filed with EPA. In this case, the applicant shall also
certify that the plan was adhered to during construction, as a condition to
receive occupancy.
   Grading plans required herein shall be submitted for proposed subdivisions
at the preliminary plat application stage. Subdivision development is subject
to the grading permit requirements. Grading plans for proposed residential
subdivisions shall show:
   a.   Existing and finish elevation at each lot corner, at the curb at the
point of extension of each side lot line, and at the bottom of flow line of
each drain course at every point where it crosses a lot line, and the minimum
floor elevation for the house that will be built on the lot, as determined
applying the vertical separation and slope standards of item (c) following;
   b.   Drainage pattern type for each lot. Drainage pattern types are:
      i.   Type A: Lot drains to curb;
      ii.   Type B: Lot front drains to curb, and remainder of lot drains to
rear of lot;
      iii.   Type C: Entire lot drains to rear of lot;
      iv.   Type D: Lot drains to side lot line.
   Where lots are graded as types B, C and D, drainage not flowing to curb must
be accommodated by a drainage retention system per EC 9-4-1-10, and transferred
to the retention system by an interconnected system of drainage courses located
in drainage easements. Flow lines of such drainage courses shall be centered at
least five feet from lot lines that lie parallel to them, to give protection to
fencing materials from water damage.
   c.   The following minimum vertical separation and minimum grade standards
apply to residential subdivision grading plans:
      i.   Vertical separation highest ground surface to lowest finish floor
0.67 feet;
      ii.   Slope downward from house across first adjacent ten feet 0.5 feet;
      iii.   Slope of lawn and landscape areas between ten and twenty feet from
house 2 percent (downward from house) minimum;
      iv.   Slope of drain-way flow lines 0.5 percent minimum, downward toward
receiver;
      v.   Slope of impervious hard-surfaced areas (cement concrete, asphaltic
concrete and mortared masonry - does not apply to stepping stones, free-set
flagstones or un-mortared paving blocks or paving bricks) 0.5 percent minimum.
   Commercial and industrial developments may apply these standards or present
engineering analysis and design demonstrating adequacy (for the 100-year storm
criterion) of a site-specific design.
IBC J104.3 "Exceptions", is deleted and replaced with the following:
   Exceptions to separation and slope standards: building official may allow
exceptions through written endorsement of detailed plan documents, provided
applicant supplies engineering analysis and design calculations that
demonstrate that house and garage are adequately protected against backup of
direct runoff from the hundred-year storm event.
IBC J107 IBC building code amendment, appendix J, section J107 Fills is amended
to add the following text:
   In areas subject to EC 9-5-3, the requirements of EC 9-5-3 supersede the
provisions of section J107 where the provisions of the two sections differ.
(Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
7-1A-4: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
IRC section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code For
One- And Two-Family Dwellings of the city of Eagle, and shall be cited as such
and will be referred to herein as "this code."
IRC section 101.2 Scope delete exceptions no. 1 and no. 2. Replace no. 2 with
the following:
   No. 2, owner-occupied lodging houses with three (3) or fewer guestrooms
shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the international
residential code for one- and two-family dwellings. Such occupancies shall be
required to install smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms in accordance with
sections R314 and R315, respectively, of the international residential code for
one- and two-family dwellings.
IRC section R102.7 is amended to read as follows:
   R102.7 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on
the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the international fire
code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety
and welfare of the occupants and the public.
IRC section 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Delete item no. 2 and item no. 7 and
replace with the following, and add the following item no. 11:
   2. Fences not over six (6) feet (one thousand, eight hundred twenty-nine
(1829) mm) high may be exempted from the requirement for a building permit in
the absence of any other applicable land use regulations governing the
installation, height, type or other aspect.
   7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are not greater than four (4) feet (one
thousand, two hundred nineteen (1219) mm) deep.
   11. Flag poles.
IRC section 105.2.1 Emergency Repairs is amended to read as follows:
   R105.2.1 Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next working business day or at a time required by the building
official.
IRC section R105.2.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not
required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alter of,
replacement or relocation of any, gas piping, combustion vent, electric wiring
or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
IRC section R105.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R105.3.1.1 Determination Of Substantially Improved Or Substantially Damaged
Existing Buildings In Flood Hazard Areas. For applications for reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or
structures located in an area prone to flooding as established by table R301.2
(1), the Eagle city floodplain administrator shall examine or cause to be
examined the construction documents for the proposed work. For buildings that
have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall
include the cost to repair the building or structure to its pre-damage
condition. All substantially improved or reconstruction of existing structures
shall be made in accordance with the Eagle city flood control ordinance.
IRC section R105.3.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R105.3.2 Time Limitation Of Application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of
filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued. The building official is authorized to grant an extension not to
exceed 180 days each. Extensions will only be granted with requests in writing
by the applicant with justifiable cause demonstrated. Applications will not be
granted more than twice.
IRC section R105.5 is amended to read as follows:
   R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the
provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180
calendar days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work
is commenced for a period of 180 calendar days.
   The timeframe by which a project shall be deemed to be suspended or
abandoned shall be measured from the date of the last major inspection that
resulted in an approval to move to the next stage of construction by the city
of Eagle or if no inspection has been required then a project shall be deemed
to be suspended 180 calendar days from the date the permit was issued. The
major inspections that can be required from the city of Eagle include grading
inspection, footing/foundation inspection, concrete slab or under-floor
inspection, lowest floor elevation inspection, framing inspection, lath or
gypsum board inspection, fire resistant penetration inspection, energy
efficiency inspection and special inspections. However, the building official
may extend a permit based on a good faith effort made by the permit holder as
determined by the building official. A good faith effort may include but is not
limited to an inspection performed by city inspectors to verify that
substantial amount of code compliant work has been performed and that
significant progress has occurred towards the next stage of inspection.
      a. New Permit Required After Expiration. Before work on the site can be
recommenced after expiration, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so,
and the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit
provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work, that the work is still possible given current
conditions, and that work has not been suspended or abandoned for more than one
year from the last recorded major inspection or good faith effort determined by
the building official. In such cases, a new permit shall not be issued after
expiration when the original review was performed using a previously adopted
code.
      If more than one year has passed since the permit has expired or the city
has adopted a new version of the building code, then the applicant shall apply
for a new permit and the plans will be subject to a new plan review process and
related permit fees.
      The building official shall have the authority to deny the new permit
which utilizes the requirements of the expired permit unless the permittee made
a good faith effort to complete the project and reasons beyond their control
resulted in suspension or abandonment of the project. The permittee must show
that the building or work will be duly completed without further delay, if the
building official renews the permit.
      b. Permit Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply
for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit,
when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this
section. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee
for a period not exceeding 180 calendar days on written request by the
permittee with written evidence provided demonstrating that a good faith effort
to complete the project has been made and that reasons beyond the control of
the permittee have resulted in a delay. Under no condition shall a permit be
extended more than once.
      c. Demolition And/Or Restoration Of Property After Permit Expiration.
Once a permit has expired and the building official has determined that said
permit shall not be renewed, the permittee/owner shall have 90 calendar days to
demolish any partially erected structures and/or restore the property to the
same condition that it was in at the time of the issuance of the original
permit, or to a condition acceptable to the building official.
      d. Council Action. If the permittee/owner does not return the property to
the condition that it was in at the time the original building permit was
issued, or to a condition acceptable to the building official, then, after
providing adequate notice to the permittee/owner, the building official shall
cause the matter to be heard before city council. The city council shall hear
the matter and may order the property to be restored to the same condition it
was in at the time of the issuance of the original building permit, or to the
condition that was ordered by the building official, or any other action it
deems necessary. This action may result in the demolition or restoration of a
structure or portion thereof. A tax lien shall be placed against the property
for any work that the building official must undertake to restore the property.
If demolition/restoration is necessary, the city shall follow the procedure set
forth in the city code and/or as set forth in the Idaho Code addressing
abatement of dangerous or nuisance buildings or property.
IRC section R105.10 Permit Transfer is a new section and reads as follows:
   R105.10 Permit Transfer. A building permit shall be transferable to another
party if such party can provide a document signed and notarized by the original
permit holder consenting to the transfer itself and all agreements and
conditions incorporated into the original permit approval. A permit may also be
transferred back to the property owner or owner's designated legal agent in
cases where the property owner has terminated their legal relationship with
their contractor or owner's designated legal agent. An administrative fee for
the transfer of the permit will be assessed for the work performed by city
staff to facilitate the transfer based on an hourly rate of $50.00.
IRC section R106.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R106.1 Submittal Documents. Two (2) sets of construction plans, special
inspection and structural observation programs, and other pertinent data shall
be submitted with each application for a permit. Plans for all townhouse
construction with more than four (4) units attached shall be prepared, signed
and sealed by an architect licensed by the state of Idaho under section 54-309,
Idaho Code, as amended.
   Dwelling and townhouse units constructed in areas under the purview of the
Eagle city code, title 9, chapter 5, Special Development Subdivisions, shall
have foundation designs signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed
by the state of Idaho, and qualified in the engineering specialty involved.
IRC section R107.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R107.1 General. The building official and the zoning administrator must both
approve a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits
shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more
than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for
demonstrated cause.
IRC section R108.5 is amended to read as follows:
   R108.5 Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize a refund of any fee
paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
   The building official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of
the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan
review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is
done.
   The building official shall not authorize a refund of any fee paid except on
written application filed by the original permittee or owner's representative
not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
IRC section R108.6 is a new section to read as follows:
   R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any
work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system
before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a special
investigation that shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
   An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected
whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee
shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code or as set
by resolution of the city council. The payment of such investigation fee shall
not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code
nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
IRC section R109.1.3 Floodplain Inspections is deleted and replaced with the
following:
   R109.1.3 Floodplain Inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding
as established by table R301.2(1), upon placement of the lowest floor,
including basement, the building official is authorized to require submission
of documentation of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement,
required in section R322.
IRC section R109.4 is amended to read as follows:
   R109.4 Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated
in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction
that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an
agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any
portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be
covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. A final
inspection and approval is required upon completion and prior to occupancy and
use of all building and structures.
IRC section R110.4 is amended to read as follows:
   R110.4 Temporary Occupancy. If the building official finds that no
substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion
thereof before the same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy may
be issued for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior
to the completion of the entire building or structure. A temporary occupancy is
set at a time period of 90 days. Multiple time extensions of a maximum of 90
days each may be granted when requested in writing to the building official
when justifiable cause is demonstrated by the permit holder. In no case shall a
temporary occupancy extend beyond one (1) year unless approved by the building
official and the city council.
IRC section R111.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R111.1 Connection Of Service Utilities. A final inspection and approval is
required upon completion and prior to occupancy and use of all buildings and
structures for connection of service utilities. Lack of building official
approval may result in the termination of utility services to said building or
structure and either civil or criminal prosecution under the penalty provisions
of this code.
IRC section R111.3 is amended by changing the title to read as follows:
   R111.3 Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities For Unsafe Conditions.
IRC section R111.4 is a new section to read as follows:
   R111.4 Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities For Occupancy Violations.
Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this code
is being used contrary to the provisions of this code and/or other laws which
are enforced by the city of Eagle, the building official may order such use
discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated and the utility
services disconnected by notice served on any person causing such use to be
continued. Such person shall discontinue the use or make the structure or
portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code, and/or other laws
which are enforced by the city of Eagle, within a time period of thirty (30)
days of receipt of such notice or as designated by the building official.
IRC section R112.1 is amended to read as follows:
   112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals consisting of all members of the Eagle city council. The building
official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said
board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board shall
adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the
building official.
IRC sections R112.2.1 and R112.2.2 are hereby deleted and repealed.
IRC section 112.3 is deleted and repealed.
IRC section R113.5 is a new section to read as follows:
   R113.5 Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this code occurs or continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable as herein provided.
IRC section R114.1 and R114.2 are amended, and a new section R114.3 is added to
read as follows:
   R114.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by
this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code
or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to
issue a stop work order.
   R114.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order,
and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
   R114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law.
IRC section R202 Definition For "Townhouse" is amended to read as follows:
   Townhouse is a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached
units separated by property lines and with open space on at least two sides.
IRC table R301.2(1) is amended to read as follows:
   TABLE R301.2(1)
   CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
                            Subject To Damage From             Ice
           Wind   Seismic                              Winter  Barrier              Air      Mean
Ground     Speedd Design    Weathering Frost           Design  Under-    Flood      Freezing Annual
Snow Load  (mph)  Categoryf a          Line   Termitec Tempe   layment   Hazardsg   Indexi   Tempj
                                       Depthb                  Requiredh

Ground
snow load
= 20 psf
(pg).
(Further
design for
snow loads
shall be
determined                                                               Floodplain
in                                                                       ordinance
accordance                                    Slight   10                effective  10       51.1
with       90     B         Severe     24     to       degrees No        4-17-84,   degrees  degrees
section 7                              inches moderate F                 and FIRM   F        F
of ASCE 7,                                                               maps as
but the                                                                  currently
design                                                                   adopted
roof load
shall not
be less
than a
uniform
snow load
of 25
psf.)
 
For SI: 1 pound per square foot=0.0479 kN/m.02, 1 mile per hour=1.609 km/h.
a.    Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry
than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The
weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e.,
"negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the
weathering probability map [figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall
be determined from ASTM C34, C55, C62, C73, C90, C129, C145, C216 or C652.
b.    The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in figure
R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the
minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the
need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local
subterranean termite damage.
d.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed
from the basic wind speed map [figure R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall
be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with R301.2.1.4.
e.    The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the
columns of 971/2 percent values for winter from ASHRAE-97 Handbook Of
Fundamentals.
f.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic
design category determined from section R301.2.2.1.
g.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date
of the jurisdiction's entry into the national flood insurance program (date of
adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas),
(b) the date(s) of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM, or other flood hazard
map adopted by the community, as may be amended.
h.    In accordance with sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1,
R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local
damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this
part of the table with "yes". Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this
part of the table with "no".
i.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year
return period air freezing index (BF-days) from figure R403.3(2) or from the
100-year (99%) value on the national climatic data center data table "Air
Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/
fpsf.html.
j.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean
annual temperature from the national climatic data center data table "Air
Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/
fpsf.html.
IRC table R302.1 Exterior Walls delete the figures contained in the last column
of the table under the heading "Minimum Fire Separation Distance" and replace
with:
Table R302.1 Exterior Walls.
Walls (fire-resistance rated): < three (3) feet
Walls (not fire-resistance rated): = three (3) feet
Projections (fire-resistance rated): < three (3) feet
Projections (not fire-resistance rated): = three (3) feet
IRC section 302.2 Townhouses. The "exception" under this section shall be
deleted and replaced with:
Exception. A common one-hour or two-hour fire resistance rated wall assembly
tested in accordance with ASTME E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouses if
such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in
the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from
both sides and shall extend to and be tight against the exterior walls and the
underside of the roof sheathing. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall
be in accordance with section R302.4.
IRC section 303.4 is deleted.
IRC section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. The "exception"
under this section shall be deleted and replaced with:
Exception. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required
in townhouses where a two-hour fire- resistance rated wall is installed between
dwelling units or when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses
that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
IRC section R313.2 is deleted.
IRC section R315.2 Where Required In Existing Dwellings. The following two (2)
exceptions are added to this section as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as, but not limited
to, replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition or replacement of windows
or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck or electrical permits, are exempt
from the requirements of this section, and
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of noncombustion plumbing or mechanical
systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
IRC section R322.1.10 is deleted.
IRC section R322.2.2 Enclosed Area Below Design Flood Elevation. Paragraph 2.2
of this section shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
2.2. The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square inch
(645 mm2) for each square foot (0.093 m2) of enclosed area, or the opening
shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that
the design and installation of the openings will provide for the equalization
of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
IRC section R323 and 324 are repealed, deleted, and replaced with the
following:
Section R324 Flood-Resistant Construction. All construction within flood hazard
areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with title 10, Flood
Control, of the Eagle city code.
IRC section R501.3 and exceptions is deleted.
IRC section R602.10 is deleted and replaced with the following:
R602.10 Wall Bracing. Buildings shall be braced in accordance with this section
or, when application, section R602.12, or the most current edition of APA
system report SR-102 as an alternate method. Where a building, or portion
thereof, does not comply with one (1) or more of the bracing requirements in
this section, those portions shall be designated and constructed in accordance
with section R301.1.
IRC section R903.1 is amended to read as follows:
R903.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings
secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Roof coverings shall be designed, installed and maintained in
accordance with this code and the approved manufacturer's installation
instructions such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or
structure.
IRC table R905.8.5 Wood Shake Material Requirements is amended and shall read
as follows:
      TABLE R905.8.5
      WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
 
Material                         Minimum Grades Applicable Grading Rules
Wood shakes of naturally durable 1              Cedar shake and shingle bureau
wood
Taper sawn shakes of naturally   1              Cedar shake and shingle bureau
durable wood
Preservative-treated shakes and
shingles of naturally durable    1              Cedar shake and shingle bureau
wood
Fire-retardant-treated shakes
and shingles of naturally        1              Cedar shake and shingle bureau
durable wood
Preservative-treated taper sawn
shakes of southern yellow pine
treated in accordance with AWPA  1              Forest products laboratory of
standard U1 (commodity                          the Texas forest services
specification A, use category 3B
and section 5.6)
 
IRC table R905.8.6 Wood Shake Weather Exposure And Roof Slope is amended and
shall read as follows:
      TABLE R905.8.6
      WOOD SHAKE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE
 
Roofing Material                 Length (Inches) Grade Exposure (Inches)
                                                       4:12 Pitch Or Steeper
Shakes of naturally durable wood 18              No. 1 71/2
                                 24              No. 1 10a
Preservative-treated taper sawn  18              No. 1 71/2
shakes of southern yellow pine   24              No. 1 10
Taper sawn shakes of naturally   18              No. 1 71/2
durable wood                     24              No. 1 10
 
   For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
   a.    For 24-inch by 3/8-inch handsplit shakes, the maximum exposure is 71/
2 inches.
N1102.4.3 is deleted and replaced with the following:
   N1102.4.3 Fireplaces. New wood-burning fireplaces shall have tight-fitting
flue dampers and outdoor combustion air.
Chapter 11 [RE] Energy Efficiency. The following sections and tables of chapter
11 shall be amended in accordance with the requirements contained below in
subsection 0004.04 of these rules which correspond to the appropriate section:
   i. Table N1102.1.1 (table R402.1.1)-Insulation And Fenestration Requirements
By Component.
   ii. Table N1102.1.3 (table R402.1.3)-Equivalent U-Factors;
   iii. Table N1102.2.6 (table R402.2.6)-Steel Frame Ceiling, Wall And Floor
Insulation (R-Value);
   iv. Section N1102.4.1 (table R402.4.1)-Building Thermal Envelope;
   v. Section N1102.4.1.1 (R402.4.1.1)-Insulation;
   vi. Table N1102.4.1.1 (table R402.4.1.1)-Air Barrier And Insulation
Installation;
   vii. Section N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2)-Testing Option;
   viii. Add section N1102.4.1.3 (R402.4.1.3)-Visual Inspection Option;
   ix. Add section N1102.6 (R402.6)-Residential Log Home Thermal Envelope;
   x. Add table N1102.6 (table 402.6)-Log Home Prescriptive Thermal Envelope
Requirements By Component;
   xi. Section N1104.1 (R404.1)-Lighting Equipment.
(Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
7-1A-5: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MODULAR NON-HUD STRUCTURES:
   A.   Modular non-HUD structures to be occupied within the city of Eagle
shall adhere to the following:
      1.   All new manufactured (modular) (non-HUD) structures must bear the
insignia from the state of Idaho division of building safety and shall only be
allowed to be occupied for the use listing on the insignia.
      2.   To gain approval for an existing (modular) (non-HUD) structure, the
structure must undergo procedures as required by the state of Idaho division of
building safety and must bear the insignia prior to being allowed to be
occupied for the use listed on the insignia, except for pre- HUD mobile homes
constructed prior to June 15, 1976, which shall comply with the mobile home
rehabilitation act, title 44, chapter 25, Idaho Code prior to occupancy. (Ord.
506, 1-25-2005)
ARTICLE B. MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS CODES
SECTION:
7-1B-1: International Mechanical Code Adopted
7-1B-2: International Fuel Gas Code Adopted
7-1B-3: Amendments To The International Mechanical Code
7-1B-4: Mechanical Inspector
7-1B-1: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the city the international mechanical code, 2012
edition, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing minimum standards
and requirements for the use of and the design, construction, installation,
improvement, extension and alteration of materials, piping, venting, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances in relation to mechanical systems as defined by
the international mechanical code, 2012 edition, and to provide that all
systems shall be designed, constructed, installed, improved, extended and
altered in substantial accord with the international mechanical code. (Ord.
728, 1-27-2015)
7-1B-2: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the city the international fuel gas code, 2012
edition, to provide minimum standards to safeguard life and limb, health,
property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and
maintenance or use of fuel gas systems. (Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
7-1B-3: AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE:
The international mechanical code, 2012 edition, is hereby amended as follows:
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule.
All buildings shall be subject to mechanical fees as established and set by
resolution of the Eagle city council. A schedule of said fees is on file in the
office of the city clerk.
Section 504.6.1 Material And Size. Add the following exception:
Dryer duct may be constructed of 0.013 (30 gauge) or equivalent if
prefabricated 0.016 (28 gauge) ducts and fittings are not available.
Table 603.4 Duct Construction Minimum Sheet Metal Thickness For Single Dwelling
Units. Add the following exception to the table:
Round duct, enclosed rectangular ducts and fittings less than fourteen (14)
inches may be constructed of 0.013 (30 gauge) or equivalent if prefabricated
0.016 (28 gauge) ducts and fittings are not available.
(Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
7-1B-4: MECHANICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment, Term Of Office: The city council shall have the power to
appoint a person qualified and experienced in heating, ventilation and air
conditioning, to be mechanical inspector who shall hold such office at the
discretion of the city council and whose duties shall be overseen by the
building official.
   B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the mechanical inspector to attend to
the enforcement of the provisions of this article, as the same shall pertain to
the inspection and supervision of mechanical systems. The mechanical inspector
shall have the jurisdictional authority to inspect, and shall inspect,
installations of heating, ventilation, air conditioning and related equipment
within the city's limits, to give notice of mechanical violations, to issue or
cancel mechanical permits, and to otherwise carry out the duties as mechanical
inspector for the city.
   C.   Compensation: The compensation that the mechanical inspector shall
receive for providing services shall be fixed by the city council and shall be
paid in the same manner as other claims against the city. (Ord. 432, 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE C. ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
7-1C-1: Electrical Code Adopted
7-1C-2: Electrical Inspector
7-1C-3: Fee Schedule
7-1C-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
Except where a different standard is required by this article, all work of
electrical wiring, installation and construction, and the material, apparatus
and fixtures used therein shall be in accordance with the rules established in
the National Fire Protection Association, article 70, 2014 edition, and
amendments of the national electrical code adopted as state law, which is
hereby adopted for the city, except: compliance with article 675-8(b) will
include the additional requirement that a disconnecting means always be
provided at the point of service from the utility no matter where the
disconnecting means for the machine is located. Compliance with article 550.32
(B) shall limit installation of a service on a manufactured home to those homes
manufactured after January 1, 1992. The electrical inspector appointed by the
city council shall inspect such work and report violations to the building
official. (Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
7-1C-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment: The city council shall authorize the building official to
appoint some person qualified and experienced in electrical work to be
electrical inspector who shall hold such position at the discretion of the city
council.
   B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to attend to
the enforcement of the provisions of this article as the same shall pertain to
the inspection and supervision of electrical wiring, apparatus, equipment,
machinery and signs within the city. He shall make a thorough and complete
inspection of all outlets on any work done under permits issued under this
article. The electrical inspector appointed by the city council shall inspect
such work and report violations to the building official.
   C.   Compensation: The compensation that the electrical inspector shall
receive for work shall be based on grade and range table as adopted by the city
council. (Ord. 561, 10-10-2006)
7-1C-3: FEE SCHEDULE:
All buildings shall be subject to electrical fees as established and set by
resolution of the Eagle city council. A schedule of said fees shall be
maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 561, 10-10-2006)
ARTICLE D. FIRE CODE
SECTION:
7-1D-1: International Fire Code And Standards
7-1D-1: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AND STANDARDS:
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code and standards known as the international fire code, 2012
edition, including all amendments adopted as state law, and the international
fire code standards. One copy of the current edition of the international fire
code, appendix chapters, and the international fire code standards are on file
in the office of the city clerk and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and from the effective
date hereof, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the city. (Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
ARTICLE E. SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCES
SECTION:
7-1E-1: Short Title And Purpose
7-1E-2: Definitions
7-1E-3: Solid Fuel Heating Appliance Permits
7-1E-4: Issuance Of Solid Fuel Heating Appliance Permits
7-1E-5: Penalty
7-1E-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the EAGLE SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE
ORDINANCE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect air quality resources
vital to public health and safety and the economic future of Eagle by
controlling emissions from the burning of solid fuel. (Ord. 119, 8-11-1987)
7-1E-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
BUILDING: Any structure, dwelling, office, industrial plant, garage, or barn,
whether publicly or privately owned, or any other structure as defined by the
uniform building code as adopted by article A of this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization, or governmental entity.
SOLID FUEL: Any form of untreated wood or coal.
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE: A device designed for solid fuel combustion so
that usable heat is derived for the interior of a building, including, but not
limited to, solid fuel fired cooking stoves, potbellied stoves, Franklin
stoves, airtight stoves, fireplace inserts, or combination fuel furnaces or
boilers which burn solid fuel. Fireplaces with air to fuel ratios that exceed
thirty to one (30:1) are exempt. (Ord. 119, 8-11-1987)
7-1E-3: SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE PERMITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner of any new or existing building in
the incorporated area of Eagle to install or allow to be installed a solid fuel
heating appliance in his or her new or existing building without first
obtaining from the city clerk a solid fuel heating appliance permit.
   B.   It shall be unlawful on or after July 1, 1987, for any person in the
incorporated area of Eagle to: advertise for sale, offer to sell, sell for
installation in any new or existing building, or install in any new or existing
building, a solid fuel heating appliance which has not been certified as clean
burning by the Oregon department of environmental quality. (Ord. 119, 8-11-
1987)
7-1E-4: ISSUANCE OF SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE PERMITS:
   A.   No solid fuel heating appliance permit shall be issued by the city
clerk for the installation of a solid fuel heating appliance which has not been
certified as clean burning by the Oregon department of environmental quality.
   B.   The city clerk shall maintain a list of appliances certified to be
clean burning by the Oregon department of environmental quality. (Ord. 119, 8-
11-1987)
7-1E-5: PENALTY:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the failure or
omission to perform any duty imposed by the provisions of this chapter is
hereby declared unlawful and punishable as an infraction and shall, upon
conviction or a finding of guilt thereof in the court of Ada County, Idaho, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
ARTICLE F. PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
7-1F-1: Plumbing Code Adopted
7-1F-2: Plumbing Inspector
7-1F-3: Fee Schedule
7-1F-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
Except where a different standard is required by this article, there is hereby
adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
minimum standards and requirements for the use of and the design, construction,
installation, improvement, extension and alteration of materials, piping,
venting, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in relation to plumbing systems
as defined by the 2009 Idaho state plumbing code, and to provide that all
plumbing and plumbing systems shall be designed, constructed, installed,
improved, extended and altered in substantial accord with the 2009 Idaho state
plumbing code, and it shall be amended, revised, compiled and published from
time to time and as such amendments or revisions are adopted by the Idaho
plumbing board, and subject to the conditions, and exceptions prevalent in
Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26. (Ord. 690, 1-8-2013)
7-1F-2: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment, Term Of Office: The city council shall have the power to
appoint some person qualified and experienced in plumbing, to be plumbing
inspector who shall hold such office at the discretion of the city council.
(Ord. 363, 2-22-2000)
   B.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to attend to the
enforcement of the provisions of this article, as the same shall pertain to the
inspection and supervision of plumbing systems. The plumbing inspector shall
have the jurisdictional authority to inspect, and shall inspect, installations
of plumbing and related equipment within the city's limits, to give notice of
plumbing violations, to issue or cancel plumbing permits, and to otherwise
carry out its duties as plumbing inspector for the city. The plumbing inspector
appointed by the city council shall inspect such work and report violations to
the building official.
   C.   Compensation: The compensation that the plumbing inspector shall
receive for providing services shall be fixed by the grade and range table
adopted by the city council. (Ord. 560, 10-10-2006)
7-1F-3: FEE SCHEDULE:
All buildings shall be subject to plumbing fees as established and set by
resolution of the Eagle city council. A schedule of said fees shall be
maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 560, 10-10-2006)
ARTICLE G. INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE (IWUI)
SECTION:
7-1G-1: Purpose
7-1G-2: Applicability
7-1G-3: International Wildland-Urban Interface Code Adopted
7-1G-4: IWUI Code Amendments
7-1G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by establishing standards to mitigate the risk to life and property
from wildland fire exposures, exposures from adjacent structures and to
mitigate structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels. (Ord. 947, 8-12-
2025)
7-1G-2: APPLICABILITY:
These regulations shall apply to new subdivisions, new construction, additions,
alterations, and moving or change of use of residential, commercial, or
industrial structures within the overlay district as identified on the
Wildland-Urban Interface Overlay District Map, the limits of which are adopted
by Ordinance 947 on file at the office of the City Clerk, or as hereinafter may
be amended. Should any provision within this chapter conflict with any other
provision of Eagle City Code, then the more restrictive shall control.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any project or development which includes a
City-approved Fire Protection Plan prepared by a Certified Wildfire Mitigation
Specialist or stamped by a Fire Protection Engineer shall be exempt from the
regulations in this Article. (Ord. 947, 8-12-2025)
7-1G-3: INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code (IWUI), 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council, as
amended by the city herein, including appendix A and B, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing the mitigation of hazard to life and property
from the intrusion of fire from wildland exposures, fire from adjacent
structures and prevention of structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels.
One copy of the current edition of the 2018 International Wildland-Urban
Interface Code, including Appendix A and B, are on file in the office of the
City Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set
out at length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the IWUI overlay district.
(Ord. 947, 8-12-2025)
7-1G-4: IWUI CODE AMENDMENTS:
IWUI Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Wildland-Urban Interface
Code of the City of Eagle, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
IWUI Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The City of Eagle Building Department is
hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code
official.
IWUI Section 108.5 is amended to read as follows:
108.5 Fire Protection Plan. (Commonly referred to as a Wildfire Safety and
Mitigation Plan)
Where required by the code official pursuant to Section 405, a fire protection
plan shall be prepared by a Certified Wildfire Mitigation Specialist or a Fire
Protection Engineer and shall be submitted to the code official for review and
approved as a part of the plans required for a permit. The Fire Protection Plan
shall be incorporated into the CC&Rs and development approvals for subdivisions
to ensure adherence to these requirements.
Additionally, the code official may require lots or land that abut or are
contiguous to the Wildland Urban Interface Overlay District to have a Wildfire
Safety and Mitigation Plan.
IWUI Section 110.4.7 is amended to read as follows:
110.4.7 Violations and Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Eagle City Code Section 1-4-1 (A). Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
IWUI Section 114.4 is amended to read as follows:
114.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that is directed to
perform to remove a violation of unsafe conditions, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Eagle City Code Section 1-4-1 (A). Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
IWUI Section 602.1 is amended to read as follows:
602.1 General.
An approved automatic sprinkler system may be required to be installed by the
code official in all occupancies in new buildings required to meet the
requirements for Class 1 ignition-resistant construction in Chapter 5. The
installation of the automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with
nationally recognized standards.
IWUI Appendix B is amended to read as follows:
Appendix B
B101.2 Plan content.
Vegetation Management: This section shall describe all actions that will be
taken to prevent a fire from being carried toward or away from the structure
(s), and shall include at least the following information:
1.   Methods and timetables for controlling, changing or modifying areas on the
property to create and maintain defensible space. Elements of the plan shall
include removal of slash, snags, vegetation that may grow into overhead
electrical lines, other ground fuels, ladder fuels and dead trees, and the
thinning of live trees, landscaping plans, etc.
2.   A plan for maintaining the proposed hazardous fuel-reduction and
mitigation measures.
3.   Maintenance and Cost: The Vegetation Management Plan shall be incorporated
into the CC&Rs and development approval(s) for subdivisions to ensure adherence
to these requirements. The CC&Rs shall also include a funding mechanism for the
continued long-term maintenance and implementation of the Vegetation Management
Plan. The cost of plan preparation and review shall be the responsibility of
the landowner.
4.   Audits: Each property or development may be subject to an audit every five
(5) years to ensure that they are in compliance with their approved Vegetation
Management Plan by the City of Eagle. The cost of any audits shall be the
responsibility of the landowner. If it is determined by the City that
improvements are needed to mitigate wildfire risk, those costs shall be the
responsibility of the landowner. If the landowner does not take action to
complete the necessary improvements within sixty (60) days, the City or a duly
authorized representative may complete the necessary improvements at cost to
the landowner.
5.   Qualifications: The Vegetation Management Plan shall be prepared by a
Certified Wildfire Mitigation Specialist or Fire Protection Engineer.
6.   Changes: Any vegetation management changes after certificate occupancy
will be required to resubmit any changes of any landscape vegetation to the
CC&R board to verify compliance with this code. (Ord. 947, 8-12-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SIGN REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 276, 8-29-1996)
CHAPTER 3
TRAILERS AND TRAILER COURTS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Administration And Enforcement
7-3-3: Permit Requirements For Trailer Courts
7-3-4: Site Development
7-3-5: Service Buildings And Accommodations
7-3-6: Health And Sanitary Conditions
7-3-7: Fire Prevention And Protection
7-3-8: Operation Of Trailer Court
7-3-9: Expansion Of Trailers, Skirting
7-3-10: Removal Of Wheels
7-3-11: Animals And Pets
7-3-12: Occupancy Of Trailers Outside Courts
7-3-13: Parking Trailers Restricted
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section:
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: Trailer coaches which do not have a toilet, bathtub or
shower.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: A trailer coach that has a toilet, bathtub or
shower.
PERMIT: A written permit issued by the mayor and city council permitting a
trailer court to be operated under this chapter.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing toilet facilities for men and women with
wastewater, sink and laundry facilities, and with separate toilet, bath and
shower accommodations for each sex.
TRAILER COACH: Any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit its being used,
as a conveyance upon public streets or highways, and duly licensable as such,
and so constructed as to permit occupancy thereof or therein, as a dwelling or
sleeping place for one or more persons, or for the conduct of any business,
trade, profession or occupation, or to be used as a selling or advertising
device.
TRAILER COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for the
accommodation of one trailer coach.
TRAILER COURT: Any plot of ground upon which one or more trailer coaches,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, or for the conduct of any business,
profession, occupation or trade (or used as a selling or advertising device)
are, or may be located. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of a board of investigators consisting of the chief of
police, chief of the fire department and city clerk, hereby created, with the
city clerk as chairman, to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to recommend to the mayor and council the issuance, suspension or
revocation of permits. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAILER COURTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
maintain, operate or alter any trailer court within the city, unless he owns a
valid permit issued annually by the mayor and city council, in the name of such
person for the specific court authorized to be operated and maintained.
   B.   Application For Permit: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be made to the mayor and council and shall show a complete plan
of the trailer court. Said application shall be accompanied by a plan of the
court showing the following:
      1.   The extent and area used for camp purposes.
      2.   Roadways and driveways, including the width and type of surface.
      3.   Location of sites or units for trailer coaches.
      4.   Location and number of sanitation conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundry and utility rooms to be used by occupants of such units.
      5.   Method and plan of sewage disposal.
      6.   Method and plan of garbage removal.
      7.   Plan for water supply.
      8.   Plans for electrical lighting of units.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to provide suitable application forms
and permit forms.
   C.   Permit Fee, Term: An annual permit fee in the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) is hereby imposed for each permit required by this section and payment
of such fee must be made at the time of application therefor. Each permit shall
expire on the December 31 of each year.
   D.   Conditions Of Issuance: No permit shall be issued without the
recommendation of the board of investigators and such board must inspect and
approve, by majority vote, the camp or court plan showing full compliance of
all the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Transfer Of Permit, Fee: License permits may be transferred upon
approval by the board of investigators showing that the transferee is a person
of good moral character and financially solvent, upon the payment of a transfer
fee of five dollars ($5.00).
   F.   Inspections And Investigations, Revocation Of Permit: The board of
investigators is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of trailer courts located in the city. In order that
such board may perform its duty of safeguarding the health and safety of
occupants of trailer courts and of the general public, such board, or any
member thereof, shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, upon any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. If the board, or any
member thereof, finds conditions or practices existing which are in violation
of any provision of this chapter, such board shall give notice in writing to
the person to whom the permit is issued, and unless such condition or practice
be corrected within a reasonable time, to be specified in such notice, the
board shall recommend to the mayor and council that such permit be revoked, and
the mayor and council shall thereafter order a hearing to show cause why the
permit of such person should not be revoked. At least thirty six (36) hours'
notice must be given the person of such hearing, advising him that he has an
opportunity to appear with counsel to show cause why his permit should not be
canceled. If, on such hearing, the mayor and council find that such person has
been guilty of the violation specified in the notice served by the board of
investigators, and in the order to show cause, said board shall forthwith
revoke such permit and such person shall thereupon cease operation of such
trailer court. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Location Of Trailer Court, Outdoor Lighting: Every trailer court shall
be located on a well drained site and be adequately lighted at night, and shall
be in conformity with the zoning laws 1 , this chapter and the ordinances of
the city.
   B.   Water Supply And Sewage Disposal:
      1.   Water Supply: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of
pure water shall be provided in each trailer court furnished through a pipe
distribution system connected directly with the city water mains. Each trailer
coach space shall have an independent water connection and an adequate supply
of hot and cold water shall be supplied at all times in each service building.
      2.   Sewage Disposal: All trailer courts shall be served with the public
sewer system, if available, or by a private sewer system in accordance with the
provisions of this code. Each trailer coach space shall be provided with a
satisfactory sewer connection and all wastes from all toilets, sinks, bathtubs,
showers and laundries shall be discharged into such sewer system. All sewer
disposal apparatus, including appurtenances thereto shall be provided,
maintained and operated so as not to become a health hazard and shall fully
comply with all the provisions of this chapter. All sanitary facilities in any
trailer house which are not connected with the city sewer or trailer court
building sewer, shall be sealed and their use is hereby declared unlawful.
   C.   Plumbing: All plumbing in trailer courts shall comply with all state
and local plumbing regulations.
   D.   Size Of Trailer Coach Space: Each trailer coach space shall contain a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet, shall be at least twenty feet
(20') wide and shall have its boundaries clearly defined.
   E.   Position Of Trailer: Each trailer coach shall be parked on an
individual trailer coach space so that there will be a minimum of fifteen feet
(15') of space between coaches, ten feet (10') between coaches and any
adjoining property line, twenty five feet (25') between coach and street or
highway and fifteen feet (15') between coach and building or structure.
   F.   Electrical Service: Each trailer coach space shall be furnished with an
electrical service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an exterior
switch or fuse with not less than 30 ampere capacity and a heavy outlet
receptacle and shall be capable of supplying at least 110 volts for each
trailer space. The installation shall comply with all state and local
electrical codes and ordinances 1  and each outlet shall be waterproof.
   G.   Driveways: Each trailer coach space shall abut on a driveway not less
than twenty feet (20') in width, which such driveway shall have unobstructed
access to a public street or highway. Each driveway shall be graveled or paved
and maintained in good condition, shall be well lighted at night and shall be
kept unobstructed.
   H.   Parking Requirements: Sufficient area shall be provided for the parking
of at least one motor vehicle for each trailer coach space.
   I.   Number Of Trailer Coaches: No greater number of trailer coaches shall
be allowed in any trailer court than the number of trailer coach spaces
available therefor. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8 of this code.
1 1. See chapter 1, article C of this title.
7-3-5: SERVICE BUILDINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS:
Each trailer court shall be provided with one or more service buildings,
adequately equipped with flush type fixtures. No service building shall contain
less than two (2) toilets for females, one toilet for males, two (2) lavatories
and one shower for each sex, a urinal for males, a laundry tray and a
wastewater sink. To serve more than twenty (20) dependent trailer coaches,
additional fixtures shall be provided in the ratio mentioned in this section.
   A.   Toilet facilities for females shall consist of at least one flush type
water closet for each ten (10) dependent trailer coaches; toilet facilities for
men shall consist of at least one flush type water closet for each ten (10)
dependent trailer coaches and one urinal for each ten (10) dependent trailer
coaches. Each water closet shall be in a private compartment and toilet
facilities for males and females shall be separated, if located in the same
building, by a sound resistant wall.
   B.   A lavatory for each sex shall be provided for every ten (10) dependent
trailer coaches. A bathtub or shower for each sex shall be provided for every
twenty (20) dependent trailer coaches. Separate bathtub and shower facilities
shall be maintained for each sex.
   C.   Floors of toilets, showers, bath facilities and laundry facilities
shall be of concrete, tile or similar material, impervious to water and easily
cleaned and pitched to a floor drain.
   D.   Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one unit for every
twenty (20) trailer coaches. Drying space in the ratio of fifty (50) square
feet to each coach space, or other adequate clothes drying facilities,
including mechanical clothes dryers, shall be provided to accommodate the
laundry of the trailer court occupants.
   E.   Each service building shall:
      1.   Be located not more than two hundred feet (200') from any dependent
trailer coach, and at least fifteen feet (15') from any trailer coach.
      2.   Be of permanent construction and be provided with adequate light,
heat, water, ventilation, sewage disposal connections and have adequate garbage
facilities available thereto.
      3.   Have the interior of moisture resistant material to permit frequent
washing and cleaning.
      4.   Have all rooms well ventilated with all openings effectively
screened.
The above accommodations shall be based on trailer court capacity according to
plans approved when permit is issued. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-
1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-6: HEALTH AND SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Garbage And Refuse Disposal: The storage, collection and disposal of
garbage and refuse in the court shall be managed so as to create no health
hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air
pollution. All garbage and refuse shall be stored in fly tight, watertight,
rodentproof containers, which shall be provided in sufficient number and
capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing. Satisfactory container racks
or holders shall be provided and shall be located not more than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from any trailer coach space.
   B.   Insect And Rodent Control: The trailer court shall be kept free of
rubbish and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. All
harborage places for rodents or hosts of insect vectors shall be eliminated and
all breeding places for flies and mosquitoes shall be eliminated or effectively
treated.
   C.   Quarantined Premises: It is hereby specifically made unlawful for any
person who may have been quarantined by proper public health officers to
remove, or attempt to remove, a trailer coach or person or persons from
quarantine orders. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-7: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION:
   A.   General: The court area shall be subject to all of the provisions of
this code and other city ordinances relative to fire protection 1 .
   B.   Flammable Materials:
      1.   Every trailer court shall be kept free of flammable material at all
times.
      2.   All liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not be used
at individual trailer coach spaces unless the containers are properly connected
by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders
shall be securely fastened in place and adequately protected from the weather.
No cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas shall be located in a trailer
coach, nor within five feet (5') of a door thereof.
   C.   Firefighting Equipment: Hoses and portable fire extinguishers shall be
available in good repair and for fighting fires. Adequate fire extinguishers in
the ratio of one to each eight (8) trailer coaches shall be maintained in
convenient places. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1, article D of this title.
7-3-8: OPERATION OF TRAILER COURT:
   A.   Duties Of Owner Or Operator: Every trailer court owner or operator
shall:
      1.   Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times;
      2.   See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced, and promptly report to the proper authorities any violation of this
chapter or any other violations of law which may come to his attention;
      3.   Report to the proper authorities all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable or contagious
disease within the trailer court;
      4.   Cooperate with the public health authorities in the matter of
quarantining any person occupying units within the court and in the enforcement
of quarantine regulations.
   B.   Number Of Occupants: No trailer coach may be inhabited by a greater
number of occupants than that for which it was designed.
   C.   Registration Of Occupants: Every trailer court owner or operator shall
keep and maintain a register of all guests which shall be open at all times to
inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the city. Such
registers shall maintain:
      1.   Names and addresses of all guests.
      2.   Date of arrival and departure.
      3.   Make, model and registration number of all trailer coaches and
towing automobiles or other vehicles.
      4.   State issuing such licenses.
Such records shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years after the
departure of the occupants.
   D.   Office Building Regulations Posted, Register Kept: Every trailer court
shall have an office building in which shall be located the office of the
person in charge of such court. A copy of the permit and of this chapter shall
be posted therein and the camp register shall at all times be kept in such
office. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-9: EXPANSION OF TRAILERS, SKIRTING:
No permanent addition of any kind shall be built on to, or become a part of,
any trailer coach. Skirting of coaches is permissible but such skirting shall
not permanently attach the coach to the ground, provide a harborage for rodents
or create a fire hazard. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-
1980)
7-3-10: REMOVAL OF WHEELS:
The wheels of trailer coaches shall not be removed, except temporarily when
necessary for repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be used under the trailer coach
to prevent movement on springs when the coach is parked and occupied. (Ord. 1,
5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-11: ANIMALS AND PETS:
No dogs, cats or other pet animals shall be permitted to run at large in the
trailer court. (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
7-3-12: OCCUPANCY OF TRAILERS OUTSIDE COURTS:
Except in trailer courts, trailer coaches shall not be used as a permanent
place of abode or as a permanent dwelling for an indefinite period of time;
provided, however, that any trailer coach, with the wheels removed, properly
connected with the city water and sanitary sewer system and in compliance with
all requirements of the building, plumbing, sanitation, health, zoning and
electrical regulations of the city, may be permitted on any premises under
permits properly secured as provided for in the building, plumbing, electrical,
sanitation, health and zoning regulations 1 . (Ord. 1, 5-24-1971; amd. Ord. 40,
10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-1A-4 of this title.
7-3-13: PARKING TRAILERS RESTRICTED:
   A.   General: It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to park
any trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any
tract of land owned by any person whether such trailer be occupied or
unoccupied, except as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Emergency Or Temporary Stopping Or Parking: Emergency or temporary
stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer
than two (2) hours, subject to any other and further prohibition, regulations
or limitations imposed by the provisions of this chapter, or other traffic
ordinances of the city or statutes of the state.
   C.   Occupied And Unoccupied Trailers: No person shall park, place or locate
and use any trailer coach or tent for human habitation on any lot, tract,
parcel or piece of land in the city for a longer period than three (3) hours,
except in a licensed trailer court; provided, however, that one unoccupied
trailer may be permitted in any accessory garage building, or an accessory car
or trailer port, or such trailer may be parked on the rear half of a lot at
least three feet (3') from side property lines and fifteen feet (15') from any
dwelling on adjoining lots. On corner lots, no trailer shall be permitted
within ten feet (10') from any side street property lines.
   D.   Business Uses: Other than in tourist courts, no trailer shall be parked
to provide living quarters, whether permanent or temporary, nor shall a trailer
be parked or stored to provide for any accessory business uses, or parked,
located or stored for rental purposes, or other financial gain. (Ord. 1, 5-24-
1971; amd. Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
CHAPTER 4
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Purpose
7-4-2: Code Adopted
7-4-3: Fees
7-4-4: Violations
7-4-5: Amendments
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum regulations for energy
efficient buildings using prescriptive and performance related provisions. The
provisions of this chapter shall regulate the design of building envelopes for
adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage, including the design and
selection of mechanical, service water heating and electrical equipment and/or
systems enabling an effective use of energy in new building construction. (Ord.
593, 5-13-2008)
7-4-2: CODE ADOPTED:
All rules, regulations and ordinances applying to the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building
envelope, mechanical, service water heating and lighting systems, contained in
book and in code form, designated as the 2012 edition of the international
energy conservation code (IECC), published under the authority of the
International Code Council, Inc., together with the appendix, is ratified and
adopted, except as said rules and regulations are hereby changed, altered and
amended by this chapter. The 2012 edition of the international energy
conservation code, together with the appendix and amendments pursuant to this
chapter, shall be known as the energy code of the city of Eagle. One copy of
the 2012 edition of the international energy conservation code shall be filed
for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. All
provisions in this chapter shall be effective as of date of adoption. (Ord.
728, 1-27-2015)
7-4-3: FEES:
The fees for residential inspection verifying for compliance with the energy
code shall be assessed in accordance with the city of Eagle building permit
fees adopted October 10, 2007, and any subsequent amendments. (Ord. 593, 5-13-
2008)
7-4-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of any provision of the energy code identified by the building
official shall be subject to enforcement under provisions of section 113 of the
international building code or section R113 of the international residential
code and as further stated in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 593, 5-13-2008)
7-4-5: AMENDMENTS:
IECC section 201.3 is amended to read as follows:
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the currently adopted editions in the international building
code, national electrical code, international fire code, international fuel gas
code, international mechanical code or the 2009 Idaho state plumbing code, such
terms shall have meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
Table 402.1.1 Insulation And Fenestration Requirements By Component is amended
as follows:
   a.   Delete the values contained in table R402.1.1 (table N1102.1.1) for
climate zone "5 and marine 4" and climate zone "6" and replace with the
following:
   TABLE R402.1.1
   INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
 
                                               Wood   Mass
Climate Fenestrati Skylight Glazed     Ceiling Framed Wall  Floor Basement Slab  Crawlspa
Zone    on U-      U-Factor Fenestrati R-Value Wall   R-    R-    Wall R-  R-    ce Wall
        Factor              on SHGC            R-     Value Value Value    Value R-Value
                                               Value
5 and                                          20 or                       10, 2
marine  0.35       0.60     NR         38      13+5h  13/17 30g   10/13    ft    10/13
4
6       0.35       0.60     NR         49      20 or  15/19 30g   15/19    10, 4 10/13
                                               13+5h                       ft
 
         b.   Add the following footnote to the title of table 402.1.1
Insulation And Fenestration Requirements By Component:
   k.   For residential log home building thermal envelope construction
requirements see section 402.6.
Table R402.1.3 delete the values contained in table 402.1.3 (table N1102.1.3)
for climate zone "5 and marine 4" and climate zone "6" and replace with the
following:
   TABLE R402.1.3
   EQUIVALENT U-FACTORS
 
                                      Wood    Mass             Basement Crawl-
Climate Fenestration Skylight Ceiling Framed  Wall R- Floor R- Wall R-  space
Zone    U-Factor     U-Factor R-Value Wall R- Value   Value    Value    Wall R-
                                      Value                             Value
5 and
marine  0.35         0.60     0.030   0.057   0.082   0.033    0.059    0.065
4
6       0.35         0.60     0.026   0.057   0.060   0.033    0.050    0.065
 
Table R402.2.6 delete table R402.2.6 and replace with the following:
      TABLE R402.2.6
      STEEL-FRAME CEILING, WALL AND FLOOR INSULATION
      (R-VALUE)
Wood Frame R-Value Requirement Cold-Formed Steel Equivalent R-Valuea
Wood Frame R-Value Requirement Cold-Formed Steel Equivalent R-Valuea
Steel Truss Ceilings
R-30                           R-38 or R-30 + 3 or R-26 = 5
R-38                           R-49 or R-38 + 3
R-49                           R-38 + 5
Steel Joist Ceilings
R-30                           R-38 in 2 x 4 or 2 x 6 or 2 x 8 R-49 in any
                               framing
R-38                           R-49 in 2 x 4 or 2 x 6 or 2 x 8 or 2 x 10
Steel Framed Wall
R-13                           R-13 + 5 or R-15 + 4 or R-21 + 3 or R-0 + 10
R-19                           R-13 + 9 or R-19 + 8 or R-25 + 7
R-21                           R-13 + 10 or R-19 + 9 or R-25 + 8
Steel Joist Floor
R-13                           R-19 in 2 x 6
                               R-19 + 6 in 2 x 8 or 2 x 10
R-19                           R-19 + 6 in 2 x 6
                               R-19 + 12 in 2 x 8 or 2 x 10
 
   a.   Cavity insulation R-value is listed first, followed by continuous
insulation R-value.
   b.   Insulation exceeding the height of the framing shall cover the framing.
Section 402.4.3 Fireplaces shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
402.4.3 Fireplaces. New wood-burning fireplaces shall have tight-fitting flue
dampers and outdoor combustion air.
Section 402.6 Residential Log Home Thermal Envelope shall be an added section
as follows:
402.6 Residential Log Home Thermal Envelope. Residential log home construction
shall comply with sections 401 (General), 402.4 (Air Leakage), 402.5 (Maximum
Fenestration U-Factor and SHGC), 403.1 (Controls), 403.2.2 (Sealing), 403.2.3
(Building Cavities), sections 403.3 through 403.9 (referred to as the mandatory
provisions), section 404 (Electrical Power and Lighting Systems), and either
subparagraph 004.04.b.i, ii, or iii, as follows:
i. Sections 402.2 through 402.3, 403.2.1, 404.1 and table 402.6;
ii. Section 405 Simulated Performance Alternative (Performance); or
iii. REScheck (U.S. department of energy building codes program).
Table 402.6 Log Home Prescriptive Thermal Envelope By Component is an added
table as follows:
 
                                                  Min                    Slab
Climate    Fenestrati Skylight Glazed     Ceiling Average Floor Basement R-     Crawlspace
Zone       on U-      U-Factor Fenestrati R-Value Log     Value Wall R-  Value  Wall R-
           Factora             on SHGC            Size In       Valued   &      Valued
                                                  Inches                 Depthb
5,6 - High
efficiency 0.32       0.60     NR         49      5       30    15/19    10, 4  10/13
equipment                                                                ft.
pathc
5          0.32       0.60     NR         49      8       30    10/13    10, 2  10/13
                                                                         ft.
6          0.30       0.60     NR         49      8       30    15/19    10, 4  10/13
                                                                         ft.
 
a.   The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column
applies to all glazed fenestration.
b.   R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs.
c.   90% AFUE natural gas or propane. 84% AFUE oil, or 15 SEER heat pump
heating equipment (zonal electric resistance heating equipment such as electric
resistance heating equipment as the sole source for heating is considered
compliant with the high efficiency equipment path).
d.   "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or
exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement
wall. "15/19" shall be permitted to be met with R-13 cavity insulation on the
interior of the basement wall plus R-5 continuous insulated sheathing on the
interior or exterior of the home. "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulated
sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at
the interior of the basement wall.
(Ord. 728, 1-27-2015)
CHAPTER 5
MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Development Standards
7-5-4: Accessory Structures
7-5-5: Administration And Enforcement
7-5-6: Nonconforming Manufactured Homes
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes the minimum standards for the location and approval of
manufactured housing. (Ord. 239, 2-22-1994)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure attached to or located adjacent to a
manufactured home such as awnings, carports, garages, porches or steps.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure built since June 1, 1976, that bears the
department of housing and urban development certification that it has been
constructed in conformance with the mobile home construction and safety
standards in effect at the time of its construction, and is to be used as a
permanent residential dwelling. Licensing regulations by the state of Idaho,
pursuant to section 44-2101 of the Idaho state code shall be observed.
PERMANENTLY AFFIXED: A manufactured home which has the running gear and towing
hitch, or similar devices, removed and is set up per manufacturer's
instructions on permanent footings, with supports having an anchoring system
that is totally concealed under the structure and complies with department of
housing and urban development standards. (Ord. 239, 2-22-1994)
7-5-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The use of a manufactured home as a permanent residential dwelling on an
individual lot shall be permitted in any zoning district of the chapter which
permits installation of a single-family site built dwelling provided the
following standards are met:
   A.   Is multi-section and at least twenty feet (20') wide;
   B.   Has a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet;
   C.   Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site built
housing. Any roofing materials may be used provided it has the appearance of a
nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof. Roofs shall also have a minimum slope
of twenty five percent (25%) (3:12) and overhanging eaves;
   D.   Has siding materials which are generally acceptable for site built
housing. Any siding materials may be used provided it has the appearance of
wood, masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal
siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white, gloss
enamel;
   E.   Has a foundation of concrete or other material allowed by the uniform
building code for site built homes which is aesthetically compatible with the
manufactured home having the appearance of site built construction. This means
the facia shall be an extension of the siding or be of materials having the
appearance of site built foundations such as brick, concrete or concrete block;
   F.   Is permanently affixed per manufacturer's instructions. Footings shall
be of poured masonry extending twenty four inches (24") below grade;
   G.   Has a crawlspace with the following minimum measurements: 1) eighteen
inches (18") of clearance; 2) twelve inches (12") of clearance under beams; and
3) an eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") door;
   H.   Complies with all applicable lot size, setback, and other requirements
of the zoning district in which it is to be located;
   I.   Provides two (2) off street parking spaces and shall be improved with
such material to provide a durable and dust free surface 1 ;
   J.   Has a single car garage, or a carport with an attached enclosed storage
room;
   K.   Provides right of way improvements in the same manner as site built
construction, in accordance with city policy;
   L.   Manufactured homes shall not be allowed in subdivisions where they are
prohibited by restrictive covenants;
   M.   Manufactured home owners or purchasers shall own or be purchasing the
land upon which their home is to be placed. The owner or purchaser shall record
with the county recorder a nonrevocable option declaring the manufactured home
as real property. These requirements shall not apply within any duly approved
mobile home park. Exceptions may also be granted as a part of a planned unit
development approval;
   N.   Manufactured homes shall meet the requirements of the Idaho residential
energy standards as adopted and amended in chapter 4 of this title, or other
equivalent standard approved by the city;
   O.   Manufactured homes shall be provided with smoke detectors as required
in the uniform building code, section 1210, "Smoke Detectors and Sprinkler
Systems" before final inspection and occupancy. Smoke detectors required in
addition to those provided for in the department of housing and urban
developments, part 3280 of 24 CFR, "Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards", may be of the battery operated type;
   P.   Manufactured homes not meeting standards B, E, J, N or O shall only be
allowed in mobile home parks, as permitted pursuant to title 8 of this code.
Placement of manufactured homes not meeting standards B, E, J, N or O may be
considered by the planning commission on a case by case basis in all other
residential use districts in accordance with the conditional use permit
provisions of section
8-7-3 of this code. (Ord. 239, 2-22-1994)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 8-4-3A and section
  8-4-5 of this code.
7-5-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures to manufactured housing shall be constructed in compliance
with the standards specified by the Eagle comprehensive zoning ordinance,
uniform building code, and the department of housing and urban development
standards. Structures shall be aesthetically compatible with the home to which
they are associated. (Ord. 239, 2-22-1994)
7-5-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Application: Application shall be made with the city on a prescribed
form. The completed application shall be filed with the city clerk. The
application shall include all information necessary to determine conformity
with required development standards of this chapter, including: exterior
dimensions, siding material, foundation facia material, roofing material, eaves
overhang and any other applicable information. The applicant shall also attach
to the application: 1) a copy of the manufacturer's instructions for
installation of the home on permanent footings, and 2) a plot plan showing
existing conditions and the proposed location of the home and other
improvements at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty feet (1"=20');
   B.   Certificates And Inspection: The applicant shall sign the completed
application certifying the manufactured home meets the required development
standards of this chapter and that site development will be in accordance with
said standards and the plot plan submitted stating that once the manufactured
home is permanently affixed the applicant will comply with the requirement for
the home to be declared as real property for taxation purposes. These
certifications shall be made prior to the moving of the home to the building
site;
Following application and plot plan approval by the Eagle building official,
the official may issue a building permit for the footings and foundation. Upon
satisfactory inspection of the footings and foundation for the attachment of
the manufactured home, the building official shall verify, in writing, that all
development standards have been met as certified by the applicant. The home may
then be attached to the foundation in accordance with the manufacturer's
instruction, city codes for permanent utility connections, and other building
requirements;
Prior to occupancy a final inspection shall be made to assure proper attachment
of the home to the foundation and placement of a proper foundation facia. (Ord.
239, 2-22-1994)
7-5-6: NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED HOMES:
A manufactured home which has been placed and maintained upon an individual lot
prior to February 22, 1994, shall be a legal nonconforming use. Such
manufactured homes shall not be relocated within the city without conforming to
all applicable provisions contained herein. (Ord. 239, 2-22-1994)
CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
7-6-1: Title And Purpose
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Application
7-6-4: Collection Of Fee
7-6-5: Capital Improvement Projects
7-6-6: Calculation Of Fee
7-6-7: General Methodology For Calculation
7-6-8: Administration Of Fee
7-6-9: Credits And Reimbursement
7-6-10: Refunds
7-6-11: Appeals
7-6-12: Extraordinary Impacts
7-6-13: Addendums
7-6-14: Bonding
7-6-15: Effect Of Fee On Zoning And Subdivision Regulations
7-6-16: Other Powers And Rights Not Affected
7-6-17: Intergovernmental Agreements
7-6-18: Fire Impact Fees
7-6-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the CITY OF EAGLE DEVELOPMENT
IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE. The purpose of these regulations is to prescribe the
procedure whereby developers of land shall pay an impact fee as set forth in
this chapter for the purpose of providing the public facilities and system
improvements needed to serve future residents and users of such development. It
is further the purpose of this chapter to:
   A.   Ensure that adequate facilities are available to serve new growth and
development;
   B.   Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform
standards by which the city may require that those who benefit from new growth
and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities
needed to serve new growth and development;
   C.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are
required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public
facilities needed to serve new growth and development and to prevent duplicate
and ad hoc development requirements;
   D.   Collect and expend development impact fees pursuant to the enabling
powers granted by the provision of the Idaho development impact fee act, title
67, chapter 82, Idaho Code;
   E.   Provide the legal and procedural basis for the implementation of
development impact fees within the area of city impact; and
   F.   Ensure that any capital improvement funded wholly or in part with
impact fee revenue shall first be included in an approved capital improvements
plan that lists the capital improvements that may be funded with impact fee
revenues as well as the estimated costs and timing for each improvement. (Ord.
345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended:
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for new construction and additions
pursuant to this title.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or
more, by new construction or other action, which increase the service capacity
of a public facility, or service improvement.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: A plan adopted and amended pursuant to the provision
of the development impact fee act, Idaho Code 67-8208 that identifies capital
improvements for which development impact fees may be used as a funding source.
The capital improvements plan is included as a part of the development impact
fee study.
CITY: The city of Eagle, a municipal corporation duly organized pursuant to the
laws of the state of Idaho.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property, the
use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires
issuance of a building permit, or manufactured/mobile home permit, which
creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written duly authorized document from the city which
authorizes the commencement of a development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed as a condition of
development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements needed to serve development. This term is also referred to as an
impact fee in this chapter. The term does not include the following:
   A.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review or inspection
cost associated with permits required for development;
   B.   Connection or hook up charges;
   C.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water, or transportation
charges for services provided directly to the development; or
   D.   Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the city
has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements for the development
if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the
construction or installation of the capital improvements, unless a written
agreement is made pursuant to section 67-8209(3), Idaho Code, for credit or
reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or
other governmental action approving or authorizing a particular development
project including, but not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels
the payment, dedication or contribution of goods, services, land, or money as a
condition of approval.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary
impact.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact which is reasonably determined by the city to:
   A.   Result in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will
significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated
from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development
agreement as allowed by section 67-8214(2), Idaho Code;
   B.   Result in the need for system improvements which are not identified in
the capital improvements plan;
   C.   Have an impact which results in a lower than acceptable level of
service.
FEE PAYER: That person who pays or is required to pay a development impact fee.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or
structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct
of the business or use, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It
does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics when not used for human
occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building, carport, or the main
building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to
meet any city parking requirement nor nonresidential facilities; arcades,
porticoes, and similar open areas which are located at or near street level,
which are accessible to the general public, and which are not designed or used
as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas.
IMPACT FEE: See definition of Development Impact Fee.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land
uses, densities, intensities, and population in the service area over at least
a twenty (20) year period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and
service demand for public facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA manufactured
home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which:
   A.   In the traveling mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or is forty
(40) body feet or more in length, or
   B.   When erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square
feet; and
   C.   Is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities; and
   D.   Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein;
   E.   Except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the
requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect
to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards
established under 42 USC 5401 et seq.
MOBILE HOME: A structure similar to a manufactured home, but built to a mobile
home code prior to June 15, 1976, the date of enactment of the federal
manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code).
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a
manufactured/mobile home, which is constructed according to standards contained
in the uniform building code, as adopted or any amendments thereto, which is of
closed construction and is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or
assembled at a place other than the building site.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future
payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction or money.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to system improvements, project improvements
are site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide
service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use
and the convenience of the occupants or users of the project.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of the cost of system improvements determined
pursuant to section 67-8207, Idaho Code, which reasonably relates to the
service demands and needs of the project.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Those types of improvements described in Idaho Code 50-1703,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Water supply production, treatment, storage, and distribution
facilities;
   B.   Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
   C.   Roads, streets and bridges, including rights of way, traffic signals,
landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways;
   D.   Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal
facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and
enhancement improvements;
   E.   Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital
improvements; and
   F.   Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency
medical and rescue and streetlighting facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of capital improvements.
STUDY: City of Eagle development impact fee study dated May 11, 1999 for parks
and pathways, and all updates and amendments pertaining thereto, and
development impact fee study dated June, 2020 for police and all updates and
amendments pertaining thereto.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to project improvements, means capital
improvements to public facilities which are designed to provide service to a
service area including, without limitation, the type of improvements described
in section 50-1703, Idaho Code.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of
system improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs
attributable thereto, and also including, without limitation, the type of costs
described in section 50-1702(h), Idaho Code, to provide additional public
facilities needed to service new growth and development. For clarification,
system improvement costs do not include:
   A.   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than
capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan;
   B.   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements;
   C.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
   D.   Administrative and operating costs of the city unless such costs are
attributable to development of the capital improvements plan, as provided in
section 67-8208, Idaho Code; or
   E.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or
other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the
city to finance capital improvements identified in the capital improvements
plan.
UNIT(S) OF DEVELOPMENT: A quantifiable increment of development activity
measured in terms of dwelling units, or other appropriate measurements
contained in the impact fee schedule incorporated in the "study". (Ord. 345, 5-
11-1999; amd. Ord. 664, 9-27-2011; Ord. 835, 11-10-2020)
7-6-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to all those who
benefit from new growth and development except as provided below.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which was
destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
      2.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the
number of service units; (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
      3.   Replacing an existing residential unit, including a modular building
or manufactured/mobile home, with another residential unit on the same lot,
provided that the number of service units does not increase; (Ord. 358, 11-23-
1999)
      4.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
      5.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of service units;
      6.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such
as tennis courts or clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements;
      7.   Upon demonstration by fee payer by documentation such as utility
bills and tax records, to the installation of a modular building, manufactured/
mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space for which a
development impact fee has been paid previously, and as long as there is no
increase in service units.
   C.   An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a
building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee
payer. Applications for exemption shall be submitted to and determined by the
City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, within ninety (90) days.
Appeals of the City Clerk's, or his or her duly designated agent's,
determination shall be made under the provisions of section
7-6-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-4: COLLECTION OF FEE:
   A.   The development impact fee shall be paid and collected at the time of
issuance of a building permit or a manufactured/mobile home installation
permit.
   B.   No building permit or other equivalent City approval shall be issued
for "development" as herein defined unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to
this chapter.
   C.   A manufactured/mobile home unit may not locate on a manufactured/mobile
home site unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this chapter or has been
paid on a previous manufactured/mobile home unit on the same site.
   D.   In the event payment is dishonored, the City shall have all lawful
remedies including, but not necessarily limited to, the withholding of utility
services, the imposition of reasonable interest and penalties, the imposition
of liens pursuant to chapter 5, title 45, Idaho Code, the withholding of other
City approvals required for the development of other properties owned by the
fee payer, and the issuance of "stop work" orders, and the revocation or
suspension of the building permit. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-5: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The capital improvement projects to be financed by the impact fee are those
designated as police facilities, park facilities and pathway facilities in the
"study", incorporated herein by reference along with all footnotes, exhibits,
appendices and other attachments referenced. (Ord. 775, 5-9-2017; amd. Ord.
835, 11-10-2020)
7-6-6: CALCULATION OF FEE:
   A.   Time Frame: The City shall calculate the amount of the park and pathway
impact fee and police impact fee due for each building permit and manufactured/
mobile home installation permit by the procedure set forth in the "study"
within thirty (30) days of submittal of complete permit plans for residential
development.
   B.   Validity: The calculation of a development impact fee shall be in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A development impact
fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee may result in an
incidental benefit to owners or developers within the service area other than
the person paying the fee.
   C.   Improvements And Expansions: A development impact fee shall be
calculated on the basis of levels of service for police, public park facilities
and public pathway facilities adopted in this chapter and in the "study" that
are applicable to existing development as well as new growth and development.
The construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement of new or existing
police facilities, public park facilities and public pathway facilities for
which a development impact fee is imposed must be attributable to the capacity
demands generated by the new development.
   D.   Multiple Uses: (Rep. by Ord. 358, 11-23-1999)
   E.   Certification: Prior to making an application for a building permit
manufactured/mobile home installation permit, a prospective applicant may
request in writing a written certification of the development impact fee
schedule or individual assessment for a particular project which shall
establish the development fee for a period of one (1) year from the date of
certification. The certification shall include an explanation of facilities
considered under section 67-8207, Idaho Code. The certification shall specify
the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used.
   F.   Individual Assessment: Individual assessment of impact fees is
permitted in situations where the fee payer, at fee payer's expense, can prove
by clear and convincing evidence that the established impact fee is
inappropriate.
      1.   Individual assessments of development impact fees may be made by
application to the City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, prior to
receiving building permits manufactured/mobile home installation permits, or
other necessary approvals from the City. The City Clerk, or his or her duly
designated agent, shall evaluate such individual assessments under the
guidelines provided for in subsection F4 of this section. If the guidelines are
met, the individual assessment shall be approved by the City Clerk, or his or
her duly designated agent. Any decision regarding a request for an individual
assessment shall be provided in writing to the applicant and a copy of said
decision, along with supporting documentation, shall be provided to the City
Council within thirty (30) days of the decision.
      2.   Late applications for individual assessments may be submitted within
thirty (30) days after the receipt of a building permit only if the fee payer
makes a showing that the facts supporting such application were not known or
discoverable prior to receipt of a building permit and that undue hardship
would result if said application is not considered.
      3.   The City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall render a
written decision regarding the individual assessment and forward it to the City
Council within thirty (30) days of the date a complete application is
submitted. The decision of the City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent,
shall establish the impact fee for the project in question for a period of one
(1) year from the date said decision becomes final.
      4.   The City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall evaluate
an application for individual assessment and may approve the same if fee payer
has shown by clear and convincing evidence that the established impact fee is
inappropriate and that the following facts and conditions exist:
         a.   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to
the development that do not apply generally to other properties in the vicinity
of the development.
         b.   An individual assessment is necessary for the reasonable and
acceptable development of the property.
         c.   The approval of the individual assessment will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in
which the development is located.
         d.   The approval of the individual assessment will not adversely
affect the relevant Capital Improvements Plan for which the impact fee is being
collected.
      5.   Appeals from the City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent,
determination of individual assessment shall be made to the City Council by the
filing of an appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of
mailing, faxing, or personal delivery of written notice of the decision of the
City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent. Final determination regarding
the appeal of individual assessments shall be made by the City Council. (Ord.
345, 5-11-1999; amd. Ord. 775, 5-9-2017; Ord. 835, 11-10-2020)
7-6-7: GENERAL METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATION:
   A.   Amount Of Impact Fee: The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated
using the methodology contained in the "study".
   B.   Fee Not To Exceed: A development impact fee shall not exceed a
proportionate share of the cost of system improvements determined in accordance
with section 67-8207, Idaho Code. Development impact fees shall be based on
actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs.
   C.   Payment By Developer: A developer shall have the right to elect to pay
a project's proportionate share of police, park and pathway system improvement
costs by payment of development impact fees according to the fee schedule as
full and complete payment of the development project's proportionate share of
system improvement costs, except as provided in section 67-8214(3), Idaho Code.
The schedule of police, park and pathway facilities development impact fees for
various land uses per unit of development shall be as set forth in the "study".
   D.   Proportionate Share Determination:
      1.   All development impact fees shall be based on a reasonable and fair
formula or method under which the development impact fee imposed does not
exceed a proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the
City in the provision of system improvements to serve the new development. The
proportionate share is the cost attributable to the new development after the
City considers the following:
         a.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money,
dedication of land, or construction of system improvements;
         b.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new development in the form of user fees, debt service payments, or taxes which
are dedicated for system improvements for which development impact fees would
otherwise be imposed; and
         c.   All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
      2.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements to be paid by the developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the City:
         a.   The cost of existing system improvements within the service area
or areas;
         b.   The means by which existing system improvements have been
financed;
         c.   The extent to which the new development will contribute to the
cost of system improvements through taxation, assessments, or developer or
landowner contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system
improvements through developer or landowner contributions;
         d.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute
to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
         e.   The extent to which the new development should be credited for
providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas;
         f.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
development;
         g.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
         h.   The availability of other sources of funding system improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation. The City shall develop a
plan for alternative sources of revenue, which shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, plans generated during the City's annual budget
process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing, implementation of user fees
and various forms of utilities. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999; amd. Ord. 775, 5-9-2017;
Ord. 835, 11-10-2020)
7-6-8: ADMINISTRATION OF FEE:
   A.   Transfer Of Funds To City Clerk: Upon receipt of impact fees, the City
Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall be responsible for placement
of such funds into separate accounts as hereinafter specified. All such funds
shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts, within the Capital Projects
Fund, in a bank authorized to receive deposits of City funds. Interest earned
by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for
the purposes specified for funds of such account.
   B.   Establishment And Maintenance Of Accounts: The city clerk, or his or
her duly designated agent, shall establish separate accounts and maintain
records for each such account whereby impact fees collected can be segregated.
   C.   Maintenance Of Records: The city clerk, or his or her duly designated
agent, shall maintain and keep accurate financial records for each such account
that shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues; that shall account
for all monies received; that shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from
each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects
specified in the capital improvements program; and that shall provide an annual
accounting for each impact fee account showing the source and amount of all
funds collected and the projects that were funded.
   D.   System And Service Area Improvements: Development impact fees shall
only be spent for the category of system improvements for which the fees are
collected and either within or for the benefit of the service area in which the
project is located.
   E.   Review And Modification: Unless the city council deems some other time
period is appropriate, the city shall at least once every five (5) years
commencing from the date of the original adoption of the capital improvements
plan, review the development potential of the area and update the capital
improvements plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho Code
section 67-8206. The city may make any updates as are deemed necessary as a
result of: 1) development occurring in the prior year; 2) capital improvements
actually constructed; 3) changing facility needs; 4) inflation; 5) revised cost
estimates for capital improvements; 6) changes in the availability of other
funding projects; and 7) such other factors as may be relevant.
   F.   Capital Budget: The city shall annually adopt a capital budget.
   G.   Audit Process: As part of its annual audit process, the city shall
prepare an annual study describing the amount of all development impact fees
collected, appropriated, or spent during the preceding year by category of
public facility and service area.
   H.   Other Requirements: All other requirements of Idaho Code 67-8210,
regarding earmarking and expenditure of collected development impact fees,
shall apply. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-9: CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project,
credit or reimbursement shall be given for the present value of any
construction of system improvements or contribution or dedication of land or
money required by the city from a developer for system improvements of the
category for which the development impact fee is being collected. Credit or
reimbursement shall not be given for project improvements.
   B.   If a developer is required to construct, fund or contribute system
improvements in excess of the development project's proportionate share of
system improvement costs, the developer shall receive a credit on future impact
fees or be reimbursed at the developer's choice for such excess construction,
funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by future development
which impacts the system improvements constructed, funded or contributed by the
developer(s) or fee payer. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
   C.   To be equitable, impact fees must avoid double charging. Impact fees
are structured to credit fee payers for taxes or fees they have paid or will
pay for the same services. General tax credits for future annual tax and fee
payments are expressed as an equivalent, current lump sum payment, and deducted
from the one time gross impact fee. The city calculates the impact fee
utilization projection included as an appendix to the study and updated yearly
at the time of the annual budget.
   D.   If credit or reimbursement is due to the developer pursuant to this
section, the city shall enter into a written agreement, with the fee payer,
negotiated in good faith, prior to the construction, funding or contribution.
The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and
form of reimbursement.
   E.   No credits shall be given for the construction of local on site
facilities, structures, improvements, or other project improvements required by
zoning, subdivision, or other city regulations unless the improvement is
identified in the "Study" as a system improvement.
   F.   Any person requesting such credit or reimbursement shall submit their
request in writing on a form provided by the city and present documentation of
costs or payments for facilities to the city clerk, or his or her duly
designated agent, prior to issuance of a building permit or manufactured/mobile
home installation permit. The determination shall be made no more than forty
five (45) days after complete documentation is submitted to the city clerk, or
his or her duly designated agent. Any appeal from such a determination by the
city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall be pursuant to section
7-6-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 358, 11-23-1999)
7-6-10: REFUNDS:
   A.   The current owner or contract purchaser of property on which an impact
fee has been paid may request a refund of such fee if:
      1.   Service is available but never provided;
      2.   The project for which a building permit has been used has been
lawfully altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due;
      3.   The city, after collecting the fee when service is not available,
has failed to appropriate and expend the collected development impact fees
pursuant to section 67-8210(4) Idaho Code; or
      4.   A building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured/
mobile home is denied or abandoned.
   B.   The request for refund must be filed in writing and submitted to the
city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, on a form provided by the city
for such purpose. The owner shall provide such documentation as the city clerk,
or his or her duly designated agent, may require to prove such satisfaction,
reconveyance, or releases from contract sellers, mortgagees, lien holders, and/
or others having an interest in the real property for which an impact fee has
been paid.
   C.   A request for refund must be filed within the time allowed by law.
   D.   Within ninety (90) days of the date of receipt of a request for refund,
the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, must provide the owner, in
writing, with a decision on the refund request including the reasons for the
decision. If a right to refund exists, the city is required to send a refund to
the owner of record within ninety (90) days after it is determined that a
refund is due. A refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half (1/2)
the legal rate provided for in section 28-22-104, Idaho Code.
   E.   Owner may appeal the determination of the city clerk, or his or her
duly designated agent, to the city council pursuant to the provisions in
section
7-6-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-11: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Of Written Determination: A developer or fee payer may appeal
the written determination of the applicability and amount of the development
impact fee, or refund, or any discretionary action or inaction by or on behalf
of the city to the city council.
   B.   Notice: The developer or fee payer must file a notice of appeal to the
city council with the city clerk within thirty (30) days following the written
determination, discretionary action or inaction. When filing an appeal, the fee
payer shall submit a letter providing a full explanation of the request, the
reason for appeal, as well as all supporting documentation.
   C.   Filing; Payment Under Protest: The filing of an appeal shall not stay
required payment of the impact fee, however, a fee payer can pay a development
impact fee under protest in order to obtain development approval or building
permit. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
   D.   Filing Fee: The fee for filing an appeal shall be established by
resolution of the city council.
   E.   Hearing Schedule; Findings: The city clerk shall schedule the appeal
hearing before the city council as soon as practical and participation in the
appeal process does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing other remedies
provided for in this chapter. The city council shall provide written findings
of fact and conclusions of law setting forth their decision. The written
decision of the city council shall be mailed to the fee payer, certified mail,
return receipt requested. (Ord. 358, 11-23-1999)
7-6-12: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS:
In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system improvements to be
paid by the developer, the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent,
shall consider whether any extraordinary costs will be incurred in serving the
development based upon an "extraordinary impact" as defined in section
7-6-2 of this chapter. This determination shall be made prior to issuance of
any permit for development and shall be paid prior to any such issuance except
as may be provided pursuant to a private agreement between the parties as
authorized by Idaho Code section 67-8214.
If the City Clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, determines that the
development will result in an extraordinary impact, it shall advise the fee
payer in writing what the extraordinary impact is, the reason for the
extraordinary impact, and the estimated costs to be incurred as a result of the
extraordinary impact.
Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the City to approve any development
which results in extraordinary impact.
The fee payer may appeal the determination of an extraordinary impact or the
amount of extraordinary costs incurred in writing by filing a notice of appeal
to the City Council with the City Clerk pursuant to the terms set forth in
section
7-6-11 of this chapter. When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall submit a
letter providing the reason for the appeal along with supporting documentation.
The City Council shall consider the appeal and make a final determination
within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written appeal. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-13: ADDENDUMS:
   A.   Addendum A entitled "Development Impact Fee Study" dated August 20,
1999, along with all footnotes, exhibits, appendices, and other attachments
referenced therein, and all subsequent amendments pertaining thereto including
but not limited to those amendments and updates dated June 29, 2011, and March
2017, are all by this reference incorporated herein as if set forth in full. A
description of acceptable levels of service for park and pathway system
improvements is described in the "study".
   B.   Addendum B entitled "City of Eagle Police Department Impact Fee Study
and Capital Improvement Plan" dated June, 2020 along with all footnotes,
exhibits, appendices, and other attachments referenced therein, and all
subsequent amendments pertaining thereto are all by this reference incorporated
herein as if set forth in full. A description of acceptable levels of service
for police is described in the "study". (Ord. 775, 5-9-2017; amd. Ord. 835, 11-
10-2020)
7-6-14: BONDING:
Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates, or other
obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other
City revenues as may be allocated by the City Council. (Ord. 345, 5-11-1999)
7-6-15: EFFECT OF FEE ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements, or
any other aspect of the development of land or provision of capital
improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and
effect without limitation with respect to all such development. (Ord. 345, 5-
11-1999)
7-6-16: OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from requiring a
developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a
development project.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit
private agreements between property owners and developers, the Idaho
Transportation Department, the City, and other governmental entities in regard
to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for
credits or reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer
including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for
project improvements which are used or shared by more than one (1) development
project. If it can be shown that a proposed development has a direct impact on
a public facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho Transportation
Department, then the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of
impact fees collected from the developer for the improvement of the public
facility by the Idaho Transportation Department.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the City to approve development
which results in an extraordinary impact. Extraordinary impacts shall be
determined and processed pursuant to section
7-6-12 of this chapter.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the City to approve a
development request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of
service below minimum acceptable levels established in this chapter. To this
end, the City may impose a development impact fee for system improvement costs
incurred subsequent to adoption of this chapter to the extent that new growth
and development will be served by the system improvements.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional
right to develop real property or diminish the power of the City in regulating
the orderly development of real property.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall work to limit the use by the city of the
power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or
procedures authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or
general obligation bond issues.
   G.   Nothing herein shall restrict or diminish the power of the city to
annex property into its territorial boundaries or exclude property from its
territorial boundaries upon request of a developer or owner, or to impose
reasonable conditions thereon, including the recovery of project or system
improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary annexation. (Ord. 345,
5-11-1999)
7-6-17: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The City is authorized under this code section and Idaho Code 67-8204A to enter
into intergovernmental agreements with other governmental entities or highway
districts, fire districts, water districts, sewer districts recreational water
and sewer districts or irrigation districts and the Idaho Department of
Transportation for the purpose of developing joint plans for capital
improvements or for the purpose of agreeing to collect and expend development
impact fees for system improvements or both.
All intergovernmental agreements shall contain a provision requiring the City
or the other party to the intergovernmental agreement to establish and maintain
a Capital Projects Fund Account or similar trust fund for the purpose of
ensuring that all development impact fees collected, pursuant to the
intergovernmental agreement, are used to address impacts reasonably
attributable to new development for which the development impact fees are paid.
The Capital Projects Fund shall be divided into one (1) or more trust accounts.
All funds in all trust accounts shall be maintained in an interest-bearing
account. The interest earned on each trust account pursuant to Idaho Code
Section 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by Idaho Code section 57-127, as it
may be amended, but shall be considered funds of each account and shall be
subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the development impact
fees on which the interest is generated. (Ord. 835, 11-10-2020)
7-6-18: FIRE IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Fire impact fees are hereby imposed on all new development within the
conterminous boundaries of the City and the Eagle Fire District and Star Fire
Protection District. The fire impact fees shall be collected as applicable by
the City and transferred to the Eagle Fire District and Star Fire Protection
District pursuant to an executed intergovernmental agreement by each entity.
The amount of the fire impact fee is identified in the Eagle Fire District
Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Plan dated June, 2020 and Star Fire
Protection District Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Plan dated
August, 2023 and all subsequent updates and amendments pertaining thereto. Fire
impact fees are subject to the same rules and procedures as other development
impact fees collected under this chapter including, but not limited to,
individual assessments, appeals, exemptions, refunds and extraordinary impact.
   B.   All fire impact fees paid by a fee payer pursuant to this chapter,
shall, upon receipt by the Eagle Fire District and Star Fire Protection
District, be promptly deposited by the Eagle Fire District and Star Fire
Protection District into a Capital Projects Fund established by the Eagle Fire
District and Star Fire Protection District. The Capital Projects Fund shall be
divided into one (1) or more trust accounts and:
      1.   Monies in each trust account shall be spent in the order collected,
on a first-in/first-out basis.
      2.   All funds in all trust accounts shall be maintained in an interest
bearing account. The interest earned on each trust account pursuant to Idaho
Code section 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by Idaho Code section 57-127, as
amended, but shall be considered funds of the trust accounts and shall be
subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the Fire District Impact
Fees on which the interest is generated.
      3.   The Eagle Fire District shall maintain and keep accurate financial
records for each of their trust accounts which records shall:
         a.   Show the source and disbursement of all revenues;
         b.   Account for all monies received;
         c.   Ensure that the disbursement of funds from each trust account
shall be used solely and exclusively for the provisions of projects specified
in the Eagle Fire District Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Plan dated
June, 2020 and the Star Fire Protection District Impact Fee Study and Capital
Improvements Plan dated August, 2023 and all updates and amendments pertaining
thereto; and
         d.   Provide an annual accounting for each trust account showing the
source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were funded,
which annual accounting shall be provided to the City as part of the annual
audit process of this chapter. (Ord. 835, 11-10-2020; amd. Ord. 948, 3-25-2025)
TITLE 8
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
ZONING INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Interpretation, Scope Of Regulations
8-1-2: Rules And Definitions
8-1-1: INTERPRETATION, SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations for each district set forth by this title shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land, except as hereinafter provided.
   A.   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located;
   B.   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
      1.   To provide for greater height or bulk,
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families,
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area,
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces
than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of
this title; and
   C.   No yard or lot existing at the effective date hereof shall be reduced
in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or
lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum
requirements set forth herein.
   D.   No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or
constructed except where the following conditions have been satisfied: (Ord.
298, 10-14-1997)
      1.   All streets to be dedicated to the Ada County highway district as
public streets, as defined in section
8-1-2 of this chapter and section
9-1-6 of this code, shall be constructed as required by ACHD or as required by
this code, whichever holds the higher standard; (Ord. 443, 11-11-2003)
      2.   Sanitary restrictions are removed pursuant to Idaho Code 50-1326;
      3.   Fire hydrants and water mains are provided, and operable, pursuant
to section 9-4-1-11 of this code; and
      4.   Street signs are installed which adequately identify the location of
such building for emergency purposes. (Ord. 298, 10-14-1997)
8-1-2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
   B.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
   C.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
   D.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed"
or "arranged" to be used or occupied.
   E.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel" and "tract".
The following words and terms, when used in this title, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or detached independent dwelling unit on
the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal dwelling unit that has separate kitchen, sleeping, and bathroom
facilities.
ACCESSORY STORAGE BUILDING: A building originally constructed for use as an
accessory building for the storage of materials and equipment accessory to a
primary use located on the property. Cargo containers, railroad cars, truck
vans, converted mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies,
vehicles and similar prefabricated items and structures originally built for
purposes other than the storage of goods and materials are not accessory
storage buildings.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure. In agricultural and residential zones accessory uses/structures
include, but are not limited to, accessory dwelling units, detached carports
and garages, pool houses and cabanas, amateur radio and satellite dish
antennas, barns, corrals, stables, and similar uses and structures, including
accessory storage buildings. In nonresidential zones accessory uses/structures
include, but are not limited to, detached carports and garages, caretaker's
quarters, guardhouses, microwave and satellite dish antennas, and similar uses
and structures.
ADMINISTRATOR: An official having knowledge in the principles and practices of
zoning who is appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council, to
administer this title.
ADULT BUSINESS: Establishments based primarily on materials or performances
that depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities. Adult
businesses must be a minimum distance of one-half (1/2) mile from any church,
school, daycare, and/or any other business or use which is primarily intended
for individuals under the age of eighteen (18) years old. The distance shall be
measured in a direct line from the front door of the adult business to the
front door of said business or use.
AFFECTED PERSON: One having an interest in real property which may be adversely
affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing the development.
AGRICULTURE AND FOREST: The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage,
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for parking, treating or storing the
produce; provided, however, that:
   A.   The operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities; and
   B.   The above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of animals
or poultry in penned enclosures within one hundred feet (100') of any
residential zoning district. Agriculture does not include the operation or
maintenance of a commercial feedlot or stockyard where large numbers of
livestock are fed concentrated feeds particularly for the purpose of fattening
for market.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water which has been set aside, designated,
classified and duly established by jurisdictional authorities which may be used
for aircraft terminals for people, mail, and freight, airport traffic control
and weather stations, aircraft repair, storage and tie down areas, gasoline,
jet fuel, oil and other aircraft supplies and parts storage areas, aircraft
landing strips, taxiways, clear areas, hangars, offices and such other
facilities, buildings or structures necessary therefor.
ALLEY: A right of way or common lot inclusive of an easement which provides
vehicular access to the rear or side of a property and is primarily intended to
provide access for alley load garages.
AMBULANCE SERVICES: Provision of nonemergency medical care transportation,
including incidental storage, maintenance and parking of medical transport
vehicles.
ANIMAL SHOWS: Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven
(7) days. This classification includes sales of animals and related
merchandise.
ANTENNA: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has complete
kitchen facilities permanently installed.
ARCHITECT: A professional individual registered in the state of Idaho to
practice in the field of architecture.
ART GALLERIES: A room or series of rooms where works of art are exhibited.
ARTIST STUDIOS: Workspace for artists and artisans, including individuals
practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied
art or craft.
ARTS AND CRAFTS SHOWS (OUTDOOR): Display and sale of painting, sculpture,
handicrafts and similar objects.
ASPHALT PLANT: An establishment where asphalt, tar, gravel and other materials
are combined to produce pavement and other related products.
AUCTION FACILITY: Facilities operated primarily for the sale of new and/or used
merchandise by auctioning.
AUTOMOTIVE BODY SHOP: Automobile collision service, repair and painting.
AUTOMOTIVE EMISSION TESTING FACILITY: A lot, structure, or vehicle where
emissions are tested or evaluated to determine compliance with law.
AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ISLANDS: A retail fuel sales facility typically including a
small kiosk building covered by a canopy.
AUTOMOTIVE GAS STATION/SERVICE SHOP: Buildings and premises where gasoline,
oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail and where, in addition, the following services may be
rendered and sales made:
   A.   Sales and service of spark plugs, batteries and distributors' parts;
   B.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
   C.   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake
fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floormats, seat covers, windshield wipers and
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like;
   D.   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
   E.   Washing, polishing and sale of washing and polishing materials;
   F.   Greasing and lubrication;
   G.   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, lines;
   H.   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
   I.   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
   J.   Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head or crankcase
or racing the motor;
   K.   Sales of cold drinks, packaged food, tobacco and similar convenience
goods for service station customers, as accessory and incidental to principal
operations;
   L.   Provisions of road maps and other informational materials to customers
and provision of restroom facilities; and
   M.   Warranty maintenance and safety inspections.
   Uses permissible at an automotive gas station/service shop do not include
major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found at an automotive gas station/service shop. An automotive gas
station/service shop is not a repair garage nor a body shop.
AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES: The sale or
rental of new and used motor vehicles, mobile homes, travel trailers and/or
farm implements, but not including repair work except incidental warranty
repair of same, to be displayed and sold on the premises.
AUTOMOTIVE PARTS AND ACCESSORIES SALES: The retail sale of new, used, and
rebuilt automotive parts accessories, including the rental of hand tools
commonly used in automotive repair (excluding services and installation).
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles
or parts thereof, excluding collision service, painting and steam cleaning of
vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE STORAGE: Storage of parking towaways, impound yards, and storage
lots for automobiles, trucks, buses and recreational vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE VINYL WRAP SHOP: The automotive aftermarket practice of
completely or partially covering a vehicle's original paint with a vinyl wrap
of a different color, and sometimes the same color with a differing finish like
a gloss, matte or clear protective layer. Other terms used to refer to vehicle
vinyl wrap are car wrap, paint wrap, color change wrap, vehicle graphics, and
paint protection film, but not including automobile collision service, repair,
and painting.
AUTOMOTIVE WASHING FACILITY: An establishment or area that provides facilities
for washing and cleaning vehicles, which may use production line methods with a
conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and that may employ some hand
labor. The facility may include vacuums and drying areas as accessory uses.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING YARD OR SALVAGE: The dismantling or wrecking of two (2) or
more used motor vehicles, mobile homes, trailers or the storage, sale or
dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or
their parts. Any premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, where more than
two (2) motor vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than thirty
(30) days, or where used motor vehicles or parts thereof are dismantled or
stored.
BACKAGE ROAD: A street, generally paralleling a state highway with properties
located between the backage road and the state highway, which provides
connectivity and access to said properties fronting the state highway. Backage
roads typically lie between section line roads and/or half mile collector
roads.
BAKERY PLANT (WHOLESALE): Establishments primarily engaged in making and
preparing bakery products for immediate and nonimmediate consumption.
BANKS/FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: Financial institutions that provide retail
banking services to individuals and businesses. This classification includes
those institutions engaged in the on site circulation of cash money and
businesses offering check cashing facilities.
   A.   With Drive-Up Service: Institutions providing services accessible to
persons who remain in their automobiles. Drive-up service is classified
separately because it is not appropriate at all locations.
BAR: An establishment for which a license under title 3, chapter 2, articles A,
B, and/or C of this code is required where the principal business is the sale
and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, but not including bars
within restaurants.
BAR, WINE/TASTING ROOM: An establishment for which a license under title 3,
chapter 2, articles A and B of this code is required where the principal
business is devoted to the sale of wine, beer, and cider whereby the product is
produced by one or multiple facilities licensed and located in the State of
Idaho for the consumption on or off premises. Food may be served; provided,
that: (1) food items are produced off premises; (2) food items provided for
consumption on site are limited to cheese, crackers, charcuterie and similar
items made available strictly in conjunction with and ancillary to the wine
tasting experience; and (3) the establishment is not a restaurant.
BASEMENT: A dwelling unit, all or partly underground, but having at least one-
half (1/2) of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
BEAUTY/BARBER SHOP: Establishments where services are provided for
hairdressing, but which may also offer tanning beds, facials, manicures,
pedicures, massages and the like.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: An owner occupied facility providing overnight
accommodations and breakfast food service to no more than twelve (12) guests at
any one time. No cooking shall be allowed in guestrooms and only breakfast food
shall be provided to guests. Bath facilities shall be shared by no more than
two (2) guestrooms.
BEVERAGE BOTTLING PLANT: An establishment that produces consumable liquids
(alcoholic or nonalcoholic) in bottles and/or cans.
BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, DORMITORY: A building other than a hotel or
motel where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation to three (3) or
more unrelated persons, but less than twelve (12) persons, who are not
transients, and kitchen facilities are not provided in the individual rooms.
BREWERY: An establishment for the manufacture of lager and ale.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building detached from, but located on the
same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the main building or use.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the top of
the peak for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING SUPPLY OUTLET: A commercial establishment storing and offering for
sale building supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed, grain, and similar goods,
for wholesale or retail sale. This use does not include hardware stores.
BUSINESS, TECHNICAL AND TRADE SCHOOLS: A proprietary school as defined by Idaho
Code section 33-2401.
CABINET SHOP: An establishment, either wholesale or retail, that sells, repairs
and/or manufactures cabinets or wood trim for any type of building or
structure.
CATERING SERVICE: Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off site
consumption without provision for on site pick up or consumption.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains and
dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery purposes include columbaria,
crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries operated in conjunction with the
cemetery.
CENTRAL SEWER SYSTEM: Any system that receives blackwaste or wastewater in
volumes exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per day; any system
which receives blackwaste or wastewater from more than two (2) dwelling units
or more than two (2) buildings under separate ownership.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any facility where children regularly receive care and
supervision, usually unaccompanied by the children's parents, guardians or
custodians, and regardless of whether the facility does or does not provide any
instruction. This use excludes the case of: a) the operator's children or legal
wards or children related by blood or marriage, b) occasional personal guests,
and c) children aged twelve (12) years and over. Any home, place, or facility
providing overnight custodial services for lodging or boarding for the
occupants therein shall not be considered a childcare facility.
There are three (3) types of childcare facilities:
   A.   Family daycare home: A childcare facility for six (6) or fewer
children. Babysitting services are an accessory use to residential uses.
   B.   Group daycare facility: A childcare facility for seven (7) to twelve
(12) children.
   C.   Daycare center: A childcare facility for thirteen (13) or more
children.
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES: Retail sales of Christmas trees between Thanksgiving and
December 26.
CHURCHES AND OTHER PLACES OF RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY: An establishment that by
design and construction is primarily intended for conducting organized
religious services, meetings, and associated activities and that is recognized
as a religious corporation or society of the state of Idaho with a state tax
exempt status in accord with Idaho Code section 63-602B.
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS: Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities,
live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities, which may be
conducted outdoors, or in a tent or other temporary structure, for a maximum of
seven (7) days. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent
entertainment facility.
CLINIC: A building used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm or injured persons or those who are in need of medical and surgical
attention; but which building does not provide board, room or regular hospital
care and services.
CLUB OR LODGE: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by
an organized association of persons for a social, literary, political,
educational or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members
and their guests; but still not including any organization, group or
association, the principal activity of which is to render a service usually and
ordinarily carried on as a business.
COFFEE ROASTING FACILITY: A facility in which unprocessed, green coffee may be
sorted, roasted and processed, or packaged for use and consumption.
COLLEGES, UNIVERSITIES: An educational institution authorized by the state to
award associate, baccalaureate, or doctorate degrees or post high school
certifications or licenses.
COLLOCATION: The use of a single tower to support more than one wireless
telecommunication service provider's equipment, or the mounting of an antenna
to a preexisting structure.
COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: An establishment or venue which is
generally related to the entertainment field, the principal business of which
is not the sale of alcoholic beverages.
COMMISSION/HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The historic preservation commission, Eagle,
Idaho.
COMMISSION/PLANNING AND ZONING: The zoning, planning and zoning, joint zoning
or joint planning and zoning commission with individuals appointed by the mayor
and confirmed by the council.
COMMON AREA OPEN SPACE: Land within a development, not individually owned or
dedicated for public use (except for the portion of the 8 foot wide landscape
strip located adjacent to and within the public right of way of a local street)
or for use as private streets, which is designed and intended for the common
use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It may include
complementary structures and improvements (see definitions of Open Space; Open
Space, Active; and Open Space, Passive).
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES: Broadcasting, recording, and other communication
services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but
excluding public service facilities and personal wireless service facilities.
This classification includes radio, television, or recording studios; telephone
switching centers; and telegraph offices.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the council
including such things as the general location and extent of present and
proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial and commercial uses,
major transportation, parks, schools and other community facilities.
CONCRETE BATCH PLANT: An establishment that combines cement, sand and gravel to
produce concrete.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted within a district, other than a principally
permitted use, requiring a permit and approval of the council. Uses permitted
in each district are listed in section
8-2-3, "Schedule Of District Use Regulations", of this title.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD AND/OR SHOP: Any area of land or building used by a
contractor for storage, maintenance, or processing incidental to the business
of building, hauling, excavation, demolition, or similar activity and including
any area of land or building used for the incidental repair of machinery used
for any of the above listed activities.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Retail sales of food, beverages and small convenience items
typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Eagle.
CREMATORIUM: A facility for the burning of corpses, human or animal, to ashes
either as a principal use or as an accessory use. Crematoriums do not include
establishments where incinerators are used to dispose of toxic or hazardous
materials, infectious materials or narcotics.
CULTURAL FACILITIES: A facility where activities, programs, displays or
performances, presented for the enjoyment, education or other benefit of the
general public, involving art, music, literature, live theater, craft shows,
history or humanities.
DAIRY FARM: A farm whose principal function is the production of milk and milk
products and which may include the processing of milk so produced. A dairy farm
further refers to a dairy barn, processing facility or feeding area where
animals are kept, raised or fed in a restricted area, and where the milking
area is subject to the approval of the Idaho state department of health and
welfare.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be
developed, including public right of way, private streets, and common area open
space; excluding floodway.
Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage
involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding public
right of way, private streets, common area open space, and floodway.
DESIGN REVIEW ORDINANCE: The design review ordinance of the city, as adopted by
the city, or as may hereafter be amended and/or codified 1 .
DETENTION FACILITIES: Publicly owned and operated facilities providing housing,
care, and supervision for persons confined by law.
DRIVE-IN THEATER: An open lot devoted primarily to the showing of motion
pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated
in automobiles.
DRUGSTORE: A store where the primary business is the filling of medical
prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies and
nonprescription medicines but where nonmedical products may be sold as well.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of three (3) or more dwelling
units with varying arrangements of entrances and party walls, commonly referred
to as apartments. Multi-family housing may include public housing.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only,
separated from other dwelling units by open space. This classification includes
manufactured homes and any home in which eight (8) or fewer supervised
unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped or elderly persons reside.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A dwelling consisting of two (2) or more
dwelling units attached to one another by common walls with each dwelling unit
being on a separate lot, commonly referred to as townhouses and/or townhomes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling, consisting of two (2) dwelling units which
may be either attached side by side or one above the other. This definition
does not include accessory dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Space within a dwelling comprising living, dining, sleeping room
or rooms and storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking,
bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its household
employees.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a
specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
ELEMENTARY AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS: See definition of Schools, Public Or
Private.
EMERGENCY: Occurrence or imminent threat of a disaster or condition threatening
life or property that requires immediate action to save lives and protect
property or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster.
EMERGENCY HEALTHCARE: Facilities providing emergency medical service with no
provision for continuing care on an inpatient basis.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: Provision of emergency medical care transportation, fire
protection and police protection, including incidental storage and maintenance
and parking of emergency and emergency related vehicles.
ENGINEER: Any professional person who is licensed in the state of Idaho to
practice professional engineering.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND SALES YARD: The use of a site for the sale, rental,
storage, or servicing of tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, or similar industrial equipment.
FACADE: The front or chief face of a building.
FAMILY:
   A.   A person living alone or two (2) or more persons related by blood or
marriage;
   B.   A group of not more than ten (10) persons who need not be related by
blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit;
   C.   Eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped or
elderly persons residing in a dwelling under staff supervision, provided that
no more than two (2) staff members reside in the dwelling at any one time.
(Resident staff shall not be counted toward the "8 or fewer" criterion.)
FARM: Buildings and premises used for the raising and processing of farm
products in an agricultural setting by an individual or an association which
operates and manages the farm either as owner or tenant, at a site used for a
farm residence and associated farm accessory buildings.
FARMERS' MARKETS (OUTDOORS): The use of a site for the seasonal sale of fresh
agricultural products directly to the consumer at an open air market designed
as a community activity. It may provide arts and crafts booths accessory to the
produce and plant life booths.
FEEDLOT OR STOCKYARD: Primarily where large numbers of livestock are fed
concentrated feeds particularly for the purpose of fattening for market.
FLEX SPACE: Allows for uses that generally require substantial amounts of
storage and working area as well as office and/or showroom space. This use is
not intended to permit warehousing or manufacturing that has high levels of
truck activity. Loading docks shall be at the rear of the structure, shall be
screened from view from street and neighboring uses, and loading ramps shall be
a maximum of two feet (2') high to discourage tractor trailer use. Examples of
uses include, but are not limited to, custom bookbinding, ceramic studios,
candle making shops, custom jewelry manufacture, lighting/plumbing fixture
showrooms, small merchandise assembly, and low intensity sales and distribution
facilities. Gross floor area of each building used as "flex space" shall be a
maximum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Buildings may be comprised of
several lease spaces. Hours of operation shall be limited to between six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES: Retail sales of food and beverages for off site
preparation and consumption. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores,
delicatessens, or bakeries, and exclude convenience stores and catering
services.
FOOD PROCESSING PLANT: A commercial operation that manufactures, packages,
labels, or stores food for human consumption, and provides food for sale or
distribution to other business entities.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A road which has unlimited access to collector and access
streets but has limited access to arterial streets. Access onto arterial
streets is limited to one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') between points.
GOLF COURSE AND RELATED SERVICES: A tract of land laid out for playing the game
of golf that may include a clubhouse, dining and snack bars, pro shop, and
practice facilities.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a
government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental
storage and maintenance of vehicles.
GRAIN STORAGE: Any facility used to store any harvested crop to be sold for
gain.
HARDWARE STORES: Sales of home and commercial building supplies. This use does
not include building supply outlets.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The local district health department or state department of
health and welfare that has jurisdictional authority.
HEALTH CLUBS, SPAS, WEIGHT REDUCTION SALONS: Establishments with equipment for
exercise and physical conditioning.
HEIGHT: The height of personal wireless facilities, spires, poles, antennas,
steeples, towers, and similar structures shall be determined by measuring the
vertical distance from the point of contact with the ground to the highest
point of the structure, including any vertical projection thereof. When mounted
upon other structures, the combined height of the personal wireless facility,
spire, pole, antenna, steeple, tower, and/or similar structure, including the
height of the structure mounted upon, shall be used to determine height.
HELIPORTS: Pads and facilities enabling takeoffs and landings by helicopters.
HIGH SCHOOL: See definition of Schools, Public Or Private.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this
community, the state, or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state,
or the nation.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a dwelling unit and property that is:
   A.   Used for gainful employment or commercial purposes that involves the
provision, assembly, processing or sale of goods and/or services; and
   B.   Incidental and secondary to the residential use of the structure and
land and does not change the essential residential character of the dwelling
unit/property; but
   C.   Excludes uses that provide shelter or lodging to persons who are not
members of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
HORTICULTURE:
   A.   General: The raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees and
shrubs as a commercial enterprise, including the storage of nursery equipment
and materials and the erection of nursery structures.
   B.   Limited: The raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees and
shrubs as a commercial enterprise, provided that no nursery equipment or
materials shall be stored and no structures erected.
HOSPITAL: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of
facilities for the medical or surgical care of patients for twenty four (24)
hours or more. This classification includes incidental facilities for
outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative
services for patients and employees. The term hospital does not include
convalescent, nursing or boarding homes and does not include institutions
devoted to the care of the mentally ill or drug or alcohol addicted.
HOTEL: Establishments offering rooms as lodging on a less than weekly basis to
guests. Hotels typically have eating and drinking service and a dining room
where meals are served.
ICE MANUFACTURE, COLD STORAGE: A manufacturing plant where ice is produced and
stored.
INDUSTRIAL:
   A.   Extractive: Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, storing,
separating, cleaning or marketing of any mineral natural resource.
   B.   Heavy: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing and
similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive in
character, require large sites, open storage and service areas, extensive
services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation and normally
generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air
pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
   C.   Light: Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are usually
controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet and free of objectionable or
hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor or dust; operating and storing
within enclosed structures and generating little industrial traffic and no
nuisances.
INDUSTRY:
   A.   Custom: Establishments primarily engaged in on site production of goods
by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small scale
equipment.
   B.   Limited: Includes mechanical equipment not exceeding two (2)
horsepower, a single kiln not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts and the incidental
direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses
include custom bookbinding, ceramic studios, candle making shops, and custom
jewelry manufacture.
INDUSTRY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: Establishments primarily engaged in the
research, development, and production of high technology electronic, industrial
or scientific products or commodities for sale, but prohibits uses that may be
objectionable by reason of production of offensive odor, dust, noise,
vibration, or storage of hazardous materials. Examples of uses include, but are
not limited to, biotechnology firms, and computer component manufacturers.
INSTITUTION: Building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of
mental, therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling or other correctional services.
JUNKYARD: An outdoor space where waste and discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or handled,
including house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places where such uses
are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, such as pawnshops
and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and
household equipment or for used cars in operable condition, or salvaged
materials incidental to manufacturing operations.
KENNEL (For Hobby, Commercial Or Boarding Purposes): Any lot or premises or
portion on which three (3) or more dogs, cats and other household domestic
animals are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in
return for compensation or kept for sale including privately or publicly owned,
operated or managed dog pounds.
LABORATORIES: Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory services;
or establishments with less than two thousand (2,000) square feet providing
photographic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are
classified as industry limited.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A professional individual registered in the state of Idaho
to practice in the field of landscape architecture.
LAUNDROMAT: Business providing self-service cleaning facilities for clothing
and other fabric articles.
LAUNDRY:
   A.   With No Drive-Up Service: A business which launders and dry cleans
clothing and other fabric articles in bulk.
   B.   With Drive-Up Service: Institutions providing services accessible to
persons who remain in their automobiles. Drive-up service is classified
separately because it is not appropriate at all locations.
LIBRARY: Any establishment or building set aside for the repository or
retrieval of information available for the public or patrons to make use of for
all kinds of research and reading, including rooms for meetings.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS: Temporary concerts and other cultural events lasting
less than seven (7) days or ongoing occasional events such as barn dances,
square dances, weddings and receptions; temporary events such as corn mazes,
hayrides, retail pumpkin patches and petting zoos lasting less than forty five
(45) days per calendar year.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS; CITY SPONSORED: Temporary concerts and other
community and cultural events.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pick ups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and
accessible to such vehicles when required off street parking spaces are filled.
Required off street loading space is not to be included as off street parking
space in computation of required off street parking space. All off street
loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right of
way.
LOT: A parcel, plot, tract, or other land area of sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and created by
subdivision for sale, transfer, or lease, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage, as may be
required within this code, on an improved public street, or on an approved
private street, and may consist of:
   A.   A single lot of record;
   B.   A portion of a lot of record; and
   C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record.
LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot
to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion adjacent
to the street, except for alley load homes designed to face each other with
common area pedestrian access between fronts. In that case the front of the lot
shall be the property line opposite of the alley and adjacent to the common
area pedestrian access. For the purpose of determining frontage requirements on
corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated under "Yard" in
this section.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF: The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of
the right of way of any public or private street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of
the county recorder; or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots,
interior lots and through lots is as follows:
   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets;
   Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street;
   Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot;
and
   Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
LOT WIDTH: Lot width shall be determined as follows: The distance between side
lot lines measured at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
LUMBERYARD, RETAIL: An area and/or structures or buildings used for the
storage, distribution, and sale of finished or rough cut lumber and lumber
products.
MACHINE SHOP: A workshop in which work is machined to size and assembled.
MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR SERVICES: An establishment providing appliance repair,
office machine repair, or building maintenance services. This use does not
include the maintenance and repair of vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME:
   A.   A dwelling constructed according to HUD/FHA construction and safety
standards and as defined by Idaho Code section 39-4105.
   B.   A rehabilitated dwelling certified by the state of Idaho department of
labor and industry, building safety division.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A residential development developed exclusively for
siting manufactured homes on individual spaces that are rented or leased.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A residential subdivision developed exclusively
for siting manufactured homes on individual lots or under individual ownership.
MICROBREWERY: A small brewery, generally producing fewer than ten thousand
(10,000) barrels of lager and ale a year and frequently selling its products on
the premises. Also called boutique brewery, brewpub. Sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages is limited to lager, ale, wine, and cider. A microbrewery
may include, but is not limited to, the following: tasting rooms, barrel rooms,
bottling rooms, tank rooms, laboratories, processing structure, and offices.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable structure suitable for year round single-family
occupancy and having water, electrical, sewage connections similar to those of
conventional dwellings. This definition applies only to units constructed prior
to June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME COURT (RV): Any site or tract of land whereupon two (2) or more
mobile homes, travel trailers, or recreational vehicles are placed, located and
maintained for dwelling purposes on a temporary basis.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership upon which
two (2) or more mobile homes in habitation are parked, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of such park.
MOBILE OFFICE: A detached mobile unit not intended for occupancy as a dwelling
unit designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on
flatbed or other trailers or detached wheels. Use of mobile office at other
than a construction site or a subdivision sales office requires a conditional
use permit.
MODULAR HOME: Constructed with standardized units or dimensions for flexibility
and variety in use.
MORTUARIES, FUNERAL PARLORS, AND SIMILAR TYPE USES: A building used for the
preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and
rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation.
MOTELS: Establishments offering lodging on less than a weekly basis. This
classification may include incidental eating or drinking service.
MUSEUM: Institution displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more
of the arts or sciences. This classification includes museums and art
galleries.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or use of land existing at the time of
enactment of this title, and which does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
NONPROFIT REHABILITATION CENTER: Facilities operated by established nonprofit
organizations such as Goodwill Industries, Salvation Army, etc., which are
intended to provide employment and training for handicapped persons. Such
facilities may include, but are not limited to, activities such as light
assembly of products, training, administrative office, repair and sale of
secondhand clothing, furniture and appliances, and may include certain
facilities for persons with profound mental retardation. This use does not
include homeless shelters or other forms of transient or permanent residential
accommodation.
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS: Land, building or combination thereof for the
storage, cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for
retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or
landscaping.
NURSING/CONVALESCENT HOME: Establishments providing care on a twenty four (24)
hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding
facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services. This
classification also includes senior assisted living facilities with provisions
for shared kitchen facilities and rooms with private bathrooms.
OFFICES, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL: Offices of firms or organizations providing
professional, executive, management, or administrative services. This
classification includes medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office
use, but excludes banks and savings and loan associations.
OFFICE, MEDICAL AND DENTAL: A facility for a group of one (1) or more
physicians for the examination and treatment of human patients, primarily
engaged in furnishing, on an outpatient basis, chiropractic, dental, medical,
surgical, medical imaging, or other services to individuals. Patients are not
kept overnight. Ancillary laboratory facilities may be included.
OPEN SPACE: A common area platted as a separate lot (except for the portion of
the 8 foot wide landscape strip located adjacent to and within the public right
of way of a local street), substantially open to the sky, exclusive of streets,
commercial and residential buildings, and shall be designated and intended as a
usable and convenient amenity for the residences of any proposed development.
OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE: Common area which includes, but is not limited to, athletic
fields, buildings or structures for recreational activities including picnic
areas, community garden, courses or courts, children's play area, dog play
area, and pathways, excluding passive open space areas. Landscape buffer areas
not required pursuant to subsection
8-2A-7J of this title may be considered, in part, as active open space provided
a pathway or other active amenity is located within and incorporated into the
buffer area. Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of water bodies
(i.e., ponds) within a development may be considered active open space provided
there is a finding that the ponds employ active recreation capabilities such as
fishing, rafting, canoeing, and the like.
OPEN SPACE, PASSIVE: Common area which includes, but is not limited to,
landscaped buffer areas required pursuant to subsection
8-2A-7J of this title (including the sidewalk within the buffer area), natural
areas, wetland areas, ornamental gardens, decorative fountains, and water
bodies, excluding active open space areas.
PAD MOUNTED MECHANICALS: All mechanical and electrical equipment mounted on the
ground, including, but not limited to, transformers, compressors, generators,
and other equipment to establish a controlled interior environment. All pad
mounted mechanicals shall be screened from view.
PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL: That portion of a building wall that rises above the
roof level.
PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES: Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, recreation
and entertainment facilities, and open spaces.
PARKING LOT, PARKING GARAGE: Parking lots or garages offering short term or
long term parking.
PARKING LOT, PARKING GARAGE, COMMERCIAL: Parking lots or garages offering short
term or long term parking to the public for a fee.
PARKING LOT, PARKING GARAGE, GOVERNMENT: Parking lots or garages which are
owned by a government agency and which offer short term or long term parking to
the public for no charge or for a fee.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: An off street parking space shall consist of an area
adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides,
together with properly related access to a public street or alley and
maneuvering room, but shall be located totally outside of any street or alley
right of way.
PAWNSHOPS:
   A.   General: Establishments licensed by this code and engaged in the buying
or selling of new or secondhand merchandise, including minimal numbers of used
autos, and offering loans secured by personal property.
   B.   Auto (Exclusive): Auto pawnshops are those businesses dealing
exclusively in offering loans secured by automobiles, trucks, motorcycles,
recreational vehicles, travel trailers and similar vehicles, the storage of
which requires one or more large parking areas. An auto pawn dealer may sell
unredeemed pawned vehicles; however, the auto pawn classification does not
include the sale of new vehicles unless auto pawn business is in conjunction
with and on the premises of a new vehicle dealership.
PERFORMANCE BOND OR SURETY BOND: A financial guarantee by a subdivider or
developer with the city in the amount of the estimated construction cost
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements, according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the agreement.
PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT: Provision of instructional services or facilities,
including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, driving
schools, and fitness studios.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Provision of commercial services to the general public such
as shoe repair, watch repair, barbershops, beauty parlors, pet grooming,
massage therapy, and similar activities.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES: Facilities necessary for the provision of
personal wireless services (i.e., towers, support buildings, etc.).
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES (WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDING): Facilities necessary
for the provision of personal wireless services (i.e., antennas) that are
located within a building or on a building and screened from view.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial wireless telecommunication services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and
similar services that are marketed to the general public.
PETROLEUM BULK STORAGE: A single property or contiguous or adjacent properties
used for a common purpose which are owned or operated by the same person on or
in which are located:
One or more stationary tanks which are used singularly or in combination for
the storage or containment of more than one thousand one hundred (1,100)
gallons of petroleum; or
All stationary tanks used for storage of used oil; or
Any tank whose capacity is greater than one hundred ten (110) gallons that is
used for the storage or containment of petroleum, the volume of which is ten
percent (10%) or more beneath the surface of the ground.
PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO: An establishment for taking or developing photographs on
site for a fee or compensation.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development designed to incorporate a variety of
lot sizes and created to accommodate a wide range of income levels and planned
to be developed as a unit under single ownership or control which may include
residential, commercial, or office uses or any combination thereof.
PORTABLE CLASSROOM: A detached mobile unit not intended for occupancy as a
dwelling unit designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels,
flatbed trailer or detached wheels. Use is only for classroom space associated
with an approved school building. Portable classrooms shall comply with the
performance standards for an accessory building as specified in subsection
8-3-5A of this title.
PRINCIPAL BUSINESS: The business activity carried out by a person or entity at
a specific location that is not an "accessory use". The term "accessory use" as
used herein shall be defined as set forth in this section.
PRINTING AND/OR BLUEPRINTING: An establishment providing printing,
blueprinting, photocopying, graphic design, engraving, binding, or related
services.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: The erection, construction, alteration, operation or
maintenance of buildings, power plants or substations, water treatment plants
or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants and other similar public
services structures by a public utility, by a railroad whether publicly owned
or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including
the furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport, communication, public water
and sewage services.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and
structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the
storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service
facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY YARD: A yard where facilities such as utility shops, garages, or
storage areas are located that are owned and operated by a public utility.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic or nonprofit nature.
RECREATION ITEM, PERSONAL: Includes, but is not limited to, bus, boat,
snowmobile, jet ski, horse trailer, motorcycle, and all-terrain vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping
trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for
recreational or emergency occupancy. Any of the following vehicles which are
licensed for travel on the highway: travel trailer (a vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreation or vacation, or one permanently identified as a travel
trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer); pick-up coach (a structure
designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreation and vacation); motor home (a portable, temporary dwelling to
be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of
a self-propelled vehicle); and camping trailer (a canvas, material or metal
folding structure, mounted on wheels, and designed for travel, recreation and
vacation use).
RECYCLING OPERATION: A lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings, upon
which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual
reuse in new products.
RENDERING PLANT: A factory or plant that renders and processes livestock
carcasses into tallow, hides, fertilizer, etc.
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES: Research, development and testing related to such fields
as chemical, pharmaceutical, medical, electrical, transportation and
engineering.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses
as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom, and dining room. Bars and
microbreweries are allowed within restaurants, whether operated by the
restaurateur or by a separate entity, and shall be allowed under the same use
classification as the restaurant when operated within a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant which primarily serves patrons in vehicles
parked outside the principal building. Patrons are served at the vehicle and
these facilities typically have no indoor seating. This use does not include
restaurants with drive-up window service.
RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THROUGH: A restaurant, typically with indoor seating,
which includes drive-up window service for ordering food to go.
RETAIL SALES:
   A.   General: The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under
another use classification. This classification includes department stores,
clothing stores, video stores, and furniture stores, and businesses retailing
the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry,
cameras, photographic supplies, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods,
bicycles, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, art antiques, art supplies
and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor coverings, and office
supplies.
   B.   Limited: Excludes furniture, hardware, paint and wallpaper, carpeting
and floorcovering, and similar uses.
   C.   Pharmacies And Medical: Establishments primarily selling prescription
drugs, and medical supplies and equipment.
   D.   Artisan: Handmade items, foodstuffs, and crafts made on the premises.
Artisan sales is the only retail sales subclassification that is permitted as
part of a home occupation use.
RIDING ACADEMIES/STABLES: Establishments offering facilities for instruction in
horseback riding, including rings, stables, and exercise areas, and facilities
for the care and exercise of horses and related equestrian activities.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In
addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips,
sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special features
(required by topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped
area, viaducts and bridges.
ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale
of agricultural and related products, the majority of which have been grown on
adjacent land.
ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICALS: All equipment mounted above the roof plane of a
building, including, but not limited to, heating and air conditioning
equipment, antennas, satellite dishes, and other equipment necessary to
establish a controlled interior environment. All roof mounted mechanicals shall
be screened from view.
RV PARK: A place where people with recreational vehicles can stay overnight, or
longer, in allotted spaces known as “spaces,” “sites,” or “campsites.”
SAND OR GRAVEL YARD: An area that is being used for the purpose of removing the
sand or gravel from the land for wholesale or retail use; excavating and
removing rock, stone, ore, soil, gravel, sand, minerals, and similar materials
from the surface and/or subsurface for profit. Extractive industries are
quarries, sand and gravel pits, mines, and soil removal operations. They are
intensive operations that may generate large amounts of truck traffic, noise
(including blasting), and dust. Much of the activity may result in odors from
asphalt plants, noise and dust from sifters, crushers, and loading and
unloading trucks, as well as runoff from washing material and cleaning
operations and water sprayed to keep dust down.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site in which refuse and earth, or other suitable
cover material, are deposited and compacted in alternating layers of specified
depth in accordance with an approved plan.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE: An institution of learning that offers academic
instruction in the courses that are required by the state of Idaho to be taught
in public schools. "School" includes kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior
high, and senior high. Privately funded schools whose curriculum meets the
state of Idaho standards shall be included in this definition.
SEAT: For purposes of determining the number of off street parking spaces for
certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or
indicated on each twenty four (24) linear inches of benches, pews or space for
loose chairs. A row of benches, pews or loose chairs for every five feet (5')
of seating area shall be considered for determining total possible number of
rows.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line (except for front setback), defining the limits of a
yard in which no building or structure may be located aboveground except as may
be provided herein.
SHIPPING/CARGO CONTAINER: Standardized reusable vessels that were:
   A.   Originally designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or
transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities; and/or
   B.   Originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail,
truck or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport
device. This definition includes the terms "transport containers" and "portable
site storage containers" having a similar appearance to and similar
characteristics of cargo containers.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed,
owned and/or managed as a unit related in location, size and type of shops to
the trade area the unit serves. Shopping centers shall provide services for a
neighborhood or for the community. Neighborhood centers will typically be
comprised of between thirty thousand (30,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross leasable floor area and community centers will typically
be comprised of between one hundred thousand (100,000) to four hundred fifty
thousand (450,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area.
SHOPPING MALL: A regional shopping facility comprised of many separate shops
typically with two (2) or more major anchors (usually full line department
stores) with shops/major anchors accessed mostly by indoor halls/walking areas.
Outdoor access may be provided for open air shopping malls. A shopping mall
shall provide services for a regional area, as well as the community, and will
typically be comprised of between four hundred fifty thousand (450,000) to
eight hundred fifty thousand (850,000) square feet of gross leasable floor
area.
SIDEWALK: The portion of the road right of way outside the roadway which is
improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGN:
   A.   Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not
on the premises on which the sign is located.
   B.   Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or
device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place
designed to advertise, identify or convey information, including any
landscaping where letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing the
public's attention to a product or location, with the exception of window
displays and state or national flags.
      1.   Illuminated Sign: Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light including reflecting or phosphorescent light.
      2.   Lighting Device Sign: Any light, string of lights or group of lights
located or arranged so as to cast illumination on the sign.
      3.   Off Premises Sign: Any sign unrelated to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises
where such sign is located.
      4.   On Premises Sign: Any sign related to a business or profession
conducted, or a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where
such sign is located.
      5.Projecting Sign: Any sign which projects from the exterior of a
building.
SMALL ENGINE REPAIR (Mower, Chain Saws, Etc.): An establishment for repair and
maintenance of small engines and equipment such as lawn mowers, snowblowers,
chain saws, and the like. This does not include any type of automotive or
vehicular engine/equipment repair.
STOCKYARD, SLAUGHTERHOUSE, MEATPACKING: An establishment maintained for the use
of slaughtering or maintaining stock or preparing or processing of products for
human consumption in order to prepare for sale to outlets.
STORAGE (ENCLOSED BUILDING): An enclosed building or group of buildings
containing separate, individual, secured, and private storage spaces of varying
sizes available for lease or rent for varying periods of time.
STORAGE (FENCED AREA): The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk,
material, or merchandise in the same place for more than twenty four (24)
hours.
STORM DRAIN FACILITY: Facilities by which stormwater is collected and conveyed,
including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, streets,
gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities,
retention and detention basins, and natural and humanmade or altered drainage
ditches/channels/lakes/reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORY: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling
immediately above it.
STREET: A right of way or common lot inclusive on an easement which provides
for vehicular and or vehicular and pedestrian travel, the dedication or
granting of which has been officially approved by a governmental agency for
public or private street purposes. The term "street" also includes the terms
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or other
such terms. Street types are defined as follows:
   Arterial Street: Primarily provides for access from one part of the
community to another and also provides for the movement of vehicles through the
community.
   Collector Street: Primarily provides for circulation within and between
neighborhoods.
   Local Street: Primarily provides for access to abutting properties.
STREET FAIR: Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live
entertainment, or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures
for a maximum period of seven (7) days. This classification includes block
parties.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences
and billboards.
SURETY: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the developer
or his agent to the city clerk, which guarantees that the developer will
perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an approved plat,
and provides that if the developer defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the developer or his agent will pay damages up
to the limit of the surety, or the financial instrument will itself complete
the requirements of the approved plat.
TATTOO PARLORS AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS: A commercial land use where
the marking or coloring of the skin is performed by pricking in coloring matter
or by producing scars, and/or piercing of the body which is conducted in
exchange for financial or other valuable consideration. It does not include
tattooing when applied by a licensed dermatologist on premises licensed as a
dermatological office.
TERMINAL YARD, TRUCKING: The use of a site where freight brought by truck or
rail is transferred. The use may include the storage or repair of trucks or
railcars. The use excludes the long term or permanent storage of freight.
TOWER: Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, similar structure, or
combination thereof, with a "height", as defined in this section, in excess of
fifteen feet (15'), including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and
masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.
TRADE FAIRS: Display and sale of goods or equipment related to a specific trade
or industry for a maximum period of seven (7) days.
TRAVEL SERVICES: Establishments providing travel information and travel
reservations to individuals and businesses. This classification excludes car
rental agencies, and reservation services that do not make travel arrangements
as a primary function of their operation.
TRUCK AND EQUIPMENT REPAIR AND SALES (HEAVY): The sale of vehicles primarily
designed to carry cargo and material. Truck sales often involve the assembly of
chassis and cabs.
TRUCK STOP, SERVICE STATION: A filling station or business enterprise using the
premises primarily to sell and supply motor fuel, lubricating oils and greases
to on premises trade including large trucks as well as automobiles, including
sale of tires, batteries, accessories and related services. Major and minor
motor vehicle repairs, as well as special services to operators and drivers of
trucks operating on an interstate basis provided.
TURF AND/OR TREE FARM: A property for agricultural use that is five (5) acres
in size or greater, and is used for the purpose of growing turf and/or trees.
UPHOLSTERY SHOP: An establishment which sells upholstery or offers
reupholstering services on site.
USE: The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: A modification of the bulk and placement requirements of this title
as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard,
setbacks, parking space, height of buildings or other provisions of this title
affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure
upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not be considered a right or
special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of
undue hardship because of the characteristics of the site and that the variance
is not in conflict with the public interest. Definition same as Idaho Code 67-
6516.
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming,
diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those
who are in need of medical or surgical attention and may include overnight
accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and/or recuperation.
It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary activity.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means the
relationship of the proposed developments to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
VINEYARD: A property in agriculture that is five (5) acres in size or greater,
used for the purpose of growing and cultivating grapevines.
WALKWAY: A public way, four feet (4') or more in width, for pedestrian use
only, whether or not along the side of a road.
WALL: A continuous structure designed to enclose an area to be the surrounding
exterior of a building.
WAREHOUSING AND STORAGE:
   A.   Limited: Provision of storage space for household or commercial goods
within an enclosed building without direct public access to individual storage
spaces. This classification includes facilities with a maximum of five thousand
(5,000) square feet of gross floor area, but excludes wholesaling, distribution
and storage, ministorage and vehicle storage.
   B.   Ministorage: Provision of storage space for household or commercial
goods within an enclosed building with direct public access to individual
storage spaces. May include vehicle storage to a maximum of twenty percent
(20%) of the site. Where greater than twenty percent (20%) of the site is
allocated to vehicle storage, the vehicle storage must be treated as a separate
use.
WHOLESALING, COMMERCIAL: Wholesaling and storage of commercial goods and
supplies within an enclosed building.
WHOLESALING, DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE: Storage and distribution facilities not
including retail sales having five (5) or fewer trucks at any one time.
WHOLESALING, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE; SMALL SCALE: Wholesaling, distribution,
and storage having a maximum gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square
feet and using a maximum of two (2) commercial vehicles.
WINERY: An establishment for the manufacture or bottling of wine. A winery may
include, but is not limited to, the following: a tasting room, barrel rooms,
bottling rooms, tank rooms, laboratories, sale of wine, processing structure,
and offices.
WINETASTING ESTABLISHMENT: A structure or building wherein the tasting,
sampling, display and/or sales of wine and/or beer takes place.
WOODWORKING SHOP: A carpentry establishment where wood is modified and/or wood
products are sold.
YARD: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any structure or portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the general
ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments and
furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
Front Yard: A yard extending between the side lot lines across the front of a
lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
Interior Side Yard: A yard extending from the principal building to the side
lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing
the front and rear yards.
Rear Yard: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot and
from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
Street Side Yard: A yard extending from the principal building to the secondary
street that adjoins the lot between the lines establishing the front and rear
yards.
ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by the administrator authorizing the uses of
land and structures, and the characteristics of the uses.
(Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; amd. Ord. 672, 12-10-2013; Ord. 733, 6-23-2015; Ord. 756,
8-23-2016; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 826, 7-28-2020; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020;
Ord. 858, 10-26- 2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2, article A of this title.
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
8-2-1: Districts Established, Purposes And Restrictions
8-2-2: Official Zoning Map; Incorporation By Reference
8-2-3: Schedule Of District Use Regulations
8-2-4: Schedule Of Building Height And Lot Area Regulations
8-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED, PURPOSES AND RESTRICTIONS:
The following zoning districts are hereby established. For the interpretation
of this title, the zoning districts have been formulated to realize the general
purposes as set forth in this title. In addition, the specific purpose of each
zoning district shall be as follows:
A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT: To maximize opportunities for agricultural activities
by preserving land for the purposes of cultivating the soil and raising
livestock. Minimum lot size of twenty (20) contiguous acres, all of which must
be under single ownership to ensure protection of irrigation and surface water
drainage systems.
A-R AGRICULTURAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: To provide for the transition of
agricultural land no longer used for extensive agricultural purposes into
residential areas, while preserving agricultural uses compatible with
residential development. Gross density shall not exceed one single-family
dwelling unit per five (5) acres.
R-E RESIDENTIAL-ESTATES DISTRICT: To provide opportunities for very low density
residential land use compatible with the topography and public service
capacities. Gross density shall not exceed one single-family dwelling unit per
two (2) acres.
R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: To provide regulations and districts for various
residential neighborhoods. Gross density in an R district shall be determined
according to the numeral following the R. The numeral designates the maximum
number of dwelling units per acre. Multi-family and two-family units/
developments are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zoning districts,
unless approved as part of a planned unit development (PUD). Centralized water
and sewer facilities are required for all subdivision and parcel division
applications submitted after the effective date hereof in all zoning districts
except the city council may permit the use of individual well(s) and septic
system(s) in the A, A-R and R-E zoning districts upon a determination that the
public health, safety, and welfare will not be negatively impacted. Whenever
there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this section and
those of other chapters and/or other titles, the chapter or title with the more
restrictive provision shall prevail. When a property is being proposed for
rezone to the R zoning district, a development agreement may be utilized in
lieu of the PUD and/or conditional use process if approved by the city council,
provided the development agreement includes conditions of development that are
required during the PUD and conditional use process.
L-O LIMITED OFFICE DISTRICT: To permit the establishment of groupings of
professional, research, executive, administrative, accounting, clerical,
stenographic, limited commercial and similar uses. Development shall not be
traffic intensive and research facilities shall not involve heavy testing
operations of any kind. The L-O district is designed to act as a buffer between
other more intense nonresidential uses and high density residential uses, and
is thus a transitional use.
C-A COMMERCIAL-AIRPORT: To permit the establishment of a commercial airport
which is compatible with property uses in other Eagle area districts.
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT: To permit the establishment of convenience
business uses which tend to meet the daily needs of the residents of an
immediate neighborhood while establishing development standards that prevent
adverse effects on residential uses adjoining a C-1 district. Such districts
are typically appropriate for small shopping clusters or integrated shopping
centers located within residential neighborhoods.
C-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: To permit the establishment of areas for
commercial uses allowed in other commercial zones and commercial uses which are
more intensive than those permitted in other commercial zones. Uses that
complement rather than compete with the uses allowed within the CBD zoning
district shall be encouraged.
C-3 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT: To permit the establishment of areas for travel
related services such as hotels, motels, service stations, drive-in
restaurants, offices, limited warehousing, commercial services and retail
sales. This district is specifically designed in clusters to service the
motoring public on major streets. Uses that compete with the uses allowed
within the CBD zoning district shall be discouraged.
CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: To accommodate and encourage further expansion
and renewal in the historical core business area of the community. A variety of
business, public, quasi- public, cultural, residential and other related uses
are encouraged. The greatest possible concentration of retail sales and
business is to occur in this district. Pedestrian friendly uses and
developments are encouraged.
M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: To encourage the development of manufacturing
and wholesale business establishments which shall be free of hazardous or
objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare, are operated
entirely within enclosed structures and generate little industrial traffic.
Research activities are encouraged and limited office and commercial uses may
be permitted as ancillary uses. This district is further designed to act as a
transitional use between heavy manufacturing uses and other less intense
businesses.
BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT: To encourage the development of technical park/
research and development facilities, offices and office complexes, and limited
manufacturing activities including small scale production, distribution and
storage of goods. Support activities may also be permitted. All development
within this district shall be designed to be within a landscaped setting, and
be free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke
or glare. Such development shall be operated entirely within enclosed
structures, and generate minimal industrial traffic. All development requiring
a conditional use permit in the BP zoning district, as shown in section
8-2-3 of this chapter, shall occur under the PUD and/or development agreement
process in accordance with chapter 6 or 10 of this title unless the proposed
development does not meet the area requirements as set forth in section
8-6-5-1 of this title. In that case a cooperative development, in conjunction
with adjacent parcels (to meet the minimum area requirements), shall be
encouraged. Otherwise a conditional use permit shall be required unless the
proposed use is shown as a permitted use in the BP zoning district within
section
8-2-3 of this chapter.
M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: To encourage the development of major
manufacturing, processing, warehousing and major research and testing
operations. Limited office and commercial uses may be permitted as ancillary
uses. These activities shall include certain uses excluded from the M-
1 district for reasons of health, safety or general welfare. All development
within this land use shall be free of hazardous or objectionable elements such
as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare.
M-3 EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: To provide land for the mining, processing
and storage of mineral resources. This district is designed to assure that
these resources be properly managed and all land be reclaimed so as not to
create a hazard or nuisance which either immediately or in the future adversely
affects the health, safety or general welfare of the community.
PS PUBLIC/SEMIPUBLIC: To provide for public/semipublic development such as golf
courses, parks, recreation facilities, greenways, schools, and public service
facilities such as government offices. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
MU MIXED USE DISTRICT: To provide for a variety and mixture of uses such as
limited office, limited commercial, and residential. This district is intended
to ensure compatibility of new development with existing and future
development. It is also intended to ensure assemblage of properties in a
unified plan with coordinated and harmonious development which shall promote
outstanding design without unsightly and unsafe strip commercial development.
Uses should complement the uses allowed within the CBD zoning district. All
development requiring a conditional use permit in the MU zoning district, as
shown in section
8-2-3 of this chapter, shall occur under the PUD and/or development agreement
process in accordance with chapter 6 or 10 of this title unless the proposed
development does not meet the area requirements as set forth in section
8-6-5-1 of this title. In that case a cooperative development, in conjunction
with adjacent parcels (to meet the minimum area requirements), shall be
encouraged. Otherwise a conditional use permit shall be required unless the
proposed use is shown as a permitted use in the MU zoning district within
section
8-2-3 of this chapter. Residential densities shall not exceed twenty (20)
dwelling units per gross acre. When a property is being proposed for rezone to
the MU zoning district, a development agreement may be utilized in lieu of the
PUD and/or conditional use process if approved by the city council, provided
the development agreement includes conditions of development that are required
during the PUD and conditional use process. (Ord. 673, 11-27-2012)
DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICT: To guide the general appearance of building and
improvements to achieve the objectives of the comprehensive plan or other
development plans as adopted by the council. This district is superimposed over
all other districts within the entire city limits.
P PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: This designation, following any zoning designation
noted on the official zoning map of the city (i.e., R-4-P), indicates that the
development was approved by the city as a planned unit development. Density
transfers may have been permitted as a part of the overall development.
DA DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: This designation, following any zoning designation
noted on the official zoning map of the city (i.e., C-2-DA), indicates that the
zoning was approved by the city with a development agreement. Specific
provisions, as may have been incorporated within the development agreement, are
applicable to development within this zoning designation. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007;
amd. Ord. 673, 11-27-2012; Ord. 826, 7-28-2020; Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
8-2-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE:
   A.   Map Adopted: The districts established in section
8-2-1 of this chapter and shown on the official zoning map, as now existing or
as may hereafter be amended, together with all explanatory material thereon,
are hereby incorporated into this title as if set forth in full within this
title.
   B.   Boundaries Of Districts: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map,
the following shall apply:
      1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the centerline of street lines, highway right of way lines, streams, lakes or
other bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such boundary;
      2.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;
      3.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the
centerlines or right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall
be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map;
and
      4.   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said
railroad line. (Ord. 298, 10-14-1997)
8-2-3: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS:
District regulations shall be as set forth in the official schedule of district
regulations, in the performance standards in chapter 3 of this title, and as
otherwise provided within this code. The official schedule of district
regulations is divided into five (5) land use groups: agricultural,
residential, commercial, industrial, and public/semipublic. To determine in
which district a specific use is allowed:
   A.   Find the use in one of the land use groups;
   B.   Read across the chart until either "P" or "C" appears in one of the
columns; and
   C.   If "P" appears, the use is an allowed use; if "C" appears, the use is
only allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and/or a development
agreement upon rezone to an MU or BP zoning designation; if no letter appears
the use is prohibited.
If a proposed use is not specifically listed in the chart below then the use is
prohibited. When several combined land uses exist, or are proposed, the most
intensive land use shall be considered as the primary activity.
    OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
   (P - Permitted Use / C - Conditional Use / No P Or C - Prohibited Use)
 Land Uses Districts
           A A-R R-E R L-O C-A C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD M-1 BP M-2 M-3 PS MU
  Land Uses            Districts
                       A A-R R-E R L-O C-A C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD M-1 BP M-2 M-3 PS MU
Agricultural:
 Agricultural and     P
  forest
 Dairy farm           C
 Farm                 P P
 Farmers' markets     P                       P       P                     P
  (outdoor)
 Feedlot and          C                                          C
  stockyard
 Horticulture         P P   P     P       P   P                             P
  (general)
 Horticulture         P P   P   P P       P   P                             P
  (limited)
  Roadside stand
 (temporary           P P   P     P       P   P   P   P                     P
  structure)
 Turf and/or tree     P C
  farm
 Vineyard             P C
Residential:
 Accessory dwelling   P P   P   P                                           P
  unit
 Boarding or lodging            C C                   C                     C
  house or dormitory
 Home occupation,     P P   P   P P                   P                     P
  Class A and B
 Home occupation,     C C   C   C
  Class C
  Mobile home (single
 unit) (primary                 C                                           C
  residence)
  Mobile home (single
 unit) (temporary     C C   C   C                                           C
  living quarters)
 Mobile home court    C                       C   C
  (RV)
 Mobile home park               C                                           C
 Multi-family                                         C                     C
  dwelling
 Planned unit           C   C   C C       C   C   C   C   C   C  C          C
  development
 Single-family                  C                     C                     C
  attached dwelling
 Single-family        P P   P   P C       C           P                     C
  dwelling (existing)
 Single-family        P P   P   P C       C           C                     C
  dwelling (new)
 Two-family dwelling            C C                   C                     C
Commercial:
 Adult business                                   C
 Airport                              P
 Ambulance services                           C   P   C                  C  C
 Animal shows or      P         C         C   P       P       C          P  C
  sales
 Artist studios                   P           P       P                     P
 Arts and crafts                C             P       P                  P  C
  shows
 Auction facility     C                       C           P   C  P
 Automotive body shop                         P   P       P   C  P
 Automotive emission                      C   C   C       C   C
  testing facility
  Automotive gas
 station or fuel                          C   P   P
  islands
 Automotive gas                               P   P
  station/service shop
  Automotive, mobile
 home, travel                                 C   P       P   C  P
  trailer, and/or farm
  implement sales
 Automotive parts and                     C   P   P                         C
  accessories sales
 Automotive repair                            P   P       P   C
 Automotive storage                                       C      P
 Automotive vehicle                       C   C   C       C   C             C
  vinyl wrap shop
 Automotive washing                       C   P   P       P   C             C
  facility
 Bakery plant                                             P   C  P
  (wholesale)
  Banks/financial
 institutions (no                 P       P   P       P                     P
  drive-up service)
  Banks/financial
 institutions (with                       C   P   C   C                     P
  drive-up service)
 Bar                                      C   C   C   P                     C
 Bar, wine/tasting                            P   P   P                     P
  room
 Beauty/barber shop               P       P   P   P   P                     P
 Bed and breakfast    C C   C     C       C           C                     C
  facility
 Building supply                              C   C       P   C  P
  outlet
 Cabinet shop                                 P   P       P   C  P          C
 Catering service                 P           P   P                         P
 Cemetery             C C   C   C C       C   C   C       C   C             C
 Childcare:
 Daycare center       C C   C   C C       C   C   C   C                     C
 Family               P P   P   P C       C           P                     P
 Group                C C   C   C C       C   C   C   C                     C
 Christmas tree sales P           P       P   P   P   P   P   P          P  P
 Church               C C   C   C P       P   P   P   P                     P
 Circuses and         C                       P       P                  P  C
  carnivals
 Club or lodge                    P       P   P       P                     P
 Coffee roasting                              C   C   C       C  C   C      C
  facility
  Commercial
 entertainment                    C       C   P   P   P                     C
  facilities (indoor)
  Commercial
 entertainment        C C                     P   P   P                     C
  facilities (outdoor)
 Communication        C C                 P   P   P       P      P          C
  facilities
 Contractor's yard                            C   C       C   C  C
  and/or shop
 Convenience store                        C   C   C
  with fuel service
 Convenience store    C C   C   C         P   P   P   P                     P
  with no fuel service
 Detention facilities                                         C
 Drive-in theater                             C   C           C  C          C
 Drugstore                        C       C   P   P   P                     P
  Electronic sales,
 service, or repair               P       P   P   P   P                     P
  shop
 Emergency healthcare                         C   P   C   C              C  P
 Emergency services   C C   C   C P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P          P  P
 Equipment rental and                     C   C   P       C   C             C
  sales yard
 Flex space                                       P   P   P   P             P
 Food and beverage                C       P   P   P   P                     P
  sales
 Hardware store                           P   P   P   P                     P
  Health clubs, spas,
 weight reduction                 C       P   P   P   P                     P
  salons
 Heliports                            C
 Hospital                         C       C   P   P   C   C                 C
 Hotel                                        P   P   P                     C
 Institution                                      C           C
 Kennel               C C   C   C C       C   C   C                         C
 Laboratories                     P       P   P   P   P       P             C
 Laundromat                       C       P   P   P   P   P                 C
 Laundry (with drive-                     C   P   P       P                 C
  up service)
 Laundry (with no                         C   P   P   P   P                 P
  drive-up service)
 Live entertainment   C C                 C   P   C   P                     C
  events
  Live entertainment
 events, city                             P   P   P   P       P          P  P
  sponsored
 Microbrewery                             C   P       P                     C
 Mobile office                  C C       C   C   C       C   C             C
 Mortuary                         C           C               C             C
 Motel                                        P   P   P                     C
  Nonprofit
 rehabilitation                                   C           C
  center
 Nursery, plant       P C   C   C P       P   P   P   P   P                 C
  materials
 Nursing/convalescent C C   C   C             C   C   C                     C
  home
 Office, business and             P       P   P   P   P       C             P
  professional
 Office, medical and              P       P   P   P   P                     P
  dental
 Parking lot, parking             P           P   P   C   P   P  P       P  P
  garage
 Parking lot, parking             C       P   P   P   C   P   C             C
  garage, commercial
 Pawnshops (auto)                                 C           C
 Pawnshops (general)                          C   C
 Personal improvement             P       P   P   P   P                     P
 Personal services                P       P   P   P   P                     P
  Personal wireless
 facilities (enclosed C C   C   C P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P
  building, height -
  35' or less)
  Personal wireless
 facilities (enclosed C C   C   C C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C   C  C
  building, height -
  over 35')
  Personal wireless
 facilities (height - C           P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P
  35' or less)
  Personal wireless
 facilities (height - C           C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C   P  C
  36' - 50')
  Personal wireless
 facilities (height - C           C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C   C  C
  over 50')
 Photographic studio              P       P   P   P   P                     P
 Printing and/or                  P       P   P   P   P   P   P             P
  blueprinting
 Professional                     P       P   P   P   P       P             P
  activities
 Restaurant (drive-                           P   P
  in)
 Restaurant (no                 C C       P   P   P   P                     P
  drive-through)
 Restaurant (with                             C   C   C                     C
  drive-through)
 Retail sales                     C       P   P   P   P                     C
  (general)
 Retail sales                     P       P   P   P   P                     C
  (limited)
  Retail sales
 (pharmacies and                  C       P   P   P   P                     P
  medical)
 Riding academies/    P C   C                                               C
  stables
 Shopping center                          C   C   C   P                     C
 Shopping mall                                C   C   P
 Sign shop, including                         P   P       P   C  P          C
  painting
  Small engine repair
 (mower, chain saws,                      C   P   P       P   C             C
  etc.)
 Storage (enclosed                P       P   P   P       P   C  P   P      C
  building)
 Storage (fenced                C C       C   C   C       C   C  P   P      C
  area)
 Street fair                                  P       P                  P  P
 Subdivision sales          P   P                                           P
  office
  Tattoo parlors and
 body piercing                                    C   C
  establishments
 Tire shop, including                         P   P       P   C
  recapping
 Trade fair                                   P       P                     C
 Travel services                  P       P   P   P   P                     P
 Truck stop                                   C   C       C   C
 Upholstery shop                      P   P   P   P   C       C             C
 Vet clinic (animal             C C   C   P   P   P   P                  P
  hospital)
 Welding, tool shop                   C       P           P   C  P
 Winery               C C                                     C             C
 Woodworking shop                     P       P   P       P   C  P          C
Industrial:
 Asphalt plant                                                   P   P
 Automotive wrecking                                             C   C
  yard or salvage
 Beverage bottling                                        C   C  P
  plant
 Billboard                                                C   C  P
  manufacture
  Cement or clay
 products                                                        P   P
  manufacturing
 Chemical storage and                                            C
  manufacturing
 Concrete batch plant                                            P   P
 Dairy products       C                                   P   C  P   P
  processing
 Food processing                                              C  P
  plant
 Fuel yard                                                       P
 Grain storage          C                                        P
 Ice manufacture,                                         C   C  P
  cold storage
 Industry:
 Custom                                       P           P   P             C
 Limited                                      P           P   P             C
 Research and                                                 P             C
  development
 Junkyard                                                        C   C
 Lumberyard, retail                                       C      P
 Machine shop                                 P   P       P   C  P
 Manufacturing,                                           P   C  P
  furniture
 Mobile home                                                     P
  manufacturing
 Monument works,                                          C   C  P
  stone
 Oil and gas          P P   P   P P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P
  extraction
 Oil and gas post-                                                   C
  extraction
 Petroleum storage                                               C   C
 Planing mill                                                    P
 Public utility yard                              C       C   C  P
 Railroad yard or                                 C       C      P
  shop
 Recycling operation                                             C
 Rendering plant                                                     C
 Research activities                                          P             C
 Sand or gravel yard                                             C   P
 Sanitary landfill                                               C   C
  Stockyard,
 slaughterhouse;                                                     C
  meatpacking
 Terminal yard,                                   C              P
  trucking
  Truck and equipment
 repair and sales                             C   C       C   C  P
  (heavy)
 Warehousing,                                             P   C  P
  wholesaling plant
 Wood processing                                                 P
  plant
Public/semipublic:
 Golf course and      C C   C   C C       P   P   P           P          P  C
  related services
 Government building,             P       P   P   P   P   P   P          P  P
  offices
 Library                        C C       P   P   P   P                  P  C
 Museum                         C C       P   P   P   P                  P  C
 Park and recreation    C   C   C C       C   C   C   P                  P  C
  facilities
 Parking lot, parking             P       P   P   P   P       P          P  P
  garage, government
 Portable classroom   C C   C   C C       C   C   C   C                  P  C
 Public service       C C   C   C C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C  C   C   C  C
  facilities
 School, public or    C C   C   C C       C   C   C   C                  P  C
  private
 
(Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; amd. Ord. 672, 12-10-2013; Ord. 720, 6-24-2014; Ord. 733,
6-23-2015; Ord. 756, 8-23-2016; Ord. 792, 6-26-2018; Ord. 809, 4-9-2019; Ord.
820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 824, 3-10-2020; Ord. 826, 7-28-2020; Ord. 827, 10-22-
2020; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021; Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
8-2-4: SCHEDULE OF BUILDING HEIGHT AND LOT AREA REGULATIONS:
   OFFICIAL HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
                 Minimum Yard Setbacks
                 Note Conditions A To E*                Minimum Lot
Zoning   Maximum                            Maximum Lot Area        Minimum Lot
District Height             Interior Street Covered F   (Acres Or   Width I*
                 Front Rear Side     Side   And J*      Square
                                                        Feet) H*
                  Minimum Yard Setbacks
                  Note Conditions A To E*      Maximum   Minimum
Zoning    Maximum                              Lot       Lot Area  Minimum
District  Height               Interior Street Covered F (Acres Or Lot Width
                  Front  Rear  Side     Side   And J*    Square    I*
                                                         Feet) H*

A         60'     60'    30'   30'      45'    10%       20 acres  100'
A-R       35'     60'    30'   30'      45'    10%       4.7 acres 100'
R-E       35'     50'    30'   20'      35'    15%       1.8 acres 100'
R-1       35'     30'    30'   15'      30'    35%       37,000    100'
R-2       35'     30'    30'   10'      20'    40%       17,000    75'
R-3       35'     30'    25'   7.5'     20'    40%       10,000    75'
R-4       35'     20'    25'   7.5'     20'    40%       8,000     70'
R-5       35'     20'    25'   7.5'     20'    40%       7,000     70'
R-6       35'     20'    20'   7.5'     20'    60%       5,000     50'
R-6 to R-
10                20'    15'   5'
single-   35'     10' if 5' if 0' for   20'    N/a       1,600     20'
family            alley  alley common
attached          load   load  wall
dwellings
L-O       35'     20'    20'   7.5'     20'    60%       2,000     25'
C-1       35'     15'    0'    0'       10'    50%       2,000     25'
C-2       35'     0'     0'    0'       0'     92%       1,300     25'
C-3       35'     0'     0'    0'       0'     92%       1,300     25'
CBD       35'     0'     0'    0'       0'     92%       500       25'
M-1       35'     0'     0'    0'       0'     92%       n/a       25'
BP        35'     20'    0'    0'       20'    50%       n/a       25'
M-2       35'     0'     0'    0'       0'     92%       n/a       25'
M-3       35'     0'     0'    0'       0'     92%       n/a       25'
MU        35'     20'    20'   7.5'     20'    50%       5,000     50'
 
*Note Conditions:
   A.   Setback reductions (to be measured from the foundation to the property
line):
      1. Building eaves may extend no more than 2 feet into any setback;
      2. Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms,
carports, covered patios and similar architectural projections shall be
considered part of the building to which they are attached and shall not
project more than 15 feet into the required rear yard setback provided that the
remaining setback distance is no less than 10 feet.;
      3. Open porches for residential dwelling units shall not project more
than 5 feet into the required front yard setback provided that the remaining
setback distance is no less than 15 feet;
      4.   A single-family dwelling unit that utilizes a side entry garage
shall be permitted to have a 5 foot reduction in the minimum required front
yard setback provided that the distance is no less than 20 feet, and no less
than 15 feet within the MU zoning district, measured from the foundation of the
garage to the property line;
      5.   Upon the submittal of the waiver application and findings adopted by
the zoning administrator addressing compliance with the following criteria,
accessory structures may be permitted to be located within a minimum of 15 feet
of the rear property line:
         a.   Be compatible with the scale and design of the structures and
overall existing development pattern of the surrounding area;
         b.   Not impair reasonable or appropriate use of adjoining properties;
         c.   Not result in greater impacts on natural resources;
         d.   Not impair sight distances on public or private roads; and
         e.   If authorized, the waiver may only be granted for the minimum
amount necessary to achieve the stated purpose of the waiver sought.
         f.   The applicant shall provide written approval of the setback
reduction from all adjoining property owners at the time of application
submittal. If written approval cannot be obtained, then the city shall notify
the adjoining property owners and inform them in writing about the applicant's
setback reduction. The adjoining property owners shall have 10 calendar days
from the decision date to appeal. In the event of a denial, the applicant shall
be allowed to appeal the zoning administrator's decision. If no appeal is
submitted, the decision is final.
   B.   Except for single-family attached dwellings, an additional 5 feet per
story side setback is required for multi-story structures. Height not to exceed
maximum allowed within the zone.
   C.   All residential buildings in other than agricultural or residential
districts must meet residential official height and area regulations.
   D.    Front yard setback from arterial and collector streets (as identified
on the master street map typologies map in the Eagle comprehensive plan) is 30
feet in all residential zoning districts.
   E.    Street side setback on arterial and collector streets (as identified
on the master street typologies map in the Eagle comprehensive plan) is 25 feet
in all residential zoning districts.
   F.   In order to stimulate the rehabilitation and revitalization of the
existing neighborhoods where the currently platted residential lots are less in
size than the 7,000 square feet per dwelling unit, applicants desiring to
exceed the authorized 40 percent maximum lot coverage may apply for a
conditional use permit.
   G.   All front load garages shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
back of sidewalk.
   H.   All lots with street side frontage, excluding lots within zoning
districts A, A-R, R-E and R-1, shall have a minimum lot area that is 10 percent
larger than shown in this table.
   I.   Minimum lot frontage: The minimum lot frontage for all residential
zoning districts shall be the minimum lot width specified within the zoning
district or 35-feet, whichever is less.
   J.    Childcare facilities, churches, nursing/convalescent homes (which
include senior assisted living facilities), schools (public or private), which
are proposed within an agricultural district (A), agricultural-residential
district (A-R), and/or residential- estates district (R-E) shall be permitted
an increase of the maximum lot coverage from 10 percent to 24 percent.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 686, 10-23-2012; Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; Ord. 820,
12-10-2019; Ord. 826, 7-28-2020; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
ARTICLE A. DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-2A-1: General Applicability
8-2A-2: Purpose And Goals
8-2A-3: Effect Of Other Provisions
8-2A-4: Definitions
8-2A-5: Design Review Overlay Districts; Eagle Architecture And Site Design
Book (EASD)
8-2A-6: Design Requirements, Objectives And Considerations
8-2A-7: Landscape And Buffer Area Requirements
8-2A-8: Sign Regulations
8-2A-9: Administrative And Board Level Applications
8-2A-10: Application Requirements
8-2A-11: Reserved (Repealed by Ord. 827)
8-2A-12: The Eagle Architecture And Site Design Book
8-2A-13: Design Review Application Processing
8-2A-14: Appeals
8-2A-15: Term Of Approval
8-2A-16: Modifications
8-2A-17: Restrictions On Other Required Documents
8-2A-18: Sureties
8-2A-19: Inspection
8-2A-20: Maintenance
8-2A-1: GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
This article applies to all proposed development located within the Design
Review Overlay District which shall include the entire City limits, and any
land annexed into the City after the date of adoption hereof. Such development
includes, but is not limited to, new commercial, industrial, institutional,
office, multi-family and single-family attached residential projects, signs,
common areas, subdivision signage, proposed conversions, proposed changes in
land use and/or building use, exterior remodeling or repainting with a color
different than what is existing, exterior restoration, and enlargement or
expansion of existing buildings, signs or sites, and requires the submittal of
a design review application pursuant to this article and a fee as established
by resolution of the City Council. Design review applications for a change in
paint color are subject to review and approval by the City but otherwise shall
not be required to comply in all respects to the requirements of this article.
An individual single-family dwelling located within the A, A-R, R-E, and R
Zoning District, unless required as part of the PUD, is specifically excluded
from the requirements of the Design Review Overlay District. (Ord. 809, 4-9-
2019; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020)
8-2A-2: PURPOSE AND GOALS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to:
      1.   Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and to
provide a method by which the City may implement this interdependence to the
benefit of the community.
      2.   Encourage the development of private property in harmony with the
desired character of the City and in conformance with the guidelines herein
provided with due regard to the public and private interests involved.
      3.   Provide planning and design guidelines to give specific direction
for downtown development, while allowing for flexibility that promotes
creative, market driven development proposals.
   B.   Goals: The general theme of the Design Review Overlay District is to
specify desirable building and landscape architectural styles and materials to
create a sustainable and pleasing environment for residents and visitors alike.
The architectural designs, materials, and graphics set forth in this article
are compiled to create a theme unique to the area called "Eagle Architecture".
(Ord. 462, 11-11-2003)
8-2A-3: EFFECT OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
If any provision of this article is found to be in conflict with any other
provision of any Zoning, Building, Fire Safety or Health Ordinance or other
provision of this Code, the provision which establishes the higher and/or more
restrictive design standard shall prevail. However, in order to foster
rehabilitation of older districts and comply with unforeseen future needs of
the overlay districts, the City Council may, at their discretion, suspend or
relax some or all requirements found in this article, if the City Council
determines a particular site, setting, or use to have special and/or unique
circumstances to warrant an exception to the requirements. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
8-2A-4: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted as defined
within a particular section, as defined within this article, or as defined in
section
8-1-2 of this title, with the more specific and/or more restrictive definition
controlling. Any other words or phrases not specifically defined shall be
interpreted to give this article its most reasonable application. (Ord. 462,
11-11-2003)
8-2A-5: DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICTS; EAGLE ARCHITECTURE AND SITE DESIGN
BOOK (EASD):
   A.   Area Of District: The Design Review Overlay District encompasses the
entire City limits including any land annexed into the City after the date of
adoption hereof.
   B.   Proposed Developments: Any proposed development located within the
Design Review Overlay District shall be harmonious with and in accordance with
the general objectives and with any specific objective of the Comprehensive
Plan.
   C.   Areas Of Development: There are four (4) specifically defined areas of
development within the Design Review Overlay District. The general purpose of
each of those areas are described below. Any development which meets the
criteria for design review, as set forth in this article, that is not within
the specific areas described below, shall be required to comply with the
general requirements of this article and not the specific requirements for the
DDA, TDA, CEDA, and DSDA:
      1.   Downtown Development Area-DDA: The purpose of the DDA is to
establish a distinct area regulated to fulfill the vision of the City
Comprehensive Plan and to provide for activities conducive to a compact and
concentrated downtown commercial center.
      2.   Transitional Development Area-TDA: The purpose of the TDA is to
provide areas for public parking and service to the DDA and serve as an area
for future expansion of the DDA as market demands grow.
      3.   Community Entry Development Area-CEDA: The purpose of the CEDA is to
fulfill the vision of the City Comprehensive Plan by providing a sense of entry
into Eagle and transitional development into the DDA.
      4.   Dunyon/State Development Area-DSDA: The purpose of the DSDA is to
allow unique regulations specific to this district to facilitate the
redevelopment of the area.
Where any parcel lies within more than one (1) development area described
above, the entire parcel shall be considered to be within the development area
with the more restrictive requirements. However, the development of a parcel
located within more than one (1) development area may be permitted using the
criteria from each respective district provided the Design Review Board
determines that the more restrictive criteria is not compromised and that the
development is in harmony with the adjacent properties.
   D.   Area Boundaries: The DDA, TDA, CEDA and DSDA are delineated on the map
(Exhibit A-1) included as part of EASD Book.
   E.   Eagle Architecture And Site Design Book-EASD: The purpose of the EASD
Book is to show, through the use of pictures and text, specific period
architectural styles, themes, and elements envisioned through the requirements
of this article. The EASD Book, established through a resolution of the City
Council and as may be amended through future resolution(s), contains all
exhibits referenced in this article and is incorporated herein by reference.
However, Exhibit A-1 may only be modified through an ordinance amendment. The
architecture styles found in the EASD Book are permitted styles. Architectural
styles not shown within the EASD Book will not be considered. A copy of the
EASD Book is available at Eagle City Hall. (Ord. 462, 11-11-2003)
8-2A-6: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS, OBJECTIVES AND CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   General Objectives And Considerations: The following apply to the
entire Design Review Overlay District including the DDA, TDA, CEDA, and DSDA.
Additional requirements for the DDA, TDA, CEDA, and DSDA are set forth in
subsections C through G of this section and, to the extent there is a conflict
with this section, the requirements for the DDA, TDA, CEDA, and DSDA shall
control. The following, including the provisions set forth in the Eagle
Architecture and Site Design Book, contains a listing of objectives applied to
each application, and a listing of matters which shall be considered by the
Design Review Board. The objectives are separated into two (2) sections: site
design and building design. Specific aspects of design should be examined to
determine whether the proposed development will provide a desirable environment
for its occupants as well as for its neighbors, and whether, aesthetically, the
composition, materials, textures and colors meet the intent of this article.
The design review board shall consider the following criteria in reviewing the
application:
      1.   Site Design Objectives: The site plan design shall minimize impact
of traffic on adjacent streets, provide for the pedestrian, and provide
appropriate, safe parking lot design.
         a.   The functional relationship of the structures and the site in
relation to its surroundings;
         b.   The impact and effect of the site development plan on traffic
conditions on contiguous streets and adjoining properties or neighborhoods;
         c.   The site layout with respect to separation or integration of
vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic patterns;
         d.   The arrangement and adequacy of off street parking facilities
relative to access points, building location and total site development to
prevent traffic conflict or congestion;
         e.   The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading ramps,
docks, and bays and vehicle service facilities;
         f.   The access, parking lot, and interior roadway illumination plans
and hours of operation;
         g.   The required driver, pedestrian and bicycle sight distance
requirements of the project and their relationship to adjacent streets,
driveways and properties;
         h.   The coordination of the site development with planned right of
way alignments, acquisitions and street improvements;
         i.   The graphic delineation of traffic circulation patterns to avoid
confusion, congestion and conflicts;
         j.   The continued maintenance of traffic, parking and lighting
systems;
         k.   The protection of views and vistas in relation to urban design
and aesthetic considerations; and
         l.   The provision of safe pedestrian and bicycle connections between
neighborhoods and commercial areas.
      2.   Site Landscaping: The site landscaping shall minimize impact on
adjacent properties through the proper use of screening with sound and sight
buffers, and unsightly areas shall be concealed or screened and the design
review board shall consider:
         a.   The location, height, and materials of walls, fences, hedges and
screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent development;
         b.   The location and type of new plantings, with due regard to
preservation of specimen and landmark trees, and to maintenance of all
plantings;
         c.   The providing of screen plantings or other screening methods
reasonably required to conceal outdoor storage areas, trash receptacles,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and other unsightly
developments;
         d.   The installation of sound and sight buffers, the preservation of
public views, light and air, and the consideration of those landscape aspects
of design which may have substantial effects on neighborhood development, land
uses, and amenities;
         e.   The design and use of open spaces and parks; and
         f.   The permanent maintenance of all landscaped areas and fencing.
      3.   Site Grading And Drainage: The on site grading and drainage shall be
designed so as to maximize land use benefits and to minimize off site impact
and provide for slope and soil stabilization to prevent erosion and the design
review board shall consider:
         a.   The existing and proposed grading relative to soil removal, fill
work, retainage, soil stabilization, erosion control on the site and the
adjacent terrain and streets, and adoption of the development to the existing
site contours;
         b.   The planting of ground covers or shrubbery to prevent dust, to
stabilize soils and embankments and to control erosion;
         c.   Existing and proposed storm drainageways, canals, floodway and
floodplains relative to flow or alignment alterations, containment and
endangerment of health; and
         d.   The maintenance of floodway, floodplains, drainageways, channels,
culverts, head gates, canals, and soils.
      4.   Signage: Signing for any project shall provide for business
identification and minimize clutter and confusion on and off the site, and
shall be in compliance with section 8-2A-8 of this article and the current
edition of the uniform sign code adopted by the city. The design review board
shall consider:
         a.   The "overall sign concept" for multi-tenant business centers to
assure that it addresses the continuity between tenant sign design and building
design;
         b.   The reduction of hazards to motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians
as may be caused by or partially attributable to the distraction and
obstruction of improperly located and designed signs;
         c.   The provision for effective and necessary business identification
systems adapted to the building design;
         d.   The continued maintenance of signs throughout their life; and
         e.   The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting,
landscaping, and hours of operations of all permanent signs and outdoor
advertising structures or features to ensure that any such proposals do not
detract from the function of, or design of, buildings, structures, surrounding
properties, neighborhoods, or streets.
      5.   Utilities: Utility service systems shall not detract from building
or site design. Cable, electrical, and telephone service systems shall be
installed underground, and the design review board shall consider:
         a.   Size and location of all service systems for appropriate
appearance and maintenance accessibility;
         b.   The location and design of transformers, pad mount and roof
mounted mechanicals and electrical equipment shall be reviewed and approved by
the design review board. All roof mounted mechanicals shall be completely
screened from view through the use of a parapet wall when utilizing a flat roof
design or shall be enclosed within the building when utilizing a roof design
other than a flat roof. "Screened from view" shall mean "not visible" at the
same level or elevation of the parapet wall (e.g., the perspective generally as
shown on an elevation plan);
         c.   The location and sizes of all utility lines, manholes, poles,
underground cables, gas lines, wells, and similar installations; and
         d.   The continued maintenance of these service systems.
      6.   Building Design:
         a.   Building Mass: The mass of the building shall be reviewed for its
relationship with existing development in the immediate surrounding area and
with the allowed use proposed by the applicant;
         b.   Proportion Of Building: The height to width relationship of new
structures shall be compatible and consistent with the architectural character
of the area and proposed use;
         c.   Relationship Of Openings In The Buildings: Openings in the
building shall provide interest through the use of such features as balconies,
bays, porches, covered entries, overhead structures, awnings, changes in
building facade and roofline alignment, to provide shadow relief. Avoid
monotonous flat planes;
         d.   Relationship Of Exterior Materials: The design review board shall
determine the appropriateness of materials as they relate to building mass,
shadow relief, and existing area development. Use of color to provide blending
of materials with the surrounding area and building use, and the functional
appropriateness of the proposed building design as it relates to the proposed
use shall be considered; and
         e.   Allowed Architectural Styles: The architecture styles provided in
the EASD book are approved examples for applicants to follow when designing for
Eagle architecture.
   B.   Architectural Requirements, Building Materials, Fence And Deck/Patio
Materials, Colors, And Architectural Appurtenance Height Limitation: Unless
specified as prohibited herein, materials listed in this section are allowed.
If a material proposed for construction is not listed in this section it shall
be upon the discretion of the zoning administrator, the design review board,
and the city council, whichever the case may be, to determine the
appropriateness of such material.
      1.   Exterior walls and soffits:
         a.   Wood: cedar (clear) and redwood (clear) - architectural/premium
grade. Log siding, wood shingle are permitted for accent only, twenty five
percent (25%) maximum wall coverage (per each facade);
Synthetic board and bat sidings are permitted as accents only. Plywood is
prohibited.
         b.   Fiber cement;
         c.   Masonite: horizontal lap only, maximum six inch (6") reveal;
         d.   Vinyl: 0.46 millimeter minimum thickness, integral color;
         e.   Textured tilt up concrete with accent reveals;
         f.   Textured pour in place concrete with accent reveals;
         g.   Masonry: brick, natural rock/stone, synthetic stone, decorative
block. Smooth face block for accent only, ten percent (10%) maximum wall
coverage (per each facade);
         h.   Stucco: Twenty five percent (25%) planer change required,
additional accents shall be incorporated through the use of other material(s);
         i.   EIFS: Permitted for accent only, ten percent (10%) maximum wall
coverage (per each facade). Additional accents required through the use of
other materials;
         j.   Additional encouraged material: exposed beams, fabric awnings,
cornices/dentils, shutters, dormers, cupolas, columns;
         k.   Metal: Metal siding shall be anodized, shall have a concealed
fastener system, shall have a factory finish or equivalent, and shall include
special design treatments to enhance its appearance. These treatments may
include brick or masonry wainscot treatments along exterior walls and accent
colored metals.
Metal siding is prohibited on the portion of any building facing a road. This
includes sections within the front facade that may be perpendicular to the road
but within the face of the building oriented toward the road.
Metal siding shall also be prohibited in the DDA, TDA, CEDA design review
overlay district areas.
It is not the intent of these metal siding requirements and prohibitions to
inhibit creative and innovative architecture. Therefore, alternative building
designs that utilize metal, not specifically meeting the requirements herein,
may be permitted where the applicant shows, and the City Council finds that the
metal is: architecturally compatible with surrounding buildings;
architecturally compatible with other nonmetal buildings in the area;
attractively landscaped when feasible; and is designed to equal or exceed the
city requirement to eliminate the stark utilitarian look intended to be
prevented by this subsection.
      2.   Roofs:
         a.   Wood shakes/shingles: premium on number 1 grade;
         b.   Architectural grade textured composition shingles;
         c.   Tile: cemetitious, clay;
         d.   Slate;
         e.   Metal; standing seam, batten seam (concealed fasteners required);
Metal, standing seam/batten seam is prohibited on mansard roof sections facing
a road.
         f.   Flat roof specification: single ply, built up (both
nonreflective). (Ord. 462, 11-11-2003)
      3.   Fences:
         a.   Block (with columns), which may include brick, rock, stone or
similar veneer;
         b.   Brick (with columns);
         c.   Wrought iron;
         d.   Decorative wood and vinyl fencing may be permitted if the city
determines that the style of fence proposed is complementary to the building
architecture and overall site design;
         e.   Dog ear cedar, fir, chain link, barbwire, razor wire, and similar
high maintenance and/or unsightly fencing is prohibited. However, powder coated
chain link fencing may be permitted for use on school sites.
      4.   Decks and patios:
         a.   Concrete (stamped finish and smooth finish);
         b.   Brick pavers;
         c.   Wood-polymer composite lumber;
         d.   Wood (pressure treated, redwood).
      5.   Colors:
         a.   Earthen tones are encouraged.
         b.   Flat or low gloss finishes are encouraged.
         c.   Roof mounted mechanicals, all vents protruding through the roof,
and similar features shall be painted so as to match the color of the roof.
         d.   Exposed metal flashing or trim will be anodized or painted to
blend with the exterior colors of the building.
      6.   Architectural appurtenance and building height restrictions:
         a.   All buildings, spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and any
other such structures shall be limited to a maximum height of forty feet (40')
within the DDA and TDA and thirty five feet (35') in all other locations.
Additional height may be permitted if a conditional use permit is approved by
the city council.
      7.   Enclosed trash and recycle receptacle areas: All commercial and
multi-family developments shall provide for trash and recycle services and
shall include an enclosed area for the storage of trash and recycle
receptacles. The area shall be screened in accordance with section
8-2A-7J of this article. A waiver of this section may be approved for small
businesses that utilize ninety six (96) gallon or smaller trash and recycle
receptacles provided the containers are stored indoors or are otherwise
screened from view with the use of a screen wall and landscaping.
   C.   Downtown Development Area: DDA shown on exhibit A-1 within the EASD
book.
      1.   Purpose: To provide a compact downtown business center supported by
the comprehensive goals of the city.
      2.   Architectural Character:
         a.   Height: Height of buildings is restricted to a maximum height of
forty feet (40'). To the extent the height requirements herein conflict with
section
8-2-4 of this chapter, the height requirements herein shall control.
         b.   Ground Floor Requirements: The ground floor (street level) of new
buildings shall accommodate pedestrian friendly elements. The design should
accommodate a variety of potential uses that may not be contemplated at the
time of construction. Examples include: specialty retail, grocery, drugstore,
shoe repair, dry cleaning, florist shop, department store, hardware store,
other personal services, restaurant or theater or financial services or a
parking garage. Any use must meet the requirements set forth in section
8-2-3 of this chapter.
         c.   Other Floor Options: The design should accommodate the ground
floor uses as listed in subsection C2b of this section including residential
use. Any use must meet the requirements set forth in section
8-2-3 of this chapter except that apartments on floors other than the ground
floor shall be a permitted use. For the purposes of this section a single
apartment unit or multiple apartment units may be permitted.
         d.   Orientation: Shall be designed so that at least seventy percent
(70%) of the building's ground level, street facing facades are constructed to
abut and be oriented to a public sidewalk or plaza.
         e.   Accessibility: Shall be visually and physically accessible to the
pedestrian at the sidewalk or plaza level.
         f.   Facade: All buildings shall include a "storefront" on the ground
floor consisting of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) glass. Floors above the
main floor shall have a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) glass. The front
of any building is the facade that fronts upon any street.
         g.   Exterior Surfaces: The exterior vertical surface of a building
shall be designed to minimize the environmental impacts such as glare,
reflected heat, and wind. High quality nonreflective architectural materials
are particularly encouraged.
         h.   Building Entries: Building entries facing a street shall be
recessed a minimum of four feet (4'). Exceptions may be permitted if another
building entry design feature can meet the intent of this requirement and is
approved by the design review board and city council.
         i.   Detailing: Architectural detailing shall be an important
consideration for design approval. Attention to detail in architectural
elements shall include, but is not limited to, walls, pilasters, parapets,
cornices, columns, windows, doors, awnings, exterior lighting, ledges, eaves,
colors and materials.
         j.   Horizontal Lines: Parapets shall be used to vary long horizontal
lines exceeding fifty feet (50').
         k.   Other: Such other nonconflicting architectural detailing,
materials and colors as set forth in this article, including the examples set
forth in the EASD book.
      3.   Setbacks And Lot Coverage: To the extent the setback and lot
coverage requirements set forth below conflict with section
8-2-4 of this chapter, the setback requirements below shall control:
         a.   Front building setbacks from the property line shall be a minimum
of zero feet (0') to a maximum of ten feet (10').
         b.   Side building setbacks shall be zero feet (0') so as to tie into
adjoining structures.
         c.   Structures shall not have a continuous face(s) longer than ninety
feet (90') inclusive of adjoining structures.
         d.   When a building is located at the intersection of two (2)
streets, the distance between the face of the building and the back of curb
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') to preserve adequate sight visibility.
         e.   Front and street side setbacks shall be for pedestrian amenities
and the city encourages joint efforts between adjoining property owners.
Suggested amenities include: public art, landscape treatment, seating, flowers/
shrubs/all tree displays in movable planters, outdoor dining, plazas,
streetscape extension and bike racks.
         f.   Lot coverage by the footprint of the structure shall be a minimum
of forty percent (40%) and a maximum of ninety five percent (95%) in which case
off site parking shall be provided for. The lot coverage requirement may be
waived if development of the lot as a parking lot is reviewed by the design
review board and is approved by the council. Furthermore, the minimum lot
coverage requirement may be reduced by the council for the purpose of providing
adequate on site parking in accordance with the provisions of this title for
structures that include residential uses on floors other than the ground floor.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   Off street parking shall be behind buildings. If the parcel is
developed as a parking lot, a landscape buffer shall be provided between the
parking lot and any street. Limited parking potential in the DDA may allow for
reduced parking ratios where there is access to public or shared parking.
         b.   Provide on street parking along State Street, 1st Street, 2nd
Street, Idaho Street, Park Road and Aikens Road.
         c.   On street parking along Eagle Road is prohibited.
         d.   Shared parking shall be encouraged.
      5.   Landscaping And Streetscape: All landscaping shall comply with the
landscape requirements contained in section 8-2A-7 of this article. Other
streetscape and design elements shall comply with the requirements contained
within subsection G of this section.
      6.   Planning Considerations: In reviewing an application pursuant to
this chapter, the design review board shall give consideration to the following
to determine compatibility with this article:
         a.   Public Restrooms: Locations should be sought which are safe and
convenient for public use downtown. Suitable locations include public parking
areas and sites adjacent to or within private development.
         b.   Public Gathering Place: A public gathering place is desired to
act as the hub for community events such as the Eagle Fun Days. The public
gathering place could be defined as 1st Street between Idaho Street and Aikens
Road, and State Street between Eagle Road and 2nd Street. However, the public
gathering place may be redefined as development progresses in the "downtown
development area" and/or in the "transitional development area" or if a more
specifically defined area is adopted as a part of the city comprehensive plan.
         c.   Vehicular And Pedestrian Use: Extensions of Idaho Street and
Aikens Road for vehicular and pedestrian use shall be considered.
   D.   Transitional Development Area: TDA shown on exhibit A-1 within the EASD
book.
      1.   Purpose: To serve as an area of future expansion to the central
business district as market demands grow and to provide an area to accommodate
public parking and service to the central business district.
      2.   Architectural Character:
         a.   Height: Height of buildings is restricted to a maximum height of
forty feet (40'). To the extent the height requirements herein conflict with
section
8-2-4 of this chapter, the height requirements herein shall control;
         b.   Ground Floor Requirements: The ground floor (street level) of new
buildings shall accommodate pedestrian friendly elements. The design should
accommodate a variety of potential uses that may not be contemplated at the
time of construction. Examples include: specialty retail, grocery, drugstore,
shoe repair, dry cleaning, florist shop, department store, hardware store,
other personal services, restaurant or theater or financial services or a
parking garage. Any use must meet the requirements set forth in section
8-2-3 of this chapter.
         c.   Other Floor Options: The design should accommodate the ground
floor uses as listed in subsection D2b of this section including residential
use. Any use must meet the requirements set forth in section
8-2-3 of this chapter except that apartments on floors other than the ground
floor shall be a permitted use. For the purposes of this section a single
apartment unit or multiple apartment units may be permitted.
         d.   Orientation: Shall be designed so that at least seventy percent
(70%) of the building's ground level, street facing facades are constructed to
abut and be oriented to a public sidewalk or plaza.
         e.   Accessibility: Shall be visually and physically accessible to the
pedestrian at the sidewalk or plaza level.
         f.   Facade: All buildings shall include a "storefront" on the ground
floor consisting of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) glass. Floors above the
main floor shall have a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) glass.
         g.   Exterior Surfaces: The exterior vertical surface of a building
shall be designed to minimize the environmental impacts such as glare,
reflected heat and wind. High quality nonreflective architectural materials are
particularly encouraged.
         h.   Building Entries: Building entries facing a street shall be
recessed a minimum of four feet (4'). Exceptions may be permitted if another
building entry design feature can meet the intent of this requirement and is
approved by the design review board and city council.
         i.   Detailing: Architectural detailing shall be an important
consideration for design approval. Attention to detail in architectural
elements shall include, but is not limited to, walls, pilasters, parapets,
cornices, columns, windows, doors, awnings, exterior lighting, ledges, eaves,
colors and materials.
         j.   Other: Such other nonconflicting architectural detailing,
materials and colors as set forth in this article, including the examples set
forth in the EASD book.
      3.   Setbacks And Lot Coverage: To the extent the setback and lot
coverage requirements set forth below conflict with section
8-2-4 of this chapter, the setback requirements below shall control:
         a.   Front building setbacks from the property line shall be a minimum
of ten feet (10') to a maximum of twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Side building setbacks may be zero feet (0') so as to tie into
adjoining structures or ten feet (10') maximum where ties to adjoining
structures are not desirable.
         c.   Structures shall be visually tied to adjoining structures.
Examples of methods to visually tie such structures together include screening
walls, facade walls, courtyards and landscaping.
         d.   Front and street side setbacks shall be for pedestrian amenities
and the city encourages joint efforts between adjoining property owners.
Suggested amenities include: public art, landscape treatment, seating, flowers/
shrubs/tree displays in movable planters, outdoor dining, plazas, streetscape
extension and bike racks.
         e.   The city encourages developing outdoor use and/or strong visual
ties on properties along the Eagle drain to preserve its natural resource,
visual features and possible recreational value.
         f.   Lot coverage by the footprint of the structure shall be a minimum
of twenty percent (20%) and a maximum of eighty five percent (85%) in which
case off site parking shall be provided for. The minimum lot coverage
requirement may be reduced by the council for the purpose of providing adequate
on site parking in accordance with provisions of this title for structures that
include residential uses on floors other than the ground floor.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   Continuous front parking areas (off street) along State Street
and Eagle Road is not permitted.
         b.   Limited direct access to parking areas from State Street or Eagle
Road is allowed.
         c.   Shared drive access points to parking shall be used wherever
possible.
         d.   Encourage shared parking.
         e.   Off street public parking areas may be required. Where these
facilities occur adjacent to existing residential development, a continuous six
foot (6') high masonry wall with landscape treatment or a separate landscape
barrier will be required to mitigate sound and visual impact. Safe pedestrian
and bicycle connections between the residential neighborhood and the off street
parking area should be provided if feasible.
         f.   On street parking is allowed.
      5.   Landscaping And Streetscape: All landscaping shall comply with the
landscape requirements contained in section
8-2A-7 of this article. Other streetscape and design elements shall comply with
the requirements contained within subsection G of this section.
      6.   Planning Considerations: In reviewing an application pursuant to
this article, the design review board shall give consideration to the following
to determine compatibility with this article:
         a.   Public Restrooms: Locations should be sought which are safe and
convenient for public use downtown. Suitable locations include public parking
areas and sites adjacent to or within private development.
         b.   Public Gathering Place: A public gathering place is desired to
act as the hub for community events such as the Eagle Fun Days. The public
gathering place could be defined as 1st Street between Idaho Street and Aikens
Road, and State Street between Eagle Road and 2nd Street. However, the public
gathering place may be redefined as development progresses in the downtown
development area and/or in the transitional development area or if a more
specifically defined area is adopted as a part of the city comprehensive plan.
         c.   Vehicular And Pedestrian Use: Extension of Idaho Street for
vehicular and pedestrian use shall be considered.
   E.   Community Entry Development Area: CEDA shown on exhibit A-1 within the
EASD book.
      1.   Purpose: To provide a sense of entry into the city and transition
development into the central business district in support of the comprehensive
plan.
      2.   Architectural Character:
         a.   Height: Height of buildings is restricted to a maximum height of
thirty five feet (35').
         b.   Orientation: Shall be designed so that at least seventy percent
(70%) of the building's ground level, street facing facades are constructed to
abut and be oriented to a public sidewalk or plaza.
         c.   Accessibility: Shall be visually and physically accessible to the
pedestrian at the sidewalk or plaza level.
         d.   Detailing: Architectural detailing shall be an important
consideration for design approval. Attention to detail in architectural
elements shall include, but is not limited to, walls, pilasters, parapets,
cornices, columns, windows, doors, awnings, exterior lighting, ledges, eaves,
colors and materials.
         e.   Other: Such other nonconflicting architectural detailing,
materials and colors as set forth in this article.
      3.   Setbacks And Lot Coverage: To the extent the setback and lot
coverage requirements set forth below conflict with section
8-2-4 of this chapter, the setback requirements below shall control.
         a.   Front building setbacks from the property line shall be twenty
feet (20') minimum.
         b.   Side building setbacks shall be ten feet (10') minimum.
         c.   Front and street side setbacks shall be for pedestrian amenities
and the city encourages joint efforts between adjoining property owners.
Suggested amenities include: public art, landscape treatment, seating, flowers/
shrubs/all tree displays in movable planters, outdoor dining, plazas,
streetscape extension and bike racks.
         d.   Lot coverage by the footprint of the structure shall be a minimum
of twenty percent (20%) and a maximum of eighty five percent (85%) in which
case off site parking shall be provided for.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   Continuous front parking areas (off street) along State Street
and Eagle Road not permitted.
         b.   Limited direct access to parking areas from State Street or Eagle
Road is allowed.
         c.   Shared drive access points to parking shall be used wherever
possible.
         d.   On street parking is prohibited on Eagle Road.
      5.   Landscaping And Streetscape: All landscaping shall comply with the
landscape requirements contained in section 8-2A-7 of this article. Other
streetscape and design elements shall comply with the requirements contained
within subsection G of this section.
      6.   Planning Considerations: In reviewing an application pursuant to
this article, the design review board shall give consideration to the following
to determine compatibility with this article:
         a.   Entry Statement: Six (6) points of entry have been identified for
consideration and are shown on exhibit A-1 within the EASD book. However, the
final location of the entry statements may be redefined as development in the
city progresses or if a more specifically defined location is adopted as a part
of the city comprehensive plan.
The following entry statement concepts for signage are encouraged: a permanent
monument sign, simple in design, identifying Eagle. A license agreement may be
required by the highway district having jurisdiction if the entry statement is
proposed to be placed within a public street right of way. Any construction
within a public right of way would require approval of the agency having
jurisdiction.
   F.   Dunyon/State Development Area: DSDA shown on exhibit A-1 within the
EASD book.
      1.   Purpose: To improve the livability, desirability, and character of
the DSDA area and to encourage new development by providing unique regulations
specific to this district.
      2.   Setbacks And Site Design:
         a.   Front And Rear Setbacks: Front and rear building setbacks from
the property line shall be fifteen feet (15') minimum.
         b.   Side Setbacks: Side building setbacks shall be five feet (5')
minimum.
         c.   Pedestrian Amenities: Front and rear setbacks shall be for
pedestrian amenities and the city encourages joint efforts between adjoining
property owners. Suggested amenities include: public art, landscape treatment,
seating, flowers/shrubs/all tree displays in movable planters, outdoor dining,
plazas, streetscape extension and bike racks.
         d.   Site And Landscape Design: At the discretion of the design review
board the following may be considered when the board finds that the site has
been designed in harmony with the design guidelines, objectives and
considerations noted within subsection A of this section:
            (1)   Interior and perimeter parking lot landscape area dimensions
may be reduced.
            (2)   The minimum required landscaping between the building and the
property line may be reduced when the design review board finds that the
building's design style and architecture serves as an appropriate buffer to the
adjacent property.
   G.   Streetscape: Streetscape improvements are to include street trees,
streetlights, pedestrian lighting, bollards, public art, kiosks and
furnishings. The scope of streetscape design and number of amenities vary
within the different overlay districts of the city. In areas anticipated to
have higher concentrations of pedestrian use wider sidewalks and a further
varied number of amenities are to be made available to enhance the pedestrian
experience and to further encourage the health of the business community.
Examples of streetscape design and amenities are shown within the EASD book.
At a minimum, the following specific streetscape criteria shall apply:
      1.   Street trees shall comply with the requirements contained in section
8-2A-7 of this article. Any tree located within a concrete area shall include
tree grates and tree wells as depicted on the tree well and tree grate exhibit
within the EASD book. Root barriers shall be required to limit future sidewalk
damage from tree roots.
      2.   The specific style of streetlight poles within the DDA, TDA, CEDA,
and in the locations specified in subsection G6 of this section, shall be as
depicted on the streetlight exhibit within the EASD book.
      3.   The specific style of streetlight lamps within the DDA, TDA, CEDA,
and in the locations specified in subsection G6 of this section, shall be as
depicted on the streetlamp exhibit within the EASD book.
      4.   Streetlights within the DDA and TDA shall be located a maximum
distance of one hundred feet (100') apart except as specified in subsection G6
of this section. Said streetlights are not required to be located in alignment
across the street from each other.
      5.   Streetlights within the CEDA shall be located a maximum distance of
one hundred fifty feet (150') apart except as specified in subsection G6 of
this section. Said streetlights are not required to be located in alignment
across the street from each other.
      6.   Except as noted in subsections G4 and G5 of this section,
streetlights shall be spaced generally as depicted on the streetlight spacing
map included within the EASD book (exhibit A-2). The specific spacing
requirements are listed below and apply to each side of the street.
Streetlights are to be located in alignment across the street from each other
except where noted as "staggered". When the streetlights are to be "staggered"
a streetlight on one side of the street is to be located generally midway
between two (2) streetlights on the other side of the street. Spacing shall
still apply to each side of the street.
Street Boundaries Spacing (Each Side Of Street)
Street                     Boundaries                   Spacing (Each Side Of
                                                        Street)
Eagle Road                 Highway 44 to State Street   75'
Eagle Road                 State Street to Ranch Drive  150'
Eagle Road                 Ranch Drive to Floating      300' (staggered)
                           Feather Road
                           Highway 44 (new connection
State Street               west of Ballantyne Lane) to  300'
                           Dry Creek
State Street               Dry Creek to Cobblestone     150'
                           Lane
State Street               Cobblestone Lane to Palmetto 75'
                           Avenue
State Street               Palmetto Avenue to Plaza     150'
                           Drive/Hill Road
State Street               Plaza Drive/Hill Road to     300'
                           Highway 44
Plaza Drive/Hill Road      Eagle Road to Edgewood Lane  150'
Hill Road                  Edgewood Lane to New Highway 300' (staggered)
                           55
Alternate route connection Plaza Drive to Eagle River   150'
                           Development
 
      7.   Streetlight spacing may be slightly modified depending upon site
constraints and the location of existing streetlights.
      8.   Bollard style pedestrian lighting shall be required along all
pathways not illuminated by street and/or site lighting.
      9.   Bollards as depicted on the bollard exhibit within the EASD book
shall be required at all bulb outs.
      10.   Public art is encouraged and/or areas should be made available for
the placement of public art in the future.
      11.   Furnishings shall be required for all applications incorporating
streetscape improvements, pedestrian areas and/or plaza areas. Furnishings may
include flagpoles, benches, seating/tables, planters, bike racks, outdoor
clocks, drinking fountains, wall lamps, waste receptacles and other similar
amenities as may be approved by the design review board. Furnishing examples
are depicted within "urban accessories" section of the EASD book.
      12.   Sidewalks within the DDA shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide
and shall abut the curb. Sidewalks shall be constructed to match the sidewalk
exhibit within the EASD book, consisting of smooth concrete and textured
concrete with a "running bond" brick pattern. "Bulb outs" shall be constructed
generally as shown on the bulb out exhibit within the EASD book and shall be
required at all intersections, except that bulb outs shall not extend into any
roadway designated as an arterial or collector as shown on the Ada County long
range highway and street map unless otherwise approved by the highway district
having jurisdiction. A reduced sidewalk section may be permitted if the design
review board finds that the preservation of existing trees warrants a
reduction. In no case however shall the sidewalk be reduced to less than six
feet (6') in width.
      13.   Sidewalks within the TDA shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide
and shall abut the curb or shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide with a
ten foot (10') wide landscape strip between the sidewalk and curb. If the
sidewalk alternative which abuts the curb is utilized it shall be constructed
to match the sidewalk exhibit within the EASD book, consisting of smooth and
textured concrete with a "running bond" brick pattern. "Bulb outs" shall be
constructed generally as shown on the bulb out exhibit within the EASD book and
shall be required at all intersections, except that bulb outs shall not extend
into any roadway designated as an arterial or collector as shown on the Ada
County long range highway and street map unless otherwise approved by the
highway district having jurisdiction. A reduced sidewalk section may be
permitted if the design review board finds that the preservation of existing
trees warrants a reduction. In no case however shall the sidewalk be reduced to
less than six feet (6') in width.
      14.   Sidewalks within the CEDA shall be a minimum of eight feet (8')
wide with a ten foot (10') wide landscape strip between the sidewalk and curb.
"Bulb outs" shall be constructed generally as shown on the bulb out exhibit
within the EASD book and shall be required at all intersections, except that
bulb outs shall not extend into any roadway designated as an arterial or
collector as shown on the Ada County long range highway and street map unless
otherwise approved by the highway district having jurisdiction. A reduced
sidewalk section may be permitted if the design review board finds that the
preservation of existing trees justifies a reduced sidewalk section. In no case
however shall the sidewalk be reduced to less than six feet (6') in width.
(Ord. 462, 11-11-2003; amd. Ord. 756, 8-23-2016; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord.
858, 10-26-2021)
8-2A-7: LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER AREA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan is required for all
developments requiring a design review, including, but not limited to, all
subdivisions. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale (no smaller than 1
inch equals 30 feet) and shall indicate the following:
      1.   Boundaries, property lines, and dimensions.
      2.   Existing trees and vegetation identified by species and size.
      3.   The location and design of areas to be landscaped.
      4.   The location and labels for all proposed plants.
      5.   Plant lists or schedules with the botanical and common name,
quantity, and spacing and size of all proposed landscape material at the time
of planting.
      6.   Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as
earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture,
lights, and courts or paved areas.
      7.   Planting and installation details as necessary to ensure conformance
with all required standards.
   B.   Landscape As Percent Of Site:
      1.   Landscaping shall cover a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the
property on multi-family residential developments. Hardscape plaza areas, such
as decorative concrete/paver patios that are integrated into the design of the
landscaped area, may be included in the fifteen percent (15%) landscape
coverage requirement.
      2.   Landscaping shall cover a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
property on all other developments. Hardscape plaza areas, such as decorative
concrete/paver patios that are integrated into the design of the landscaped
area, may be included in the ten percent (10%) landscape coverage requirement.
      3.   All landscape improvements required in this section shall count
toward fulfillment of the above minimum percentages.
      4.   If only a portion of a property is being developed, and if the city
does not require improvements on the entire property, improvements to landscape
shall continue a minimum of twenty five feet (25') (on site) beyond the
proposed development.
   C.   Retention, Removal, And Replacement Of Trees:
      1.   Retention Of Existing Trees:
         a. Existing trees shall be retained unless removal is approved in
writing by the city.
      2.   Removal And Replacement Of Existing Trees:
         a. Where trees are approved by the city to be removed, replacement
with a species identified in section 8-2A-7Q of this article is required. For
each caliper inch of deciduous tree removed, an equivalent amount of caliper
inches shall be replanted. For each vertical foot of coniferous tree removed,
an equivalent amount of vertical feet shall be replanted.
      Example: An eight inch (8") caliper deciduous tree is removed, an
acceptable replacement would be four (4) two inch (2") caliper deciduous trees.
A twelve foot (12') tall coniferous tree is removed, an acceptable replacement
would be two (2) six feet (6') tall coniferous trees.
         b. When a homeowners association or its agent removes tree(s) from a
subdivision common area to appropriately thin an overgrown canopy, replacement
shall not be required provided the site remains in compliance with
subdivision's approved landscape plan as determined by the city.
         c. Unless it is determined by the city that replacement is necessary
to preserve and/or restore riparian and wildlife habitat, removal of the
following trees shall not otherwise require replacement: black locust, poplar,
cottonwood, willow, tree of heaven, elm, and silver maple. Trees which are weak
wooded, weak branched, suckering, damaged, diseased, insect infested, or
containing similar maladies may be exempt from replacement if removal is first
approved by the city.
         d. In cases where the condition of the tree(s) constitutes an
"emergency" as defined in section 8-1-2 of this title, the tree(s) may be
removed without approval provided that the city is notified after the tree's
removal and provided with documentation indicating the tree's condition at time
of removal.
         e. Planting within public rights of way shall be with approval from
the city and the public entity owning the property.
      3.   Damage During Construction: Existing trees or shrubs that are
retained shall be protected from damage to bark, branches, or roots during
construction. Construction or excavation occurring within the drip line of any
public or private retained tree or shrub may severely damage the tree or shrub.
Any severely damaged tree shall be replaced in accordance with subsection C2 of
this section.
      4.   Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Grade changes and impervious
surfaces shall be allowed at a distance from the trunk of a retained tree equal
to the diameter of the tree trunk plus six feet (6'), or to the drip line,
whichever is furthest from the trunk.
      5.   Minimum Landscaping: Existing vegetation which is to be retained may
be used to satisfy the minimum required landscaping.
   D.   Prohibited Materials And Landscaping:
      1.   No required landscape areas shall include artificial trees, plants,
or any carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute.
      2.   Clear vision triangle shall be observed in regard to all vegetation.
All shade trees planted within vision triangles and adjacent to any street
shall be pruned to a minimum seven feet (7') above the adjacent sidewalk and
fourteen feet (14') above the adjacent roadway surface. Shrubs and ground
covers planted within the vision triangle shall not exceed three feet (3')
height at maturity. The boundaries of the vision triangle are defined by
measuring from the intersection of the edges of two (2) adjacent roadways forty
feet (40') along each roadway and connecting the two (2) points with a straight
line. The sight distance obstruction is also applicable to railroad-highway
grade crossings with the vision triangle defined by measuring forty feet (40')
along the railroad property line. In all cases, ITD and ACHD standards shall
apply also.
      3.   When the city determines that a sight obstruction exists, it shall
notify the owner of the property upon which the obstruction is located and
order that the obstruction be removed within fifteen (15) days. The failure of
the owner to remove the obstruction shall be punishable as an infraction as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   E.   Installation And Minimum Standards:
      1.   Trees shall be planted in accordance with the city of Eagle tree
planting specifications included as an exhibit within the EASD book. Accepted
nursery standards and practices shall be followed in the planting and
maintenance of landscaped areas.
      2.   Soil and slope stabilization must result after landscape
installation.
      3.   Root barriers shall be installed for all new trees planted adjacent
to existing or proposed public or private sidewalks and paving.
      4.   The minimum acceptable size for deciduous trees shall be two inch
(2") caliper, balled and burlapped.
      5.   The minimum acceptable size for evergreen trees shall be six feet
(6') to seven feet (7') balled and burlapped.
      6.   Plant material selection shall be taken from subsection Q of this
section.
      7.   All landscaped areas adjacent to vehicular areas are to be protected
with an approved curbing material.
      8.   a. Certification Of Completion: Upon the completion of the landscape
installation, or other improvement subject to design review approval, a written
certification of completion shall be prepared by the licensed landscape
architect responsible for the landscape plan. The certification of completion
shall state that the installation of all landscape improvements is in
substantial compliance with the city approved landscape plan. This
certification shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in lieu of, the inspections
performed and certificates issued by the city.
         b. Report Of Deficiencies: In the event that deficiencies are present
after the landscape installation, or other improvements subject to design
review approval, the licensed landscape architect shall prepare and file with
the city a report noting the deficiencies in the improvements. The city will
not accept a certification of completion, or issue a certificate of occupancy,
until the licensed landscape architect has verified that the deficiencies have
been corrected.
         c. Landscape Architect Designee: The licensed landscape architect may,
at his or her discretion, appoint an authorized designee to certify the project
provided that the designee is a licensed landscape architect.
   F.   Tree Species Mix:
      1.   When more than ten (10) trees are to be planted to meet the
requirements of these guidelines, a mix of species shall be provided. The
number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of
trees required to be planted. Species shall be planted in proportion to the
required mix. See the table below:
 
Required Number Of Trees Minimum Number Of Species
11 - 20                  2
21 - 30                  3
31 - 40                  4
41 plus                  5
 
   G.   Maintenance:
      1.   All required landscaping shall be permanently maintained in a
healthy growing condition by the property owner or the property owner's
representative. This includes the maintenance of street trees and/or other
landscape materials within or abutting the public right of way adjacent to the
subject property. The property owner shall remove, and if required to meet the
standards of these requirements, shall replace any unhealthy or dead plant
material immediately or as the planting season permits. In all cases,
maintenance and planting within public rights of way shall be with approval
from the public and/or private entities owning the property.
   H.   Completion Time:
      1.   The zoning administrator may authorize a delay in the completion of
planting if a surety for one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of
installation is provided to the city. A final certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued until all required plantings are complete.
   I.   Irrigation Required: An underground automatic irrigation system is
required for all development as defined in section
8-2A-1 of this article.
      1.   All required landscaped areas must be provided with an automatic
underground irrigation system.
      2.   The system shall be equipped with a reduced pressure backflow
prevention device.
      3.   The system shall be designed and constructed to provide one hundred
percent (100%) spray coverage.
      4.   Wherever feasible, sprinkler heads irrigating lawn or other high
water demand landscape areas shall be circuited so that they are on a separate
zone or zones from those irrigating trees, shrubbery or other reduced water
demand areas.
      5.   Sprinkler heads shall be placed as required to reduce direct
overthrow onto nonpervious areas (walks, drives, etc.).
      6.   The use of low trajectory spray nozzles is encouraged in order to
reduce the effect of wind velocity on the spray system.
      7.   Use of nonpotable water for use in the irrigation of lawn and plant
material is required when determined to be available.
      8.   All nonpotable water access points shall be clearly and permanently
labeled with markers indicating that the water is not safe for human
consumption.
      9.   Maintain all irrigation systems to ensure proper operation and water
conservation.
   J.   Buffer Areas/Common Lots:
      1.   Definition: A transition zone or buffer area consists of horizontal
space (land) and vertical elements (plants, berms, fences, or walls). The
purpose of such buffer space is to physically separate and visually screen
adjacent land uses which are not fully compatible due to differing facilities,
activities, or different intensities of use, such as townhouses and a
convenience store, or a high volume roadway and residential dwellings.
      2.   Minimum Requirements:
         a.   When a commercial or industrial use abuts a residential use, a
ten foot (10') wide by six foot (6') high landscaped buffer is required.
         b.   When a parking lot abuts a residential activity, a five foot (5')
wide by six foot (6') high landscaped buffer is required.
         c.   To conceal outdoor storage areas, trash receptacles, exposed
equipment associated with any commercial or industrial activity, and off street
loading when adjacent to or in view from a residential activity or public
street right of way, a five foot (5') wide by six foot (6') high landscaped
buffer is required.
      3.   Materials:
         a.   All buffer areas shall be comprised of, but not limited to, a mix
of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover in which evergreen
plant materials comprise a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the total plant
material used.
         b.   Height requirements shall be accomplished with plant material,
with a fence or decorative wall.
         c.   The required buffer area shall result in an effective barrier
within three (3) years and be maintained such that sixty percent (60%) or more
of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of vision through
it.
         d.   Chainlink fencing, with slats or otherwise, and cedar fencing is
prohibited for screening.
      4.   Major Roadways: New residential developments, including, but not
limited to, subdivisions and multi-family developments, shall be buffered from
streets classified as collectors, arterials, freeways, or expressways, to
protect residential communities from noisy, potentially dangerous, high speed
roads. The "buffer area" shall be defined as a common lot located between the
residential lots within the subdivision and the right of way line of the
adjacent roadway. This buffer is required as part of the common area open space
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association. Any landscaping proposed to
be within the public right of way shall not be included as a part of the buffer
area required below. The height for berming/fencing, as noted below, shall be
measured from the elevation of the final grade of the adjacent roadway
(measured at the centerline) to the top of the proposed berming/fencing. The
required buffer area width, plantings, and fencing are as follows:
         a.    Any road designated as a collector on the master street map
typologies map in the Eagle comprehensive plan:
A minimum of thirty five feet (35') wide buffer area (not including right of
way) shall be provided with the following plants per one hundred (100) linear
feet of right of way: four (4) shade trees, five (5) evergreen trees, and
twenty four (24) shrubs. Each required shade tree may be substituted with two
(2) flowering/ornamental trees, provided that not more than fifty percent (50%)
of the shade trees are substituted.
A minimum five foot (5') high, maximum eight foot (8') high, berm, decorative
block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete
wall, or combination thereof shall be provided within the buffer area. The
maximum slope for any berm shall be three feet (3') horizontal distance to one
foot (1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall, cultured stone,
decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be provided in
combination with the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be provided
for the placement of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and similar high
maintenance and/or unsightly fencing shall not be permitted.
         b.   Any road designated as a minor arterial on the master street map
typologies map in the Eagle comprehensive plan:
A minimum of fifty feet (50') wide buffer area (not including right of way)
shall be provided with the following plants per one hundred (100) linear feet
of right of way: five (5) shade trees, eight (8) evergreen trees, three (3)
flowering/ornamental trees, and twenty four (24) shrubs. Each required shade
tree may be substituted with two (2) flowering/ornamental trees, provided that
not more than fifty percent (50%) of the shade trees are substituted.
A minimum five foot (5') high, maximum eight foot (8') high, berm, decorative
block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete
wall, or combination thereof shall be provided within the buffer area. The
maximum slope for any berm shall be three feet (3') horizontal distance to one
foot (1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall, cultured stone,
decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be provided, in
combination with the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be provided
for the placement of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and similar high
maintenance and/or unsightly fencing shall not be permitted.
         c. Any road designated as a principal arterial on the master street
map typologies map in the Eagle comprehensive plan:
A minimum of seventy five feet (75') wide buffer area (not including right of
way) shall be provided with the following plants per one hundred (100) linear
feet of right of way: six (6) shade trees, ten (10) evergreen trees, four (4)
flowering/ornamental trees, and twenty four (24) shrubs. Each required shade
tree may be substituted with two (2) flowering/ornamental trees, provided that
not more than fifty percent (50%) of the shade trees are substituted.
A minimum ten foot (10') high, maximum twelve foot (12') high, berm, decorative
block wall, cultured stone, decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete
wall, or combination thereof shall be provided within the buffer area. The
maximum slope for any berm shall be three feet (3') horizontal distance to one
foot (1') vertical distance. If a decorative block wall, cultured stone,
decorative rock, or similarly designed concrete wall is to be provided, in
combination with the berm, a four foot (4') wide flat area shall be provided
for the placement of the decorative wall. Chainlink, cedar, and similar high
maintenance and/or unsightly fencing shall not be permitted.
      5.   Common Area Landscapes: New residential subdivision common area
landscapes shall be comprised of the following:
         a.   Lawn, either seed or sod.
         b.   A minimum of one deciduous shade tree per one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
      6.   Design Considerations For Residential Developments:
         a.   For design flexibility, half of the required shade trees may be
substituted on a two to one (2:1) basis with ornamental and evergreen trees.
         b.   Buffer areas should include a variety of species, arranged to
create varied and attractive views. Open fences, decorative walls, and berms
may be used. Height changes, offset angles, different materials, and other
design techniques are required so as to create variety.
   K.   Parking Lot Landscaping:
      1.   Visual Impact: Landscaping shall be provided to minimize the visual
impact of off street parking:
Parking should be located to the side and rear of buildings and shall be
screened so that it does not dominate the streetscape. Fences, hedges, berms,
and landscaping may be used to screen parking areas (chainlink fencing shall
not be permitted). In the design of large parking areas, arrange bays of
parking spaces to be separated by landscaping. When parking lots occur on
sloping terrain, step the parking lots to follow the terrain rather than
allowing the lot surface to extend above natural grade.
      2.   Parking Lot Landscape Strip: A landscape strip shall be provided
when a parking lot is located adjacent to a public right of way. The landscaped
strip shall serve to shield views of parked cars to passing motorists and
pedestrians, and to establish coordination among architecturally diverse
buildings, which creates a pleasing, harmonious appearance along the roadway.
      Four (4) options are provided for fulfilling this requirement:
         a.   Provide a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip between the right
of way and the parking lot, and plant with a minimum of one shade tree and ten
(10) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of frontage, excluding driveway
openings.
         b.   Provide an earth berm of thirty inches (30") minimum height (do
not exceed 3:1 slope) within a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip between the
right of way and the parking lot, and plant with a minimum of one shade tree
and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of frontage, excluding
driveway openings.
         c.   Provide a six foot (6') landscaped strip with a minimum thirty
inch (30") grade drop from the right of way to the parking lot, and plant with
a minimum of one shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear
feet of frontage, excluding driveway openings.
         d.   Provide a three foot (3') high fence of wood, brick, stone, or
decorative block or concrete along with a four foot (4') wide landscaped strip
between the right of way and the parking lot, and plant a minimum of one shade
tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of frontage,
excluding driveway openings.
      (1)   The board may waive the requirement for a wood, brick, stone,
decorative block or concrete fence if the board finds the following:
               (A)   The applicant must design, document, and obtain city
approval representing that the overall planting design, at the time of
planting, results in an effective barrier such that the landscape strip shields
the view of parked cars from passing pedestrians and motorists; and
               (B)   Any such proposed design alternative is compatible with
the overall site design of the entire project and is compatible with the
surrounding area.
      3.   Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping: Perimeter landscaping
requirements define parking areas and prevent two (2) adjacent lots from
becoming one large expanse of paving. This requirement does not hinder the
ability to provide vehicular access between lots.
         a.   Provide a minimum five foot (5') wide perimeter landscaped strip
between the property lines and the parking lot, and plant with a minimum of one
shade tree and five (5) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of perimeter.
      4.   Parking Lot Interior Landscaping:
         a.   Calculated Amount: Interior parking lot landscaping shall be
required on any parking lot with ten (10) spaces and above. The required amount
of landscaping is based on a sliding scale, as follows:
 
Total Number Of Spaces Percent Of Total Area Of A Lot That Must Be An Interior
                       Landscaped Area
    10 - 20        5 percent
    21 - 50        8 percent
    51+            10 percent
 
         b.   Additional Requirements:
            (1)   No interior planter shall be less than five feet (5') in any
dimension.
            (2)   No parking space shall be more than sixty feet (60') from an
interior landscaped area.
            (3)   Parking islands are to be as evenly spaced as feasible
throughout the lot to consistently reduce the visual impact of long rows of
parked cars.
            (4)   Deciduous shade trees and ground covers or low shrubs are
recommended as primary plantings in interior landscaped areas. Deciduous shade
trees are to be clear branched to a height of six feet (6').
            (5)   A terminal island for a single row of parking spaces shall be
landscaped with at least one tree and shrubs, ground cover, or grass. A
terminal island for a double row of parking spaces shall contain not less than
two (2) trees and shrubs, ground cover, or grass.
   L.   Landscaped Commercial Strips:
      1.   Landscaped strips shall be provided between all building development
and public rights of way to lend continuity among different architectural
styles, screen unsightly views, establish a pleasing view for motorists, and
create a safe and pleasant corridor for pedestrians.
         a.   The landscaped strip shall be ten feet (10') wide minimum and
planted with one shade tree and ten (10) shrubs for every thirty five feet
(35') of street frontage. Two (2) ornamental or two (2) evergreen trees may be
substituted for one shade tree.
   M.   Parkway Strips, Separated Sidewalks, And Street Trees:
      1. Except as may otherwise be required within the DDA, TDA, CEDA, and
DSDA sidewalks shall be separated from the curb along all streets. An eight
foot (8') wide minimum parkway planter strip planted with shade class (class
II) trees shall be required between the sidewalk and street to provide a canopy
effect over streets.
      2.   In all required applications, excluding residential developments,
one street tree, selected from the approved tree list in subsection Q of this
section, shall be planted per thirty five (35) linear feet of street frontage.
      3.   Within residential developments one shade class (class II) tree
selected from the approved tree list in subsection Q of this section shall be
located on both sides of all streets within the eight foot (8') wide landscape
strip between the sidewalk and the curb. Trees shall be planted at the front of
each lot generally located on each side lot line corner with the distance
between trees to be a minimum of thirty five feet (35') and a maximum of eighty
feet (80') of street frontage.
      4.   In all cases, any planting within public rights of way shall be with
approval from the public and/or private entities owning the property.
   N.   Incentives:
      1.   The zoning administrator may reduce the site parking requirements by
up to five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed
landscape plan incorporates the retention of existing significant trees,
particularly in the interior of the site.
      2.   The zoning administrator may reduce the site parking requirements by
up to five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed
landscaping exceeds the requirements of these guidelines by fifteen percent
(15%) or more.
      3.   The zoning administrator may reduce technical standards of parking
lot design where paving requirements conflict with the retention of significant
trees.
   O.   Alternative Methods Of Compliance:
      1.   Project Conditions: It is not the intent of these landscape
requirements to inhibit creative solutions to land use problems. Under certain
site conditions, a strict interpretation of requirements may be either
physically impossible or impractical. Alternative compliance is a procedure
that allows certain modifications to existing regulations within this section.
Requests for use of alternative landscaping schemes are justified only when one
or more of the following conditions apply:
         a.   The sites involve space limitations or unusually shaped parcels;
         b.   Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such
that full compliance is impossible or impractical;
         c.   Due to a change of use of an existing site, the required buffer
yard is larger than can be provided; and
         d.   Safety considerations are involved.
      2.   Request For Alternative Method Of Compliance: The applicant must
provide the city with a written request if an alternative method of compliance
is proposed. The request shall state which requirement as set forth within this
section is to be modified, what project conditions stated within subsection O1
of this section justify using the proposed alternative, and how the proposed
alternative equals or exceeds said requirement.
      3.   Tree Fund: Persons applying for an alternative method of compliance
for relief from regulations that require all existing trees to remain on site
may elect to make a financial contribution to the Eagle city tree fund in lieu
of retaining all trees on site. The condition(s) which warrants the need for
the tree fund alternate method of compliance shall be specified in the
application submitted under subsection O2 of this section. If the application
is approved, the amount to be contributed by the applicant will be based upon
the total caliper inches of deciduous tree(s) removed from the site and the
total vertical feet of coniferous trees removed from the site. Cost per caliper
inch for deciduous trees and cost per vertical foot for coniferous trees shall
be determined by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall have the
right to review and consider the value determination, and following said
review, to reapply for other alternative methods of compliance, without
prejudice, in accordance with subsection O2 of this section.
   P.   Plan Preparation: Preparing a landscape plan requires special skills.
Landscaping involves more than a simple arrangement of plants with irrigation;
plants are not haphazardly placed in a way that fills up leftover space.
Landscape plans should reflect a theme so that site elements are artfully and
technically organized in a way that conveys meaning, coherence, and spatial
organization. Landscaping should enhance the physical environment as well as
the project's aesthetic character. Therefore, landscape plans to be submitted
for approval shall be prepared by or under the responsible control of a
licensed landscape architect with said plans to be duly stamped to clearly
identify the preparer.
   Q.   Approved Tree List: This list is a suggested planting list. Other tree
species and varieties will be considered.
            SMALL TREES (CLASS I)  
Common Name Botanical Name        Varieties
                     SMALL TREES (CLASS I)    
Common Name          Botanical Name          Varieties
                                             Adirondack
                                             Brandywine
                                             Coralburst
                                             Donald Wyman
                                             Harvest gold
                                             Indian summer
                                             Prairiefire
Crabapple, flowering Malus spp.              Purple prince
                                             Radiant
                                             Red jewel
                                             Robinson
                                             Royalty
                                             Sargent
                                             Spring snow
                                             Strawberry parf
                                             Transitoria
                                            
Dogwood, flowering   Cornus florida          Cloud 9
Goldenraintree       Koelreuteria paniculata September
Hawthorn, Washington Crataegus phaenopyrum    
Lilac, Japanese tree Syringa reticulata      Ivory silk
Magnolia, saucer     Magnolia x soulangiana   
Maple, amur          Acer ginnala            Flame
Maple, hedge         Acer campestre          Queen Elizabeth
                                             Aristocrat
                                             Capitol
Pear, callery        Pyrus calleryana        Chanticleer
                                             Cleveland
                                             Redspire
Plum, flowering      Prunus spp.             Blireiana
                                             Newport
Plum, purple leaf    Prunus cerasifera        
Redbud, eastern      Cercis canadensis        
Smoke tree, common   Cotinus coggygria        
Sumac, stag horn     Rus typhina             Laciniata
 
MEDIUM TREES (CLASS II)
Common Name Botanical Name Varieties
MEDIUM TREES (CLASS II)
Common Name               Botanical Name           Varieties
Alder, mountain           Alnus tenuifolia          
                                                   Bergeson
                                                   Cimaron
Ash, green                Fraxinus pennsylvanica   Marshall
                                                   Patmore
                                                   Urbanite
Ash, raywood              Fraxinus oxycarpa        Raywood
                                                   Flame
                                                   Autumn applause
Ash, white                Fraxinus americana       Autumn purple
                                                   Rosehill
                                                   Skyline
Birch, river              Betula nigra             Heritage
Buckeye, yellow           Aesculus octandra         
Cherry, Japanese - kanzan Prunus serrulata          
Corktree, amur            Phellodendron amurense   Macho
Filbert, Turkish          Corylus colurna           
                                                   Princeton sentry
Ginkgo (male only)        Ginkgo biloba            Magyar
                                                   Autumn gold
Hackberry, common         Celtis occidentalis      Prairie pride
                          Gleditsia triancanthos   Shademaster
Honeylocust, thornless    inermis                  Skyline
                                                   Moraine
Hornbeam, European        Carpinus betulus         Fastigiata
Horsechestnut, common     Aesculus hippocastanum   Baumannii
Katsuratree               Cercidiphyllum japonicum  
Linden, American          Tilia americana          Redmond
                                                   Legend
                                                   Chancellor
Linden, littleleaf        Tilia cordata            Corzam
                                                   Glenleven
                                                   Greenspire
Linden, silver            Tilia tomentosa          Green mtn.
                                                   Sterling
Magnolia, cucumber tree   Magnolia acuminata        
                                                   Columnare
Maple, Norway             Acer platanoides         Deborah
                                                   Emerald queen
                                                   Royal red
Maple, sugar              Acer saccharum           Green mtn.
                                                   Legacy
Pagoda tree, Japanese     Sophora japonica         Regent
Persimmon, common         Diospyros virginiana      
Sweetgum, American        Liquidambar styracaflua  Moraine
Yellowwood, American      Cladrastis kentukea       
 
LARGE TREES (CLASS III)
Common Name Botanical Name Varieties
LARGE TREES (CLASS III)
Common Name               Botanical Name               Varieties
                                                       Asplenifolia
Beech, European           Fagus sylvatica              Riversii
                                                       Roseo-Marginata
                                                       Pendula
Catalpa, northern         Catalpa speciosa              
Coffee tree, Kentucky     Gymnocladus dioicus          Espresso
Cottonwood, black         Populus trichocarpa           
Hickory, shagbark         Carya ovata                   
Oak, bur                  Quercus macrocarpa            
Oak, English              Quercus robur                Fastigiata
                                                       Pyramich
Oak, red                  Quercus rubra                 
Oak, swamp white          Quercus bicolor               
Plane tree, London        Platanus x acerifolia        Bloodgood
Tulip tree                Liriodendron tulipifera       
Zelkova, Japanese         Zelkova serrata              Village green
                                                      
CONIFERS
Common Name               Botanical Name               Varieties
                                                      
Arborvitae, eastern       Thuja occidentalis            
                                                       Monarch of
Bald cypress, common      Taxodium distichum           Illinois
                                                       Shawnee brave
                                                       Glauca pendula -
Cedar, blue atlas         Cedrus atlantica glauca      weeping
                                                       Fastigiata -
                                                       columnar form
Cedar, weeping Alaska     Chamaecyparis nootkatensis   Pendula
Douglas fir               Pseudotsuga menziesii         
False cypress, lawson     Chamaecyparis lawsoniana     Allumii
                                                       Stewartii
Fir, white                Abies concolor               Violacea
Incense cedar, California Calocedrus decurrens          
Juniper, Rocky Mountain   Juniperus scopulorum          
Larch, European           Larix decidua                Pendula
Pine, Austrian            Pinus nigra                   
Pine, bristlecone         Pinus aristata                
Pine, eastern white       Pinus strobes                 
Pine, limber              Pinus flexilis                
Pine, mugo                Pinus mugo                    
Pine, ponderosa           Pinus ponderosa               
Pine, Scotch              Pinus sylvestris              
Redwood, dawn             Metasequoia glyptostroboides  
Sequoia, giant            Sequoiadendron giganteum      
                                                       Glauca
Spruce, Colorado          Picea pungens                Hoopsii
                                                       Koster
                                                       Moerheimii
Spruce, Norway            Picea abies                   
Spruce, Serbian           Picea omorika                 
Spruce, white             Picea glauca                 Densata
(Black Hills)
 
(Ord. 434, 1-14-2003; amd. Ord. 462, 11-11-2003; Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; Ord. 618,
2-17-2009; Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; Ord. 703, 9-24-2013; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
8-2A-8: SIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   All Signs: Signs shall not be erected or maintained in any district
as established by the zoning ordinance except those signs specifically
enumerated in this article.
      2.   Undefined Or Unclassified Signs: To determine applicable regulations
for any sign not specifically defined herein, the zoning administrator shall
use the definition or classification within this article which most closely
defines or classifies any such sign.
      3.   Architectural Compatibility: The number, area, and height of signs
as outlined in this article are intended to be maximum standards which do not
necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. Therefore, in addition to the
enumerated maximum standards, the city shall give consideration to a sign's
relationship to the overall appearance of the subject property as well as the
surrounding area.
      4.   Materials And Appearance: It is the intent of this article to
encourage interesting, creative, readable, effective, uncluttered, and well
maintained signage. Sign materials and appearance shall be complementary to the
building architecture and colors. The exhibits provided in the EASD book are
examples of the types of sign designs envisioned for the Eagle architecture
theme.
      5.   Nonconforming Signs: All signs in the entire city on the effective
date hereof shall conform to this title upon any structural change to the sign,
sign base, or building to which it is attached, or upon any change in the face
or copy of the sign for the business to which such sign pertains if the use
associated with the business is changed, except as provided for within
subsection C16n, "Historic Signage", of this section.
      6.   Change Of Face, Copy And/Or Logo On Signs: For signs conforming to
this article, a permit shall not be required for a change of face, copy and/or
logo on any such sign, provided that the sign structure is not changed in any
way and provided that the colors previously approved by the city are not
changed.
   B.   Definitions: If conflict arises between any definition in this section
and any other definition within this title, the definition with the more
specific and/or more restrictive definition shall control. Any other words or
phrases not specifically defined shall be interpreted to give this article its
most reasonable application.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign which is designed and constructed to give its
message through a sequence or progressive changes or parts or lights or degree
of lighting, such as an electronic reader board.
   AREA OF THE BUILDING FACE: The general outer surface of an exterior wall of
a building. The area of the building face shall be a total area of such
surface, including the area of doors and windows which open into such face, if
any.
   AUTOMATED SIGN: A sign with a fixed or changing display capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures or images composed of, a series of light
emitting elements or moving panels or parts; including, but not limited to:
tripaneled, digital, electronic message boards, light emitting diodes (LED)
signs or signs that in any other way move or create the illusion of movement.
This definition does not include signs with copy that is manually changed.
   BANNER SIGN: Any sign made of lightweight fabric, plastic, or similar
material. Governmental flags or emblems shall not be considered banner signs.
   CABINET SIGN (SCULPTED): A sign consisting of a translucent or
nontranslucent panel containing sign copy which is affixed to a cabinet that is
sculpted to form a nonsquare or nonrectangular decorative shape which provides
interest to the sign, such as the shape of a logo, the shape of letters, or
combination thereof.
   CABINET SIGN (STANDARD): A sign consisting of one or more translucent or
nontranslucent panels containing sign copy, which are interchangeable and which
are affixed to a box or cabinet that is generally square or rectangular in
shape.
   CITY ENTRY SIGN: A permanent sign identifying the city of Eagle or the
central business district. No business advertising is permitted on city entry
signage.
   COMMUNITY EVENTS: Community sponsored events such as Eagle Fun Days, Eagle
Saturday Market, First Friday, school sporting events, and similar city,
chamber of commerce, Eagle Idaho Merchants Association, and school district
type events, including events sponsored by any church/religious institution
which has a city approved site within Eagle.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: An informational sign which identifies the architect,
engineer, contractor, banking institution, or other individual or firms
involved with the construction of a building, or announcing the character of
the building or enterprise.
   COOPERATIVE BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign including multiple
businesses, and which may or may not include directional information, that is
to be constructed as a part of the "City Entry Statement Cooperative Sign
Plan".
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN (OFF PREMISES): See definitions of Portable Off Premises
Directional Sign and Subdivision Directional Sign (Off Premises).
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN (ON PREMISES): An on premises permanent directional sign
which foremost contains words such as "Entrance", "Enter", "Exit", "In", "Out",
or other similar words, or a sign containing arrows or characters indicating
traffic directions and used either in conjunction with such words or
separately.
   DRIVE-THROUGH/DRIVE-UP SERVICE MENU BOARD SIGN: A sign identifying products
for sale and prices for those products. The menu board sign may include
business identification.
   FACE OF SIGN: The surface of the sign area upon, against or through which
the message is displayed or illustrated.
   FEATHER FLAG SIGN: A durable and lightweight fabric that flows easily in the
wind, and is attached to an aluminum pole. The pole can either be inserted into
the ground or can be connected to a solid, spring or spinning base.
   FREEHANGING SIGNBOARD: A sign attached underneath a canopy, awning or
colonnade.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: A single or multiple faced sign, supported from the
ground by one or more columns, uprights or braces.
   GRADE: The elevation or level of the street closest to the sign to which
reference is made, as measured at the street's centerline, or top of curb if
one exists, adjacent to where the sign is to be placed, or the relative ground
level in the immediate vicinity of the sign if determined by the zoning
administrator to be an accurate determination for grade with regard to the
intent of this article.
   GRAND OPENING: The promotional activity used by a new business or enterprise
or for a grand opening for a business or enterprise under new management, to
inform the public of their location and contribution to the business community.
"Grand opening" does not mean the annual or occasional promotion of services or
retail sales by a business.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest
point of a sign or any vertical projection thereof. Architectural elements used
above any sign area may be excluded from the maximum height measurement if the
city determines that said architectural elements add to the character of the
sign and do not create an overbearing appearance in relation to the sign,
building and area.
   HOLIDAY: A day designated as having special significance for which a
government or religious group have deemed that observation is warranted. A
holiday is generally an official observance of religious, national, or cultural
significance, often accompanied by celebrations or festivities.
   HOLIDAY SEASON SIGN: Signs advertising a holiday.
   ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL: A sign that is affected by an artificial light
source that is not contained within the sign itself.
   ILLUMINATION, HALO: Illumination of a sign from a light source that is not
visible and is concealed or contained within the sign or located between the
sign and the structure/wall. Illumination from the source of the light becomes
visible in darkness when the light is reflected off of the wall/structure upon
which the sign is attached.
   ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL: Illumination of a sign from any light source that is
concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through
a translucent surface, except for illumination, punch through letter signs.
This includes characters, letters, figures, designs or outline which is
illuminated by gas filled luminous tubes, such as neon, argon or fluorescent.
   ILLUMINATION, PUNCH THROUGH LETTER: A sign with letters, logos or other sign
graphics that are opaque (no light is permitted to shine through them), that
are attached to a sign cabinet or structure that allows light to shine through
it. The distance between the letters, logos, or other sign graphics and the
background (surface of the cabinet or structure) is a maximum of one-half inch
(1/2"). The light source is concealed within the cabinet or structure and is
not visible except that illumination from the light source shines though
transparent (nonopaque) background material for no more than one-fourth inch
(1/4") around the letters, logo, and other graphics, creating a halo effect.
   MASTER SIGN PLAN: A plan designed to show the relationship of signs for any
cluster of buildings intended for business occupancy, or any single building
containing more than one business or any arrangement of business buildings or
shops which constitute a visual entity as a whole. These include developments
such as shopping centers, mini-malls, business parks, and multi-tenant
commercial, office or industrial buildings housing four (4) or more businesses.
Additionally, a master sign plan may be submitted for a single business if the
owner chooses to submit an application for a master sign plan for said
business.
   MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign with a solid base, including rock signs,
or with supports that are designed to be structurally similar to the sign
construction, and which incorporate architectural features which complement the
sign construction. Pole type supports are not permitted for monument signs,
unless enclosed within the monument sign structure.
   MURAL: A painting, other than a business advertising sign, on the outside
wall of a building.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which does not comply with the provisions of
this code.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: Signs located on a separate parcel of land or a separate
site from the place where the product, service, activity or business is
located.
   ON PREMISES SIGN: Signs located on the same parcel of land or a site as the
place where the product, service, activity or business is located.
   PENNANT SIGN: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
whether in series or not, designed to move in the wind and therefore considered
a moving sign.
   POLE SIGN: A freestanding sign that is supported by one or more poles that
are not enclosed as in a monument sign structure.
   PORTABLE OFF PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Off premises portable signs
providing directional information for businesses.
   PORTABLE ON PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS: Portable on premises signs for
advertising which can be used on a permanent basis and which are intended to
allow for business identification and any other advertising being promoted by
the business or enterprise.
   PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not designed to be permanently attached to a
building or anchored to the ground such as A-frame signs, yard signs (rigid),
banner signs, feather flag signs and sandwich board signs.
   READER BOARD: A sign or part of a sign on which the letters are readily
replaceable such that the copy can be changed from time to time.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which the sign is placed, not including a subdivision sign.
   ROOF SIGN: A sign that is erected on or above the roof of a building and
which derives its principal support from the roof or from columns or supports
extending through the roof. The definition includes a sign affixed to any
structure erected upon a roof, including a structure housing building equipment
and includes a sign erected on top of a canopy, deck, patio, or similar
structure.
   SIGN: Any letters, figures, design, symbol, trademark, logo or device
intended to attract attention to any activity or service, place, subject,
person, firm, corporation, public performance, machine or merchandise
whatsoever, including the display of merchandise. Sources of light used
primarily to illuminate a sign, or a building, or grounds surrounding the
building, shall not be considered signs themselves; provided however, that
sources of light used primarily to attract attention to the light itself or as
a decorative feature of the display shall be considered as part of the sign.
   SIGN AREA: The entire area within a single, contiguous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of writing, representation, logo, emblem or any figure or
similar character, together with any form or other material or color forming an
integral part of the display, or used to differentiate such sign area from the
background against which it is placed. The sign area shall not include the
necessary supports or uprights on which the sign is placed, and superficial,
nonilluminated column covers, ornamental trim and other such incidental objects
attached thereto, or portions of the sign structure which are not designed to
convey a message.
   STATE HIGHWAY: Highways in and through the city of Eagle that are owned and
maintained by the state of Idaho. These include State Highways 16, 20/26, 44
and 55.
   STREETLIGHT SIGN: A permanent or temporary sign supported by sign brackets
which are attached to a streetlight pole.
   SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGN (OFF PREMISES): A temporary off premises sign
used to advertise homes or buildings under construction or property for sale in
a subdivision which is to be, or is being, developed pursuant to an approved
subdivision final plat application before the city, or county if annexed into
the city.
   SUBDIVISION SIGN: A permanent on premises sign used to identify a
subdivision.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: A nonpermanent sign intended for use for a limited period of
time, as regulated within this article.
   VEHICLE SIGN: Any sign, logo or advertisement placed, painted, attached, or
displayed on a vehicle.
   WALL SIGN (FLAT): A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a
building or structure with the face of the sign parallel to the plane of said
wall, and not extending over twelve inches (12") from the wall of the building
or structure.
   WALL SIGN (PERPENDICULAR): A sign attached to or erected against the wall of
a building or structure with the face(s) of the sign perpendicular to the plane
of said wall.
   WINDOW SIGN: All signs located inside and affixed to, painted on or within
three feet (3') of windows of a building, whether temporary or permanent,
lighted or unlighted, which may be viewed from the exterior of the building.
The term does not include merchandise located within three feet (3') of the
window.
   YARD SIGN (NONRIGID): Yard signs may be referred to as "lawn signs".
Nonrigid yard/lawn signs are not stable and typically are susceptible to being
blown over by wind and oftentimes do not remain vertical. Common types of
nonrigid yard/lawn signs are corrugated plastic, fold over cardboard, and
poster type which are attached to a light metal stand with less than one-fourth
inch (1/4") thickness, or lattice type wood stakes, which are inserted into the
ground. The metal stands are usually an "H" or "I" type. The "H" type stand is
shaped like an "H" and two (2) of the prongs insert into the sign, or the sign
is attached to the two (2), and the other two (2) prongs are inserted into the
ground. The single or double crossbar between the two (2) prongs adds minimal
strength and makes the entire stand one single unit. The "I" type stand is
essentially an "H" stand without a crossbar linking the prongs.
   YARD SIGN (RIGID): Yard signs may be referred to as "lawn signs". Rigid
yard/lawn signs are stable and are not susceptible to being blown over by wind.
Rigid yard/lawn signs are made of a solid metal frame with a metal thickness of
one-fourth inch (1/4") or more, or they are made of metal one-half inch by one-
half inch (1/2" x 1/2") angle iron, both of which include solid metal legs for
insertion into the ground. The metal frame includes an attached metal or hard
plastic sign face.
   C.   Provisions And Requirements:
      1.   Wall Signs (Flat And Perpendicular):
         a.   A single-tenant building shall be allowed a maximum of three (3)
wall signs, provided that each sign is placed on a different side of the
building.
         b.   Each business within a multi-tenant building shall be allowed a
maximum of three (3) wall signs provided that each sign is placed on a
different side of the building.
         c.   For a single-tenant building the total sign area of any wall sign
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face to which it
is attached, except that any wall sign that is visible from a state highway
shall be permitted a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the area of the
building face to which it is attached.
         d.   For a multi-tenant building the total sign area of all wall signs
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face to which
they are attached, except that the total sign area for wall signs that are
visible from a state highway shall be a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the
area of the building face to which they are attached.
         e.   The sign area, per side, of any perpendicular wall sign shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face to which it is
attached.
      2.   Monument Signs:
         a.   For single-tenant buildings which are not within the DDA, TDA, or
within a "shopping center", monument signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height and the sign area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per side.
         b.   For multi-tenant buildings which are not within the DDA, TDA, or
within a "shopping center", monument signs shall not exceed fifteen feet (15')
in height and the sign area shall not exceed one hundred forty (140) square
feet per side.
         c.   For single-tenant buildings which are within the DDA or TDA
monument signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height and the sign area shall
not exceed forty (40) square feet per side.
         d.   For multi-tenant buildings which are within the DDA or TDA
monument signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height and the sign area
shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per side.
         e.   For any single-tenant building or multi-tenant building which is
not located in a shopping center, one monument sign per abutting street shall
be permitted.
         f.   A "shopping center", as defined in section
8-1-2 of this title shall be allowed one monument sign per street that it abuts
for any site less than twenty (20) acres in size and two (2) signs for any site
twenty (20) acres in size or larger. The height of any such sign shall not
exceed fifteen feet (15') adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a
state highway and twenty five feet (25') adjacent to any state highway. The
sign area shall not exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet per side
adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state highway and two hundred
(200) square feet per side adjacent to any state highway. If the shopping
center has a single address, the address shall be located on the monument sign
and shall be a size that is readable from the street.
In addition to any shopping center monument signs, any single-tenant building
within a shopping center, and adjacent to a roadway, shall be permitted one
monument sign. The height of any such sign shall not exceed six feet (6')
adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state highway and eight feet
(8') adjacent to any state highway. The sign area shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet per side adjacent to a roadway that is not designated as a state
highway and sixty (60) square feet per side adjacent to any state highway.
         g.   The minimum distance between monument signs on a single parcel,
shall be one hundred feet (100').
         h.   No monument sign shall be any closer than fifty feet (50') from a
monument sign, or other freestanding sign, on an adjacent property.
         i.   Monument signs are permitted to be double faced.
      3.   Subdivision Signs:
         a.   One subdivision sign may be permitted on each side of any entry
road into a subdivision, or within the landscape median at the entry road if
approved by ACHD, and at the intersection of any collector and/or arterial
streets abutting the subdivision.
         b.   Subdivision signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height and
the sign area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per side.
      4.   Freehanging Signboards:
         a.   Freehanging signboards shall not exceed eight (8) square feet nor
shall any such sign extend beyond the porch or canopy to which it is attached.
         b.   A minimum distance of seven feet six inches (7'6") shall be
required between a walkway and the bottom of a freehanging signboard.
      5.   Fuel Island Signs:
         a.   Fuel island canopies shall be permitted to have a maximum of
three (3) signs.
         b.   The signs shall be attached to, or painted on, the canopy face.
         c.   The height and width of the sign shall be reviewed with regard to
its proportional relationship to the height and width of the canopy face to
which it is attached or painted. The sign area shall be a maximum of twenty
(20) square feet but in no case shall the sign cover more than one-third (1/3)
of the area of the face of the canopy to which it is attached or painted.
         d.   If two (2) signs are proposed, each sign shall be located on a
different side of the canopy and should be oriented to face oncoming traffic.
         e.   A one square foot sign may be permitted for the fuel logo or fuel
brand only on each side of each fuel dispenser or spandrel attached thereto.
      6.   Drive-Through/Drive-Up Service Menu Board Signs:
         a.   Shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and the sign area
shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet.
         b.   Internal illumination may be permitted if the city determines the
following:
            (1)   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with
the general objectives, or with any specific objective of this article;
            (2)   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
            (3)   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
      7.   Vendor And Temporary Merchant Signs:
         a.   Shall comply with all the requirements of portable on premises
advertising signs except that any temporary vendor sign shall be allowed only
for the length of time that the temporary vendor is in operation.
         b.   Shall be in compliance with title 3, chapter 4, "Vendors,
Solicitors And Temporary Merchants", of this code.
      8.   Automated Signs:
         a.   Automated signs may be permitted as a part of a monument sign and
shall be prohibited in all other types of signs if the city determines the
following:
            (1)   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with
the general objectives, or with any specific objective of this article;
            (2)   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
            (3)   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses. (Ord. 665, 2-14-2012)
         b.   Automated signs shall be prohibited in the downtown development
area (DDA), the transitional development area (TDA), the community entry
development area (CEDA), and in Residential and Public/Semipublic zoning
districts. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2016)
         c.   All automated signs that utilize light to create change may
change frame content through dissolve, fade or scroll features only. No sign
shall be operated in a manner which the sign, sign structure, design or
pictorial segment of the sign shows full animation, growing, flashing, rotating
content, or otherwise creating an illusion of movement, except for single color
text only message displays scrolling or traveling across the sign area. (Ord.
665, 2-14-2012)
         d.   The signs shall only change frame content not more than once
every eight (8) seconds. The change of content must change immediately within a
period of less than one second. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2016)
         e.   Based on brightness measured in nit (an illuminative brightness
measurement equivalent to 1 candle per square meter measured perpendicular to
the rays of the source); automated signs that utilize light to change frames
shall contain an autodimmer allowing for no more than five thousand two hundred
(5,200) nit illumination between sunrise and sunset and up to three hundred
(300) nit illumination between sunset and sunrise.
         f.   The automated sign portion of any sign should be constructed into
the sign in a manner in which it is subordinate to the overall design of the
sign. The automated sign portion of any sign shall not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the face of any sign.
         g.   Where more than one sign is allowed only one sign may contain an
automated sign.
         h.   The addition of an automated sign to any nonconforming sign is
prohibited.
         i.   Any conforming existing sign or portion of a conforming existing
sign that is refaced with an automated sign shall require a design review
approval.
      9.   Prohibited Signs: The following signs and attention attracting
devices shall be prohibited within the entire city, except as may otherwise be
specifically stated within this subsection. The signs and other attention
attracting devices prohibited herein are subject to removal by the city at the
owner's or user's expense:
         a.   Pole signs.
         b.   Billboard signs.
         c.   Roof signs.
         d.   Cabinet signs (standard) except with nontranslucent panels as may
be incorporated into a monument sign which includes advertising for multiple
tenants, and as long as the cabinet portion of the multi-tenant monument sign
is surrounded on all four (4) sides by architectural elements of the sign
structure.
         e.   Wall signs that extend above the parapet wall.
         f.   Reader board signs in excess of twenty (20) square feet.
         g.   Off premises signs, except as otherwise stated within this
article.
         h.   Banner signs placed within landscaped areas, or otherwise placed
on posts inserted into the ground, except for grand openings, community events,
community yard sales and yard sales for nonprofit organizations.
         i.   Yard signs (nonrigid) except for political campaigns, garage
sales and yard sales as regulated within this article.
         j.   Any sign which is prohibited within the sight visibility triangle
as specified within the ACHD "Policy Manual".
         k.   Any sign which blocks the Americans with disabilities act (ADA)
minimum width required for handicap accessibility on a public sidewalk.
         l.   Searchlights, beacons, strobe lights, scintillating lights, and
similar lights except for grand openings and community events.
         m.   Moving, revolving, intermittent, oscillating, animated, or
flashing signs, except for grand openings and community events.
         n.   Chasing lights, except as may be approved by the city as an
integral part of a building or structure, and except for grand openings,
community events and seasonal events.
         o.   Polyurethane and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) style inflatable
balloons and blimps, larger than twenty four inches (24") in diameter, except
for grand openings and community events.
         p.   Bubble machines except for grand openings and community events.
         q.   Signs purported to be, or which are, an imitation of, or resemble
an official traffic sign or signal, or which bear the words "Stop", "Danger",
"Warning", or similar words in a manner potentially causing confusion with such
official signs or signals.
         r.   Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a
traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or radio
equipment vehicle, or signs which obstruct the visibility of any traffic or
street sign or signal device.
         s.   Miscellaneous signs and posters which are visible from a public
way and are tacked, pasted, taped or otherwise affixed in a similar manner to
or upon the walls of buildings, trees, poles, posts, fences, hydrants, bridges,
or other structures.
         t.   Display of items for sale within any landscape area or required
parking area except as a part of a community event.
         u.   Any sign in violation of this title.
         v.   Any sign in violation of local, state, or federal law over which
the city exercises jurisdiction.
         w.   Any sign whose permit or approval has expired.
      10.   Portable On Premises Advertising Signs:
         a.   One portable on premises advertising sign shall be permitted per
business. Except that, if the business abuts more than one street it shall be
permitted one portable on premises advertising sign per street that it abuts as
long as the signs are a minimum of fifty feet (50') apart.
         b.   Portable on premises advertising signs, except for feather flag
signs, shall be a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet along roadways with three
(3) or less travel lanes with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour
or less and twenty four (24) square feet along roadways with more than three
(3) travel lanes or along roadways with a speed limit of over twenty five (25)
miles per hour.
         c.   Portable on premises advertising signs, except for feather flag
signs, shall be a maximum of five feet (5') in height along roadways with three
(3) or less travel lanes with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour
or less and six feet (6') in height along roadways with more than three (3)
travel lanes or along roadways with a speed limit of over twenty five (25)
miles per hour.
         d.   Portable on premises advertising signs shall only be permitted on
the parcel where the business is located, or on the adjacent sidewalk, and
shall not be permitted on any other parcel except that any multi-tenant site
shall have the sign on the site and not on any other site.
         e.   Portable on premises advertising signs on a public sidewalk
abutting the business's parcel may be permitted if a minimum of five feet (5')
of unobstructed walkway, or ADA required minimum, remains for pedestrians. The
sign shall be located so as to not interfere with the flow of pedestrians.
         f.   If a feather flag sign is used as a portable on premises
advertising sign the maximum height shall be fourteen feet (14') and maximum
width shall be four feet (4').
         g.   The sign, copy, and materials shall be maintained and kept in
good condition and repair to guard against decay, unsafe, and poorly maintained
signs.
         h.   Written approval of the city zoning administrator shall be
required for any portable on premises advertising sign, except for feather flag
signs used as portable on premises advertising signs. A color picture, or color
drawing, including the dimension of any proposed sign shall be submitted to the
city along with a written narrative describing the sign materials, as well as
the planned location of any such sign. The zoning administrator shall review
the sign proposal for compliance with this article. There shall be no cost to
the applicant for zoning administrator review and action on any such sign. Any
denial or approval by the zoning administrator may be appealed to the city
council as specified within section
8-7-4-1 of this title. An appeal fee shall be required for any appeal.
      11.   Portable Off Premises Directional Signs:
         a.   Shall only be permitted for businesses which are not located on
any street designated as an arterial street on the transportation/pathway
network map in the Eagle comprehensive plan (this includes any business in a
shopping center or business park).
         b.   Portable off premises directional signs are allowed only when a
change in direction is required to lead customers to the business site.
         c.   Portable off premises directional signs which include multiple
businesses are encouraged in order to guard against clutter and therefore are
permitted double the height and size maximums specified in subsections C11d and
C11e of this section.
         d.   Portable off premises directional signs shall be a maximum of
eight (8) square feet along roadways with three (3) or less travel lanes with a
speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less and twelve (12) square
feet along roadways with more than three (3) travel lanes or along roadways
with a speed limit of over twenty five (25) miles per hour.
         e.   Portable off premises directional signs shall be a maximum of two
and one-half feet (2.5') in height along roadways with three (3) or less travel
lanes with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less and three
feet (3') in height along roadways with more than three (3) travel lanes or
along roadways with a speed limit of over twenty five (25) miles per hour.
         f.   Portable off premises directional signs on a public sidewalk may
be permitted if a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed walkway, or ADA
required minimum, remains for pedestrians. The sign shall be located so as to
not interfere with the flow of pedestrians.
         g.   The sign, copy, and materials shall be maintained and kept in
good condition and repair to guard against decay, unsafe, and poorly maintained
signs.
         h.   No portable off premises directional sign owner shall have any
exclusive right to any location within a public right of way, nor shall any
sign be permitted to be placed within any congested area where the signage
might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this paragraph,
the judgment of a "public safety officer" (as defined in section
3-4-2 of this code), or ACHD official, or ITD official, exercised in good
faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the
public is impeded or inconvenienced.
         i.   Written approval of the city zoning administrator shall be
required for any portable off premises directional sign. A color picture, or
color drawing, including the dimension of any proposed sign shall be submitted
to the city along with a written narrative describing the sign materials, as
well as the planned location of any such sign(s). The zoning administrator
shall review the sign proposal for compliance with this article. There shall be
no cost to the applicant for zoning administrator review and action on any such
sign. Any denial or approval by the zoning administrator may be appealed to the
city council as specified within section
8-7-4-1 of this title. An appeal fee shall be required for any appeal.
      12.   Permitted Temporary Signs: Written city approval shall not be
required for the temporary signs as described and regulated within this
subsection. Additionally, signs listed under "prohibited signs" of this article
are also prohibited as temporary signs.
         a.   Government: Governmental or other legally required posters,
notices or signs.
         b.   Banner Signs: Banner signs used for limited time frame promotions
of special events, business open houses, or sales of products or services. Said
banner signs shall be securely attached to a fence, building, structure or
similar permanent fixture and shall not be permitted to be displayed for more
than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days with a minimum of thirty (30)
consecutive days between placements. No banner sign shall be placed within a
landscaped area, or otherwise be placed on posts inserted into the ground. The
maximum size for any such banner sign shall be forty eight (48) square feet.
(Ord. 665, 2-14-2012)
         c.   Real Estate Signs: One "For Sale", "For Rent", or "For Lease"
sign shall be allowed for properties, businesses and residences provided such
sign does not exceed six (6) square feet in residential zones, and sixteen (16)
square feet in all other zones, except that thirty two (32) square feet may be
permitted along state highways. Said signs shall be located entirely within the
property that is for sale, and shall be removed immediately after the close of
the escrow, or the rental or lease has been accomplished. Said signs shall only
be permitted on the property where the property, business or residence is
located. (Ord. 699, 5-28-2013)
         d.   Real Estate Open House Signs: On and off premises signs used for
real estate open houses. Said signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet, shall
only be used during the open house, and shall be removed immediately after the
open house.
         e.   Political Signs: Off premises signs used for political campaigns
for any item or individual on a voting ballot. Said signs may only be used
during the campaign and shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours after
the voting booths close.
         f.   Garage And Yard Sale Signs: On and off premises signs used for
garage sales and yard sales during the sale only, except that community yard
sales and yard sales for nonprofit organizations may have signs posted ten (10)
days prior to the sale. Said signs shall be removed immediately after the sale.
         g.   Construction Signs: Shall be placed on the construction site only
between the time that a development application has been filed with the city
and final issuance of certificate of occupancy. Contractors' signs may include
banks, realtors, subcontractors, etc., and shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet, except that thirty two (32) square feet may be permitted along state
highways, unless legally required by governmental contract to be larger, and
eight feet (8') shall be the maximum height.
         h.   Subdivision Directional Signs (Off Premises): Shall advertise the
subdivision name with directional information and may advertise trade
information and/or price range. Said signs shall be a maximum of sixteen (16)
square feet, except that thirty two (32) square feet may be permitted along
state highways, and said signs may be a maximum of eight feet (8') high. A
maximum of three (3) off premises subdivision directional signs may be utilized
for any subdivision within the city limits. All signs are to be placed on
private property. Said signs are allowed only when a change in direction is
required to lead customers to subdivision site. Subdivision directional signs
may only be erected after city approval of the final plat for the subdivision
and must be removed after the last lot within the approved final plat is sold
by the developer.
         i.   Grand Opening Signs: All signs, except for prohibited signs as
regulated in this article, are allowed for a grand opening for a new business
or enterprise or for a grand opening for a business or enterprise under new
management for a maximum period of sixty (60) calendar days.
         j.   Temporary Sign In Lieu Of Permanent Wall Sign: A business
identification banner, or similar sign, is allowed on a temporary basis, not to
exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, during approval and construction of any
wall sign for a new business. Said sign shall not be larger than the wall sign
that would be permitted per this title, shall only be located on the face of
the building where the wall sign would be permitted per this title, and shall
be removed when the permanent sign is installed, not to exceed one hundred
twenty (120) days.
         k.   Temporary Sign In Lieu Of Permanent Monument Sign: A business
identification A-frame, sandwich board or similar sign, is allowed on a
temporary basis, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, during approval
and construction of any monument sign for a new business. Said sign shall not
be larger than the monument sign that would be permitted per this title and
shall be removed when the permanent sign is installed, not to exceed one
hundred twenty (120) days.
         l.   Holiday Signs: Temporary signs commemorating and/or recognizing a
"holiday" as defined herein shall be allowed during the time the holiday is
typically recognized. Holiday signs shall not advertise a business, product or
service. No requirement within this article shall apply to temporary holiday
signs except however, no temporary holiday sign shall block ADA accessible
sidewalk requirements or violate the sight visibility triangle of any
intersection as determined by ACHD.
         m.   Community Event Signs: Community events signs shall be permitted
for a maximum of sixty (60) days in any calendar year. No requirement within
this article shall apply to temporary community event signs except however, no
temporary community event sign shall block ADA accessible sidewalk requirements
or violate the sight visibility triangle of any intersection as determined by
ACHD.
         n.   Person Signs: Signs worn or held by a person while walking the
public ways of the city. (Ord. 665, 2-14-2012)
      13.   Sign Illumination:
         a.   The city must find that any illuminated sign permitted under the
specific regulations within this article is designed such that brightness
levels are controlled to assure a soft, subtle effective light in accordance
with other city regulations intended to create and maintain the Eagle
architecture theme, while encouraging energy efficient lighting.
         b.   Illumination types, styles, and practices not listed herein shall
be prohibited unless otherwise deemed by the design review board and city
council to be consistent with the Eagle architecture theme.
         c.   Floodlighting is permitted only through the use of incandescent,
LED and high pressure sodium light sources.
         d.   Exposed neon is permitted when used to create the sign letter(s)
or as an architectural element as part of the sign design. A clear covering may
be permitted for protection of the neon element.
         e.   Halo illumination is permitted.
         f.   Metal halide is not permitted as a light source for signage.
         g.   All types of internal illumination is prohibited, except for
automated signs and drive-through/drive-up service menu board signs as
regulated in this article. (Ord. 699, 5-28-2013)
      14.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided at the base of all
monument signs. Landscape plans shall be prepared by or under the responsible
control of a licensed landscape architect with said plans to be duly stamped to
clearly identify the preparer. The amount required shall be three (3) times the
size of the largest sign area. An example is shown as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cc83bda73e097be2f37482d7e2b07596312e63f6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1236.png]
 
(Ord. 665, 2-14-2012)
      15.   Master Sign Plan: A "master sign plan", as defined by this article,
shall be required to be submitted to the city for review and approval. The
purpose of a master sign plan is to coordinate signs, and create a plan that
establishes a building or site's overall sign design. The master sign plan
shall show sign colors, styles and locations of buildings, maximum size,
illumination, and materials to be used.
The master sign plan may be approved by the city with elements that require
suspension or relaxation of the height, area, number of signs, or locations of
signs specified within this article if the design review board finds that
extraordinary conditions exist which allow suspension or relaxation, but that
any suspension or relaxation will still meet the intent of this article and:
         a.   The development site contains unique or unusual physical
conditions such as topography, proportion, size or relation to a public street
that would limit or restrict normal sign visibility; or
         b.   The proposed or existing development exhibits unique
characteristics of land use, architectural style, site location, physical
scale, historical interest or other distinguishing features that justify
variation from conventional development; or
         c.   The proposed signage incorporates special design features such as
logos, emblems, murals, statuaries or similar architectural elements that are
designed in a manner determined by the city to be architecturally compatible to
the sign and area. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2016)
      16.   Exempt Signs: The provisions and requirements of this article shall
not apply to the following signs and attention attracting devices, except that
no sign or attention attracting device shall block ADA accessible sidewalk
requirements or the sight vision area of an intersection as determined by ACHD:
         a.   Public Convenience Signs: Signs not exceeding six (6) square feet
in area, erected for the convenience of the public, such as signs identifying
restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features or facilities.
         b.   Directional Signs (On Premises): Shall not exceed six (6) square
feet in area.
         c.   Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and
dates of erection of a building or structure.
         d.   Traffic Or Other Municipal Signs (Signs Required By Law): Traffic
signals, railroad crossings signs, legal notices, and such temporary emergency
or nonadvertising signs as may be authorized by the city council.
         e.   Emergency Service Signs: Signs for emergency services such as
police services, emergency rooms, fire departments, hospitals, etc.
         f.   Utility Company Signs: Signs of public utility companies
indicating danger or which show the location of utility facilities.
         g.   Address Numbers: Numbers and letters for address identification.
         h.   Warning Signs: Nonilluminated or externally illuminated "No
Trespassing", "No Parking", "No Dumping" and other warning signs located on the
lot to which the sign is appurtenant and not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area.
         i.   Seasonal Decorations: Reasonable seasonal decorations within the
appropriate holiday season. However, such displays shall be removed at the end
of the public holiday season.
         j.   Flag: The flag of the government or noncommercial institution.
         k.   Flag (Commercial): The flag of a commercial institution, except
that no more than one flag is permitted per business, the flag shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet in surface area, shall be left loose to fly in the
breeze and shall be a maximum of fifteen feet (15') in height.
         l.   Art: Sculptures, fountains, mosaics and design features which do
not incorporate advertising or identification.
         m.   Murals: Murals shall be considered art and not signs as long as
the mural is not used to advertise the business. Murals shall be artistic and
nostalgic in nature and shall follow the theme of Eagle architecture. After
receiving a recommendation from the Eagle arts commission, all murals shall be
reviewed by the design review board and approved by the city council.
         n.   Historic Signage: Existing signs pertaining to any business
within the design review overlay district which business is found by the design
review board to be of local historical significance are exempt from the
provisions of this article.
         o.   Window Signs (Nonilluminated): Nonilluminated window signs as
long as the total window area covered does not exceed twenty five percent (25%)
of the total window area of all windows facing public streets.
         p.   Window Signs (Neon): Neon window signs no larger than four (4)
square feet or ten percent (10%) of the window where it is placed, whichever is
larger, but no more than two (2) neon window signs per street frontage shall be
allowed.
         q.   Door Signs: Door signs identifying the business and/or indicating
business hours, emergency phone numbers, etc., shall be permitted up to a
maximum of two (2) square feet.
         r.   Party Balloons: Latex and mylar style party balloons twenty four
inches (24") or less in diameter.
         s.   Displays: Display of items for sale located at any City approved
business site, but not within any landscape area or required parking area,
except as a part of a community event.
         t.   Signs Located Inside Buildings: Signs located in the interior of
any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of
buildings, which signs are designed and located to be viewed exclusively by
patrons of such use or uses.
      17.   Signs On City Owned Property:
         a.   No person shall erect a sign upon any property owned or
controlled by the City without first having procured prior written permission
from the City. Before any permit shall be granted for the erection and
maintenance of a sign upon property of the City, a sign approval application
shall be required with any additional information which the Zoning
Administrator shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this
article. In the event the permit does not specify a term, the permit shall
expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance.
         b.   In the event that any sign is erected or maintained in violation
of the provisions of this subsection, the City may direct the removal of such
sign. In the event the permittee deems such removal to be without cause, they
may, within thirty (30) days after such removal, make written appeal to the
City Council. The findings of the City Council, after notice to the permittee
and due hearing, shall be final.
   D.   City Entry Statement And Cooperative Sign Plan: The City may develop a
City entry statement and cooperative sign plan which includes the City entry
signs and streetlight signage and which specifies the design criteria,
aesthetics, locations and funding methods for future public, private or public/
private partnership construction of cooperative business identification and
directional signage.
   E.   Violations And Penalties For Noncomplying Signs: In addition to or in
lieu of removal of noncomplying signs by the City as permitted by this article,
the Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, or Zoning Officer sworn as a limited purpose
deputy, may issue to the known owner of such sign an infraction citation which
shall be an infraction. Such citation shall impose upon the owner a fine of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation, fifty dollars ($50.00)
for the second violation, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third and
subsequent violations. Each day a sign continues in violation of this article
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 665, 2-14-2012; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-
2021)
8-2A-9: ADMINISTRATIVE AND BOARD LEVEL APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Administrative Level Design Review Applications: Shall be scheduled as
stipulated in subsection 8-2A-13A of this article. All design review
applications shall be reviewed and shall be acted on by the Zoning
Administrator, except for those listed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Board Level Design Review Applications: Shall be scheduled as
stipulated in subsection 8-2A-13A of this article. Design review applications
for the following shall be reviewed, and shall be acted on by the Design Review
Board, subject to final decision by the City Council:
      1.   Any application that includes one (1) or more new buildings.
      2.   An addition to an existing building which is greater than twenty
five percent (25%) of its gross floor area.
      3.   New building facades with material changes.
      4.   Any addition to an existing twenty thousand (20,000) square foot or
larger building.
      5.   Master sign plans.
      6.   Any application which can only be approved with suspension or
relaxation of some or all requirements found in this article in accordance with
section 8-2A-3 of this article.
   C.   Concurrent Sign And Building Applications: All sign applications
(including master sign plans) made pursuant to this article are required to be
submitted for review at the time the respective building design review
application is made. This section is not intended to apply to sign applications
made for the advertisement of businesses in existing buildings where no changes
are proposed to the building at the time of the application.
   D.   Zoning Administrator Decision: The ultimate decision of whether an
administrative level review or board level review will be required shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
8-2A-10: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to application for a permit to erect, construct, alter, move, remodel,
reface or repaint or otherwise change the use of the building or structure in
the Design Review Overlay District, the applicant must file an application,
upon a form prescribed by the Council, with the Zoning Administrator. All
application materials supplied or presented to the City including presentation
boards, materials boards and documentation are part of the public record and
shall become the property of the City. The applicant may be required to supply
the City with colored photos of the presentation boards if determined by the
Zoning Administrator. The size of the photos shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator and the boards may be returned to the applicant if the photos are
provided to the City.
Design review applications for any commercial building larger than one hundred
twenty (120) square feet shall be prepared by or under the responsible control
of a licensed architect, unless exempted under Idaho Code, section 54-309(2),
with said plans to be duly stamped to clearly identify the preparer.
Applications shall be accompanied by appropriate architectural and site
development plans as may be required by the Zoning Administrator and in
accordance with the requirements set forth in this article. The plans shall be
legible, to scale and shall include, at a minimum: (Ord. 618, 2-17-2009)
   A.   Site Plans Showing:
      1.   Roofline and foundation plan of building, located on the site;
      2.   Location of existing trees and structures, if any;
      3.   Location and dimensions of streets and highway designations;
      4.   Location and dimensions of off street parking and loading
facilities;
      5.   Location and dimensions of points of entry and exit for vehicles and
internal circulation patterns;
      6.   Location of walls and fences and indication of their height and
material of construction;
      7.   Exterior lighting standards and devices including detailed cut
sheets and photometric plan (pedestrian, vehicle, security, decoration);
      8.   Landscape plan;
      9.   Scale and north arrow;
      10.   Location and designation of all rights-of-way and property lines.
   B.   Architectural Plans Showing:
      1.   Building materials;
      2.   Four (4) elevations to include all sides of development.
Perspectives, models or other suitable graphic materials may be submitted at
the option of the applicant and if determined by the Zoning Administrator;
      3.   Proposed color schemes of entire building, including roof;
      4.   Site photographs (snapshots) of the site itself and adjacent
properties to intersections;
      5.   Color and texture chips of actual samples of materials may be
submitted at the option of the applicant and as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator;
      6.   Scale drawings of all signs showing size, material, text or other
graphic symbols, colors and illumination; and
      7.   Scale drawings showing the placement and size of all roof mounted
mechanicals and the screening of such equipment by a parapet wall or within the
roof system. (Ord. 462, 11-11-2003)
   C.   Engineered Grading And Drainage Plans:
      1.   A generalized drainage plan showing direction drainage with proposed
on site retention.
      2.   Upon submittal of building/construction plans for an approved design
review application, a detailed site grading and drainage plan, prepared by a
registered professional engineer (PE) or licensed landscape architect (ASLA),
shall be submitted to the City for review and approval by the City Engineer.
      3.   a. Upon the completion of the site grading and drainage structure
installation, or other improvements subject to City Engineer approval, a
written certification of completion shall be prepared by the registered
professional engineer (PE) or licensed landscape architect (ASLA) responsible
for the plan. The certification of completion shall state that the installation
of all drainage improvements are in substantial compliance with the City
approved drainage plan. This certification shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in
lieu of, the inspections performed and certificates issued by the City.
         b.   In the event that deficiencies are present after the site grading
and drainage structure installation, or other improvements subject to City
Engineer approval, the registered professional engineer (PE) or licensed
landscape architect (ASLA) shall prepare and file with the City a report noting
the deficiencies in the installation. The City will not accept the
certification of completion, or issue a certificate of occupancy, until the
registered professional engineer (PE) or licensed landscape architect (ASLA)
has verified that the deficiencies have been corrected. (Ord. 618, 2-17-2009)
   D.   Existing Structures And Sites: Applications involving conversion,
remodeling, restoration, renovation, enlargement, or expansion of existing
structures or sites shall contain information sufficient in content and detail
so that the Design Review Board and/or Zoning Administrator may be assured the
applicant complies with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 462, 11-11-2003)
8-2A-11: RESERVED: (Repealed by Ord. 827)
8-2A-12: THE EAGLE ARCHITECTURE AND SITE DESIGN BOOK:
All applications made pursuant to this article shall also be reviewed in
accordance with the Eagle Architecture and Site Design Book. (Ord. 462, 11-11-
2003)
8-2A-13: DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION PROCESSING:
   A.   Design Review Application Scheduling: At least thirty five (35) days
prior to action by the Zoning Administrator or Design Review Board, anyone
required to comply with this article shall submit their application, together
with the required fee, to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
may extend the review time for design review applications that are unusually
large or complicated and may decrease review times for applications that are
minor or do not require transmittals to other agencies. At least seven (7) days
prior to any scheduled Design Review Board meeting, all applications to be
considered at that meeting shall be made available to each member of the board.
   B.   Action And Required Findings: Following a complete review of the design
review application, the Zoning Administrator, Design Review Board, or City
Council, whichever is applicable, shall approve the application as presented,
approve the application with supplementary conditions, continue the application
for further review, or deny the application.
      1.   City Findings: The City shall make findings which address the
following:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for the approval or denial;
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval.
      2.   General Standards For Design Review: The Zoning Administrator,
Design Review Board, or City Council, whichever is applicable, shall review the
particular facts and circumstances of each proposed design review in terms of
the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such
design review at the proposed location:
         a.   Will function in conformance with the applicable strategies of
the Eagle Comprehensive Plan and is in accordance with the regulations of this
Code;
         b.   Is of a scale, intensity, and character that is in harmony with
existing conforming and planned development in the vicinity of the site;
         c.   Is designed with adequate off street parking facilities in such a
way as to not interfere with ingress/egress to the site and will serve the
intended use so as to not cause conflict with adjacent uses as anticipated
within the zoning district;
         d.   Will not interfere with the visual character, quality, or
appearance of the surrounding area and City, and where possible, enhance the
continuity of thematically common architectural features;
         e.   Will have facades, features, and other physical improvements that
are designed as a whole, when viewed alone as well as in relationship to
surrounding buildings and settings;
         f.   Will not obstruct views and vistas as they pertain to the urban
environment and in relation to artistic considerations;
         g.   Will provide safe and convenient access to the property for both
vehicles and pedestrians through patterned traffic circulation and connectivity
to abutting development;
         h.   Is in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare
promoting a pedestrian friendly and walkable environment in balance with
protecting a viable commercial center in the area; and
         i.   Will have signs, if proposed, that are harmonious with the
architectural design of the building and adjacent buildings, and will not cover
or detract from desirable architectural features.
   C.   Action By The City Council: Upon receipt of the recommendation by the
Design Review Board, the City Council shall either approve, approve with
supplementary conditions, remand to the Design Review Board for further
consideration, or deny the design review application as presented. In lieu of
adopting findings as outlined within subsection B of this section, the City
Council may adopt the Design Review Board's findings. Within seven (7) calendar
days after a decision has been rendered by the City Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on
the request. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
8-2A-14: APPEALS:
   A.   Administrative decisions may be appealed to the Design Review Board. An
appeal fee, as may be adopted by resolution of the City Council, shall be
required for any appeal. Appeals shall comply with the following:
      1.   Any such appeal shall be submitted within ten (10) calendar days
after the written decision by filing with the Administrator a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Administrator shall transmit to the
Design Review Board all documents constituting the record upon which the appeal
is based. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken.
      2.   Within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of an appeal, the
Zoning Administrator shall fix a date for the application to be heard and shall
notify the appealing party and applicant, if not the appealing party, with no
further notification being required.
      3.   The grounds for the appeal may address, but is not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Inconsistency with the required findings specified within
subsection 8-2A-13B of this article;
         b.   Inconsistency with the purpose and objectives of this article;
         c.   Lack of nexus between the requirement and the proposal;
         d.   Discriminatory action;
         e.   Unwarranted prevention of an allowed land use;
         f.   Undue interference with the design integrity of the proposal;
         g.   Prohibition or unwarranted restriction of building type or
material;
         h.   Violation of law.
      4.   The Design Review Board shall either recommend approval, recommend
approval with supplementary conditions, continue for further review, or
recommend denial of the design review application as presented and shall adopt
findings as required within subsection 8-2A-13B of this article.
      5.   Upon receipt of the recommendation by the Design Review Board, the
City Council shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions,
remand to the Design Review Board for further consideration, or deny the appeal
as presented. In lieu of adopting findings as outlined within subsection 8-2A-
13B of this article, the City Council may adopt the Design Review Board's
findings. Within seven (7) calendar days after a decision has been rendered by
the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with
written notice of the action on the request. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
8-2A-15: TERM OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Any approval given pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
lapse and become null and void twelve (12) months following the date on which
it was given, unless, prior to the expiration date, construction or development
is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the
subject of the application.
      1.   A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of the
approved design review application may be approved by the Zoning Administrator
if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding City Code or design review conditions of
approval violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may
be conditioned by the Zoning Administrator to be cured as a condition of the
extension of time;
         b.   The design review application, as previously approved, remains in
the best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the City;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this Code between the
date of application approval and the application date of the time extension
request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates that the project will commence within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress of the project.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator reserves the right to revoke the extension
of time approval if it is determined that any of the criteria herein are not
met.
      3.   This section does not limit the number of extensions the Zoning
Administrator may grant so long as the criteria set forth in subsection A1 of
this section are met. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2016)
8-2A-16: MODIFICATIONS:
After approval of a design review application, the applicant may request a
modification(s) to the approved development plans or conditions. Such request
shall be made upon an application form prescribed by the Council and shall be
determined pursuant to the standards set forth in this article.
   A.   Administrative Level Approvals: The Zoning Administrator is authorized
to approve all modifications to approved design review applications except for
those listed in subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   Board/Council Level Approvals: The following modifications to an
approved design review application shall require approval from the Design
Review Board, subject to final approval by the City Council:
      1.   Any change that may impact an adjoining residential neighborhood.
      2.   Any requests that, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, would
significantly alter the approved design of the site and/or building(s) in a
manner such that Design Review Board review and approval should be required.
   C.   Appeal: Any action on a modification to an approved design review
application by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in accordance with
section 8-2A-14 of this article.
   D.   Failure To Obtain Approval: Failure of the applicant to obtain approval
of any modifications constructed contrary to the approved design review plans
may result in the requirement to reconstruct the development to comply with the
original City approved design review plan. The City will not issue a final
occupancy or accept a certificate of completion from the licensed architect or
licensed landscape architect until the issue of the modification has been
resolved. (Ord. 781, 8-8-2017)
8-2A-17: RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER REQUIRED DOCUMENTS:
   A.   Building/Zoning Permits: The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a
building/zoning permit to any applicant from within the Design Review Overlay
District until the design review application has been specifically approved in
writing by the Zoning Administrator or Design Review Board and is in full
compliance with this Code. (Ord. 462, 11-11-2003)
8-2A-18: SURETIES:
Prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, a surety in the
form of an irrevocable letter of credit, or cash, in the amount equal to one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated construction costs of site
improvements, landscaping and irrigation shall be provided by the owner/
developer to the City to be held and deposited by the City until said
construction, landscaping and irrigation is complete. Construction cost
estimates shall be reviewed and approved by the City Zoning Administrator prior
to City acceptance of said surety. The surety initiation and extension fees
shall be established by resolution of the City Council. No final certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until the required construction, landscaping and
irrigation is complete pursuant to section 8-2A-19 of this article. In the
event the owner/developer fails to complete all improvements required pursuant
to the City approved plans the City may, after written notice of intent to
proceed, draw on the surety to completely install, repair, or replace any and
all improvements which are the subject of noncompliance. (Ord. 618, 2-17-2009;
amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
8-2A-19: INSPECTION:
   A.   When Required: For any development that is the subject of a design
review application, the Zoning Administrator shall cause an inspection of the
development to be performed to verify that the development has been completed
in accordance with the specifications set forth in this title.
   B.   Certification Of Completion:
      1.   a. Upon the completion of a building, or any other improvement
subject to design review approval, the licensed architect responsible for the
plan shall prepare and file with the City a written certification of
completion. The certification of completion shall state that the construction
of the building is in substantial compliance with the City approved
architectural plan. This certification shall be submitted prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy and is required as a part of, and not in lieu of,
the inspections performed and certificates issued by the City.
         b.   In the event that deficiencies are present in the construction of
the building, or any other improvement subject to design review approval, the
licensed architect shall prepare and file with the City a report noting the
deficiencies in the construction. The City will not accept a certification of
completion, or issue a certificate of occupancy, until the licensed architect
has verified that the deficiencies have been corrected.
         c.   The licensed architect may, at his discretion, appoint an
authorized designee to certify the project provided that the designee is a
licensed architect.
   C.   Certificate Of Occupancy: The building inspector shall not issue a
final certificate of occupancy to the applicant until all of the requirements
of the design review applications, as approved by the Design Review Board, have
been complied with. (Ord. 618, 2-17-2009)
8-2A-20: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in a
competent and attractive manner in perpetuity all improvements made pursuant to
the design review application approval, including, but not limited to, all
structures, site furnishings, fences, site and parking lot lighting, street
lighting, parking lots, parking lot striping, pathway lighting, landscaping,
and drainage and irrigation facilities. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2016)
CHAPTER 3
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Purpose
8-3-2: Supplemental General Provisions
8-3-3: Supplemental Yard And Height Regulations
8-3-4: Commercial And Industrial Uses Restricted
8-3-5: Unique Land Uses
8-3-6: Street Improvements On State Street And Eagle Road
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of performance standards is to set specific conditions for various
uses or areas where problems are frequently encountered. (Ord. 298, 10-14-1997)
8-3-2: SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted
to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
      1.   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the
zoning regulations for new structures in that district;
      2.   The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district and the number of dwelling units per acre is less
than or equal to the requirement in that district;
      3.   The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that
which is required for new construction in that district; and
      4.   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
ordinances.
   B.   Temporary Buildings:
      1.   Temporary buildings, construction trailers, shipping containers,
equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work authorized
by this title only may be permitted in any district during the period
construction work is in progress, but such temporary facilities shall be
removed upon completion of the construction work. Storage of such facilities or
equipment beyond the completion date of the project is prohibited.
   C.   Parking And Storing Of Certain Vehicles:
      1.   Automotive vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles of any kind
or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any
property other than in a completely enclosed building, carport, or within an
approved storage facility. Such vehicles shall be operational and shall not be
occupied.
      2.   No recreational vehicles or personal recreation items may be parked
more than seventy two (72) consecutive hours in front of, or in the case of
corner lots, on the secondary street side, of any property. Such vehicles shall
be operational.
      3.   One (1) recreational vehicle and one (1) personal recreation item or
two (2) personal recreation items may be stored in the side or rear yard.
      4.   Recreational vehicles and personal recreation items shall not be
stored on commercially zoned properties other than within an approved storage
facility or within an approved RV Park. Utilizing recreational vehicle(s) as a
full time or part time living quarters when located outside of an approved RV
Park shall be prohibited.
   D.   Enclosed Trash/Recycle Areas: All trash and/or garbage and recycle
collection areas for commercial, industrial and multi- family residential uses
shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence of at
least four feet (4') in height, and a solid wood gate on a metal frame shall
enclose the fourth side, or shall be within an enclosed building or structure.
Adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of
trash and/or garbage as determined by the administrator shall be provided.
   E.   Conditional Use Mobile Home: Notwithstanding any other provision in
this title, a mobile home occupied by a family member may be located upon a lot
upon which a single-family dwelling already exists; provided, that a
conditional use permit is applied for in accordance with section 8-7-3-5 of
this title, and the city council determines that the standards for the issuance
of a conditional use permit set forth in section
8-7-3-2 of this title, are satisfied.
   F.   Nursing/Convalescent Homes: Nursing/convalescent homes (which include
senior assisted living facilities) shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector roadway in zoning districts A, A-R, R-E and R.
   G.   Portable Classrooms: Portable classrooms which are ancillary to a
permanent school are permitted to be placed on the same lot with, or in
proximity to the principal, permanent school building. Portable classrooms
intended for stand alone use which are not accompanied by a permanent school
building are not permitted. Portable classrooms shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the principal, permanent school building.
(Ord. 298, 10-14-1997; amd. Ord. 405, 1-23-2002; Ord. 720, 6-24-2014; Ord. 820,
12-10-2019; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020)
8-3-3: SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In addition to all yard regulations specified in section
8-2-4 of this title, and in other sections of this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between the height of two and one-half feet (21/2')
and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets
within the vision triangle. The boundaries of the clear vision triangle are
defined by measuring from the intersection of the edges of two (2) adjacent
streets forty feet (40') along each street and connecting the two (2) points
with a straight line. In all cases, ITD and ACHD standards shall apply also.
   B.   Fences:
      1.   In any front yard area, no fence or wall shall be permitted which
materially impedes vision across such yard above the height of two and one-half
feet (21/2') measured from the centerline grade of the adjacent street. Picket
style fences where fifty percent (50%) of the fence remains open may be
permitted up to four feet (4') in height. Chainlink fencing is prohibited in
any front yard area.
      2.   New fencing located adjacent to any street identified as a collector
or arterial on the master street map typologies map in the Eagle comprehensive
plan, and on the street side of all corner lots, shall be an open fencing style
such as wrought iron or other similar see through, decorative, durable fencing
material, except as otherwise may be permitted in subsection 8-2A-7J of this
title. Any wooden fence that existed prior to the effective date hereof, may be
rebuilt upon the fence’s original footprint provided the fence has a picture
frame appearance as shown in the EASD book.
      3.   Chainlink fencing is prohibited in the R (Residential) Zoning
District.
      4.   A permit is required prior to the construction of a fence in any
front yard area and along any street within the City subject to the application
requirements established in section
8-7-2 of this title.
   C.   Yards In Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings shall be
considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear
yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one front, one rear
and two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate district.
   D.   Side And Rear Yards For Nonresidential Uses Abutting Residential
Districts: Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located nor conducted
closer than forty feet (40') to any lot line of a Residential District; except
that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to fifty percent (50%) of the
requirement if acceptable landscaping or screening approved by the Council is
provided. Such screening shall be a masonry or solid fence between four feet
(4') and eight feet (8') in height, maintained in good condition and free of
all advertising or other signs. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or
fence shall consist of a strip of land not less than twenty feet (20') in width
planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less
than four feet (4') in height at the time of planting. (Ord. 298, 10-14-1997)
   E.   Additional Height Regulations: All buildings and appurtenances usually
required to be placed above the roof level, spires, belfries, poles, cupolas,
antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, steeples, towers, and any other
such structures shall comply with the height limitations contained in section
8-2-4 of this title. Additional height may be permitted if a conditional use
permit is approved by the city council.
   F.   Maximum Units Per Lot: Any buildable lot conforming to this title, with
a zoning designation of A, A-R, R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5, shall be
permitted a maximum of one single-family dwelling unit per lot. Additional
dwelling units shall not be permitted within the above mentioned zoning
designations unless specifically permitted elsewhere within this title. Multi-
family units/developments are prohibited in the above mentioned zoning
designations.
   G.   Transitional Lot Sizing:
When development is planned with residential lots that directly abut existing
residential lots that the Council finds are not likely to be re-subdivided
based upon the Comprehensive Plan and other evidence provided as part of any
application, a transition shall be provided to ensure lot compatibility.
Transitions shall take into consideration site constraints that may exist.
Examples of transition options, subject to City approval, include development
of similar lot sizes along the boundary, clustering of the new lots in order to
provide open space directly abutting the existing lots, including setbacks for
the new lots similar to the lots directly abutting, or other elements in the
site design and building design that the city finds will soften the impact and
create a compatible transition. (Ord. 298, 10-14-1997; amd. Ord. 405, 1-23-
2002; Ord. 756, 9-12-2016; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020; Ord.
858, 10-26-2021)
8-3-4: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES RESTRICTED:
   A.   Performance Requirements: No land or building in any district shall be
used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding
areas or adjoining premises; except, that any case permitted by this title may
be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce
dangerous and objectionable conditions to acceptable limits as established by
the following performance requirements:
      1.   Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable
or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved
as specified in the Fire Code and the National Safety Foundation publications.
      2.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit
harmful radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the
creator of such disturbance.
      3.   Noise: Objectionable noise, as determined by the Administrator,
which is due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise
controlled. Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public
purposes are exempt from this requirement.
      4.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
      5.   Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
      6.   Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is
visible from any property outside a Manufacturing District or from any street.
      7.   Erosion: No erosion by man, wind or water shall be permitted which
will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
      8.   Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the
requirements and regulations established by the health authority.
   B.   Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of
the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards
Institute, New York, the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington,
D.C., the United States Bureau of Mines and the health authority.
   C.   Enforcement: The Administrator, prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the
manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and
in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits
and tolerances. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-3-5: UNIQUE LAND USES:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental
influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this title:
   A.   Accessory Structure:
      1.   Will not be located in any required front or street side yard area
within the R-E, R, and MU zoning districts. Accessory structures located with
the A and A-R zoning districts may be permitted within the front or street side
yard area and shall comply with the minimum setbacks as required in section
8-2-4 of this title, in which case the exterior design of the accessory
structure will be compatible with the principal residence on the lot and shall
not detract from the single-family appearance of the lot or obscure and confuse
the front entrance of the principal structure. For the purposes of implementing
this section, the term compatible shall mean similar exterior building
materials and form, including but not limited to similar: building shape and
height, roof pitch, colors, siding, wainscoting, windows, and doors;
      2.   Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square feet in area
with a wall height of no more than seven feet (7') and a maximum height of no
more than nine feet (9') are permitted in any rear or interior side yard area;
      3.   Accessory structures two hundred (200) square feet in area or larger
shall comply with the minimum setbacks as required in section
8-2-4 of this title and shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty five
feet (25'). Accessory storage buildings located within the R-E zoning district
shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty feet (30'). Accessory structures
located within the A and A-R zoning districts shall be limited to a maximum
height of thirty five feet (35');
      4.   The placement and use of any shipping/cargo container, railroad
cars, truck vans, converted mobile homes, travel trailers, recreational
vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles, and similar prefabricated items and structures
as an accessory structure or living unit is prohibited; and
      5.   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in this section, the
temporary placement of transport containers and/or portable site storage
containers on residentially zoned properties, or on properties the primary use
of which are residential, for the limited purpose of loading and unloading
household contents shall be permitted for a period of time not exceeding thirty
(30) days in any one (1) calendar year.
   B.   Agriculture (Buffer Area):
      1.   Will be maintained as an untilled filler strip or natural vegetation
provided for between tilled ground and the normal high water elevation of any
surface water areas. The width of this strip shall vary according to the
average slope of the land as follows:
 
Average Slope Of Land Between Tilled Width Of Strip Between Tilled Land And
Land And Normal High Water Elevation Normal High Water Elevation
                                     (Feet Along Surface Of Ground)
0 - 4 percent                        20
5 - 9 percent                        50
10 - 14 percent                      90
15 percent and over                  110
 
      2.   Will be maintained to minimize soil erosion, sedimentation,
contamination and nutrient enrichment of ground and surface water.
   C.   Animal Clinic, Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office And Kennel:
      1.   Will be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any residence
including motels and hotels, except for an owner's residence. The Administrator
may modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed in
soundproof structures that completely screen them from view of the abutting
residential property; and
      2.   Will comply with all State and local regulations relative to such an
operation and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent the
creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and
odor.
   D.   Animal Commercial Feedlots, Meatpacking, Processing Plant And
Slaughterhouse Facilities:
      1.   Will be located, when housing animals, feedlot or holding pens, not
less than one thousand feet (1,000') from any residence, except for an owner's
residence. Such facilities shall have a minimum setback of thirty feet (30')
from any property line;
      2.   Will be designed and located with full consideration to their
proximity to adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and surrounding
properties, and to the reduction of such nuisance factors as odor; and
      3.   Will be adequately maintained with housekeeping practices to prevent
the creation of a nuisance, and shall also be subject to the health authority
requirements as to the elimination of waste materials and the maintenance of
water quality control.
   E.   Boathouse: (Rep. by Ord. 478, 8-11-2004)
   F.   Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Gases Aboveground And For Resale:
      1.   Will be located at least five hundred feet (500') from a residential
zone, a residence, motel or hotel, except for an owner's residence;
      2.   Will be erected subject to the approval of the appropriate fire
district; and
      3.   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off street
parking facilities subject to the approval of the appropriate fire district.
   G.   Chemicals, Pesticide And Fertilizer Storage And Manufacturing: Will
have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved
by the appropriate fire district.
   H.   Contractor's Yard:
      1.   Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from
any residence, except for an owner's residence;
      2.   Will have screening fence around areas utilized for storage of
equipment; and
      3.   Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to
contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
   I.   Drive-In Restaurant:
      1.   Will be enclosed on the property line with landscaping and fencing,
except for ingress and egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other
properties;
      2.   Will have at least a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence along
the property lines that adjoin a residence;
      3.   Will provide for adequate trash receptacles; and
      4.   Will avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
   J.   Oil And Gas Extraction:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE: A regulatory review and/or action performed by an employee
or contractor of the City and not deemed a legislative or quasi-judicial
action.
   APPLICANT: Any person, owner, operator, partnership, company, corporation
and its subcontractors and agents who has an interest in real estate for the
purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or transporting oil or gas.
   DEPARTMENT: The Idaho Department of Lands.
   EXTRACTION: Activities necessary for removing natural gas or oil from
underground and bringing it up to ground level, or any activities, the purpose
of which is to remove these materials from natural pools or reservoirs beneath
the earth's surface, including well drilling, injection, pumping, and including
ancillary activities and facilities necessary for such extraction, without
which the extraction could not occur.
   OIL AND GAS: Means oil or gas or both. "Oil and gas" refers to not only to
oil and gas in combination with each other but also generally to oil, gas,
casinghead gas, casinghead gasoline, gas-distillate or other hydrocarbons, or
any combination of combinations thereof, which may be found in or produced from
a common source or supply of oil, oil and gas, or gas-distillate.
   OIL AND GAS WELL: A hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring
for or extracting oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances.
   OPERATOR: The person of record, that is responsible for and actually in
charge and control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling
any well including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as
defined herein, for any well is not the lessee of any premises affected by the
provisions of this chapter, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an
operator. In the event there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises
affected by this chapter, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises
shall also be deemed an operator.
   STATE: The State of Idaho.
   WELL: An oil and gas well or an injection well, including but not limited to
directional drilling wells (for example, any well hole drilled into the
ground).
   WELLHEAD: The equipment installed at the surface of the well.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection J is to provide, through
zoning provisions, for the reasonable development of land for oil and gas
drilling while providing adequate health, safety and general welfare
protections of the City of Eagle residents.
Local governments are preempted from regulating the oil and gas well operations
or accomplishing the same purposes regulated under Idaho Code section 47-314.
Local zoning regulates surface land use as authorized under the Local Land Use
Planning Act, title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code.
      3.   Zoning Classifications: An oil or gas well site shall be considered
a permitted use by right within any zoning district(s), subject to the
standards listed herein.
      4.   Permit Requirement:
         a.   No oil or gas well site, or an addition to an existing oil or gas
well site, shall be constructed or located within City of Eagle unless an
administrative zoning permit under this subsection J has been issued by the
City of Eagle to the applicant approving the construction or preparation of the
site for oil or gas development or construction of natural gas compressor
stations or natural gas processing plants.
         b.   Each application shall be submitted with the fee established
pursuant to resolution of the City of Eagle as adopted. Such fee shall be
reasonably related to the cost of administering this by the City of Eagle.
         c.   Any modification to an existing and/or permitted oil or gas well
site that materially alters the size, location, number of wells or accessory
equipment or structures, shall require a modification of the permit under this
subsection J. Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
         d.   Wells that were permitted and constructed prior to the adoption
of this subsection J shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
subsection J. Any modification to an existing or permitted oil or gas well site
that occurs after the effective date of this subsection J and materially alters
the size, type, location, number of wells and other accessory equipment or
structures, shall require compliance with this subsection J.
         e.   Upon receiving notice from the department that an application has
been submitted, the local jurisdiction will notify all property owners within
one mile of the affected tax parcel that an application for a new oil and gas
operation has been filed with the City, County, Planning and Zoning Department.
The notice is for informational purposes only and will not solicit any public
comments on the application.
         f.   An oil or gas well permit shall not be required for exploration
for oil or gas. Exploration of oil or gas means activities related to the
various geological and geophysical methods used to detect and determine the
existence and extent of hydrocarbon deposits. The activities related to the
search for oil and gas include without limitation aerial, geological and
geophysical surveys and studies, seismic work, core drilling and the drilling
of test wells. During the exploration process, the most minimally invasive
methods shall be used.
         g.   If an applicant does not conduct said business for a period of
one year, the administrative zoning permit shall be null and void. Permits
issued under this subsection J shall not be transferable to any other
applicant, except by majority vote of the City of Eagle, and the filing of an
application by the applicant to whom such license is, or may be, transferred or
assigned.
         h.   The operator shall provide to the City a copy of any incident
reports or written complaints submitted to the department, the Idaho Oil and
Gas Conservation Commission, or any other State or Federal agency within twenty
four (24) hours after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports
or complaints.
      5.   Permit Application: The applicant shall provide to the City of Eagle
at the time of permit application:
         a.   A narrative describing an overview of the project including the
number of acres to be disturbed for development, the number of wells to be
drilled including department permit number(s) for all wells, if available, at
the time of submittal and provided when issued later, and the location, number
and description of equipment and structures to the extent known. In addition to
the narrative statement, each application shall contain the following:
            (1)   The surface owner's name, address, and phone number.
            (2)   The mineral owner's name, address, and phone number (if
different than the surface owner).
         b.   The address of the oil or gas well site and a legal description
of the parcel as determined by the City of Eagle and information needed to gain
access to the well site in the event of an emergency.
         c.   The contact information of the individual or individuals
responsible for the operation and activities at the oil or gas well site shall
be provided to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency responders as
determined by the City of Eagle. Such information shall include a phone number
where such individual or individuals can be contacted twenty four (24) hours
per day, three hundred sixty five (365) days a year. Annually, or upon any
change of relevant circumstances, the applicant shall update such information
and provide it to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency responders as
determined by City of Eagle.
         d.   A scaled site plan of the oil or gas well site showing the
drilling pad, planned access roads, the approximate location of derricks,
drilling rigs, equipment and structures and all permanent improvements to the
site and any post construction surface disturbance in relation to natural
resources. Included in this map shall be an area within the development site
for vehicles to locate while gaining access to the oil or gas well site. The
only items that may be stored and vehicles that may be parked on the operation
site are those that are necessary to the everyday operation of the well or
associated facilities and do not constitute a fire hazard.
         e.   A narrative and map describing the planned access routes to the
well sites on public roads including the transportation and delivery of
equipment, machinery, water, chemicals and other materials used in the siting,
drilling, construction, maintenance and operation of the oil or gas well site.
         f.   Comply with Idaho State Water Quality Standards pursuant to IDAPA
58.01.02.850-852 addressing procedures for Hazardous Materials Spills (850),
Petroleum Release Reporting, Investigation, and Confirmation (851) and,
Petroleum Release Response and Corrective Action (852).
Pursuant to IDAPA 20.07.02 section 310.15 (General Drilling Rules) prepare a
comprehensive emergency and spill response guidance document known as a Spill
Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan, to address key State and
Federal regulations such as 40 CFR 112.1 through 40 CFR 112.10 (SPCC
Regulation) and IDAPA 20.07.02 (Rules Governing Conservation of Oil and Natural
Gas) and IDAPA 58.01.01 sections 800-852 (Water Quality Standards). As needed,
incorporate the unique elements of a Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency
Plan and obtain approval by the applicable fire district and the Eagle Police
Department. The SPCC Plan will be prepared by a qualified registered
professional engineer (State of Idaho) and kept at each drilling/production/
workover facility. All oil-handling personnel must be trained to implement the
SPCC Plan, with emphasis upon maintaining oil storage tanks/containers,
secondary containment systems and promptly/safely handling emergency spills,
leaks and accidental discharges of any oil-based fluids and oil-laden water at
the facility. Applicant will provide the operation's SPCC Plan, to the
applicable fire district and Eagle Police Department, to the City of Eagle and
all emergency responders at least thirty (30) days prior to drilling of an oil
or gas well and at least annually thereafter while drilling activities are
taking place at the oil or gas well site. Drilling shall not commence until the
City has approved the plan. The plan shall contain the MSDS (Material Safety
Data Sheet) or similar disclosure for all chemicals used on site with no
exemption for trade secrets. Such plan shall also contain a provision that
within twenty four (24) hours of the discovery of any oil and/or gas leak,
spill, and/or emission release, the City and emergency responders shall be
notified and all operations shall cease immediately until such equipment has
been repaired and prior to operation, operator shall submit certification from
a licensed and qualified professional verifying that the equipment has been
adequately repaired and the equipment is safe to return to service. Such
certification will be reviewed by the City Engineer. Prior to any changes, City
shall be notified regarding any modifications to operations or a change in the
use of chemicals.
         g.   Conduct an appropriate site orientation of the SPCC Plan for all
applicable emergency responders, as determined by the City of Eagle. The cost
and expense of the orientation shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant. If multiple wells/well pads are in the same area (covered by the
same emergency response agencies), evidence from the appropriate emergency
response agencies that a training course was offered in the last twelve (12)
months shall be accepted.
         h.   A narrative describing the environmental impacts of the proposed
project on the site and surrounding land and measures proposed to protect or
mitigate such impacts shall be provided to the City of Eagle. A copy of any
remediation and/or mitigation plan filed with the State shall be submitted to
the City and approved prior to the commencement of operations.
         i.   The applicant, at its own expense, shall provide, prior to
drilling, documentation of baseline water testing, conducted by an independent
third-party, on a minimum of three (3) domestic wells (2 downgradient and 1
upgradient), which wells shall be located within one-fourth (1/4) of a mile of
the well site. Applicant shall provide at least one test prior to drilling and
conduct and provide test results every quarter for the first year of operation.
Thereafter, such wells shall be retested at least twice annually and the
results submitted to the City. Depending upon the depth of the domestic wells
selected for testing, the City may require an additional monitoring well(s) at
the well site. If two (2) domestic wells are not found within one-fourth (1/4)
mile, the applicant shall install a monitoring well downgradient of the well
site for such testing. The depth and location of the monitoring well(s) shall
be approved by the City and based on subsurface geology and aquifer information
provided by the applicant. All monitoring wells shall also be approved by the
Idaho Department of Water Resources. The following parameters to be tested,
include, but are not limited to, water temperature, pH, specific conductivity,
total dissolved solids, major ions (chloride, fluoride, sulfate, nitrate,
silica, calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium), trace elements (aluminum,
arsenic, barium, boron, iron, manganese, selenium, uranium, iodine),
radiochemical (gross alpha/gross beta radioactivity, in addition to uranium),
and organic constituents (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes (BTEX),
methane, methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE)), heavy metals (cadmium, chromium,
lead, mercury, strontium, vanadium), compounds (formaldehyde, hydrofluoric
acid, nitrogen oxides) and any other chemical as determined by the City
Engineer.
         j.   The applicant or permittee, at its own expense, shall provide,
prior to drilling, documentation and results of a completed baseline subsurface
testing program, conducted by a qualified independent third-party,
characterizing potential water bearing zones, utilizing non-invasive or
minimally- invasive exploration methods. The methods employed may include, for
example, geophysical techniques such as electrical resistivity,
electromagnetics, seismic refraction, gravity, electrical resistivity
tomography and ground penetrating radar, or exploratory drilling. Selection of
an approach utilizing one or more of these methods, or alternatives proposed by
the applicant or permittee, must be approved by the City Council, as advised by
the City Engineer or an independent qualified third-party as designated by the
City Council. If hydraulic fracturing or a similar process is approved by the
Idaho Department of Lands, in any proposed production drill hole, the applicant
or permittee, at its own expense, shall provide, prior to conducting hydraulic
fracturing or a similar process, documentation and results of baseline
subsurface testing, utilizing the electrical resistivity tomography technique
(ERT), to evaluate the subsurface volume within and around the drill hole,
particularly regarding the presence of any water bearing zones. If hydraulic
fracturing or similar process is carried out in any such drill hole(s),
periodic ERT monitoring shall be conducted on a schedule approved by the City
Council, to evaluate any physical or chemical changes that may be occurring
over time. Any and all of such testing and/or data collection, including the
initial instrumentation of any proposed production wells, to accommodate
subsequent ERT data collection, shall be approved by the City Council and
supervised by City staff, the City Engineer, or an independent third-party as
directed by the City Council.
         k.   Non-radioactive tracing or tagging additives, unique for each
permitted drill site must be added to all fluids used for drilling, as well as
post-drilling well treatment, including hydraulic fracturing. The City shall be
notified in writing of the formula of such additives from each well.
         l.   Automatic emergency shut off valves that can be operated remotely
shall be installed on drilling equipment with access to valves provided to the
City and the applicable fire district in case of fire or explosion.
         m.   The applicant shall comply with all State and Federal air quality
regulations. The applicant shall report the receipt of any air quality
complaints to the City within twenty four (24) hours.
         n.   The applicant shall provide proof of a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of no less than fifteen
million dollars ($15,000,000.00) per occurrence with an aggregate of thirty
million dollars ($30,000,000.00) and a company authorized to do business in the
State of Idaho shall write the policy. The policy shall not contain any
exclusions of coverage for hydraulic fracturing or mining extraction
activities. The applicant shall also provide proof of operator's extra expense
liability coverage in the event of well failures in the amount no less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The certificate shall require at least thirty
(30) days' notice to the City prior to termination of coverage for any reason.
The applicant shall secure substitute liability insurance coverage prior to
actual termination; failure to maintain comprehensive general liability
insurance shall result in immediate withdrawal of the permit by the City. At
time of application, the applicant shall provide written indemnification for
the City.
      6.   Issuance Of Permit:
         a.   Within thirty (30) business days after receipt of a permit
application, the City of Eagle will process and determine whether the
application is complete and advise the applicant accordingly.
         b.   Pursuant to Idaho Code 47-314(10)(b), if the application is
complete and fulfills the requirements of this subsection J, the City of Eagle
shall issue a permit within twenty one (21) days following the date the
complete application was submitted.
         c.   If the application is incomplete or does not fulfill the
requirements of this subsection J, the City of Eagle shall return the
application to the applicant. After necessary changes have been made City of
Eagle shall follow subsection J6b of this section.
         d.   As a condition of permit approval, applicant shall provide all
permits and plans from the department and all other appropriate regulatory
agencies within thirty (30) days of receipt of such permits and plans.
         e.   Temporary housing for well site workers is prohibited. Applicant
shall provide for adequate screening and restroom facilities for employees.
      7.   Site Design And Installation:
         a.   Access: The permit application shall be submitted to the
appropriate road agency (Ada County Highway District (ACHD) or Idaho
Transportation Department (ITD)) for comment. Any conditions provided by the
agency shall be required as part of the approval of the permit.
         b.   Height: There shall be an exception to the height restrictions
contained in this section for the temporary placement of drilling rigs, drying
tanks, pad drilling and other accessory uses necessary for the actual time
period of drilling or redrilling of an oil or gas well or pad drilling.
         c.   Setbacks/Location:
            (1)   Except as provided in Idaho Code section 47-319, oil and gas
wells, tank batteries and gas processing facilities shall not be constructed
within one-half (1/2) of a mile of the property line of an occupied structure,
place of worship/assembly, medical facility/hospital, or school, domestic water
well, canal, ditch or the natural or ordinary high-water mark of surface waters
or within one-quarter (1/4) mile of a highway.
            (2)   Oil and gas wells, tank batteries and gas processing
facilities may be constructed less than one-half (1/2) of a mile but more than
one-quarter (1/4) of a mile from an occupied structure, domestic water well, if
the operator has obtained the express written permission from the owner of the
occupied structure or domestic water well.
            (3)   Oil and gas wells shall not be constructed within the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) special flood hazard area.
            (4)   Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and
facilities is an integral part of the oil and gas development, and as part of
the planning process, operator shall strive to consider the location of its
temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to
minimize interference with City of Eagle residents' enjoyment of their property
and future development activities as authorized by the City of Eagle applicable
ordinances.
         d.   Screening And Fencing:
            (1)   Security fencing shall not be required at oil or gas well
sites during the initial drilling, or redrilling operations, as long as manned
24-hour on-site supervision and security are provided.
            (2)   Security fencing shall be at least six feet (6') in height
equipped with lockable gates at every access point and have openings no less
than twenty feet (20') wide pursuant to International Fire Code. Additional
lockable gates used to access oil and gas well sites by foot may be allowed, as
necessary. The Fire Chief shall be provided with a method to access the drill
site in the case of an emergency, preferably by use of the Knox System.
            (3)   Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the
oil or gas well site providing notice of the potential dangers and the contact
information in case of an emergency. During drilling and hydraulic fracturing,
clearly visible warning signage shall be posted on the pad site.
         e.   Lighting: Lighting at an oil or gas well site, either temporary
or permanent, shall be directed downward and inward and comply with dark sky
principles. Flaring is not permitted between sunset and sunrise.
         f.   Noise: Extraction activities shall comply with the City's Noise
Ordinance, title 4, chapter 9 of this Code.
         g.   Dust Control, Vibrations, And Odors:
            (1)   To prevent injury or nuisances to persons living and working
in the area surrounding the operation site, the operator shall conduct drilling
and production in a manner that minimizes dust, vibrations, or odors, and in
accordance with industry best practices for drilling and production of gas and
other hydrocarbons.
            (2)   The operator shall adopt proven technological improvements in
industry standards for drilling and production of reducing dust, vibration, and
odor.
            (3)   If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or odors
related to the drilling and production use present an unreasonable risk of
injury, operations shall cease until such issue is adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the City. If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or
odors related to the drilling and production have become a nuisance to persons
living and working in the area, the City shall require the operator to adopt
reasonable methods for reducing the dust, vibrations, and odors. This may
include a requirement to install a mud shaker with construction of access roads
for vehicles exiting the site.
            (4)   Operator shall control fugitive dust arising from operations
and truck traffic. Operator shall dust proof the site by applying water, road
mixture, or other means that reduce dust. Petroleum based and synthetic
polymers, and electrochemical products are prohibited.
         h.   Hours Of Operation: Site development, other than drilling shall
be conducted only between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Monday through Friday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on Saturday and at no time on Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and
materials associated with drilling and well servicing, site preparation and
other related work conducted on the site shall be limited to the above same
work hour restrictions except in cases of an emergency.
      8.   Waiver: In the case of an application for permit under this
subsection J, a waiver from an imposed condition(s) may be granted if the
condition(s) is in conflict with chapter 3, title 47 of the Idaho Code. The
applicant will have the burden to show there is a conflict with chapter 3,
title 47 of the Idaho Code, and that the local and State rules cannot be
implemented harmoniously.
   K.   Oil And Gas Post-Extraction:
      1.   Definition: Post-extraction processing activities refer to the
handling of oil and gas after it has been extracted from the earth, more
specifically defined as any and all activity relating to site construction and
maintenance for processing of, oil and natural gas which, is not a part of the
extraction process, or which occurs after the oil, natural gas, produced water,
or any other substance or material has been removed from the ground, including
and/or concerning, but not limited to: a) waste disposal, b) fencing, c)
signage, d) lighting, e) venting, f) flaring, g) vehicle traffic and access, h)
noise, i) height restrictions, j) setbacks, k) disposal wells, l) storage
tanks, m) transfer pipelines, n) compression facilities, o) settling ponds, p)
derricks, q) wastewater disposal, r) refining facilities.
"Post-extraction processing activities" include: "gathering facilities" as
defined in Idaho Code section 47-310(10), other facilities, equipment or
improvements used or installed for the gathering, treatment, refining, or other
processing of oil or natural gas or other materials or substances, "processing
facilities" as defined in Idaho Code section 47-310(26), "gas processing
facilities" as defined in IDAPA 20.07.02.23, "pits" as defined in IDAPA
20.07.02.37, and "tank batteries" as defined in IDAPA 20.07.02.51, whether or
not located on a well site (as defined in IDAPA 20.07.02.59).
"Post-extraction activities" do not include: "Tanks" as defined in IDAPA
20.07.02.50 when such tanks are: a) located on a well site as defined in IDAPA
20.07.02.59 and b) contain materials used in and necessary for extraction
activities.
All other definitions applicable to this section are found in subsection J of
this section.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose is to provide, through zoning provisions, for
the reasonable development of land for oil and gas drilling and post-extraction
while providing adequate health, safety and general welfare protections of the
City of Eagle residents.
Local zoning regulates surface land use as authorized under the Local Land Use
Planning Act, title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code.
      3.   Zoning Classifications: An oil or gas post-production facility shall
be considered a conditional use within the zoning district(s) expressly set
forth in the land use table, subject to the standards listed herein.
      4.   Permit Requirement:
         a.   No oil or gas post-extraction facility, shall be constructed or
located within City of Eagle unless a conditional use permit has been issued by
the City of Eagle to the applicant approving the construction or preparation of
the site for oil or gas post-extraction.
         b.   Each application shall be submitted with the fee established
pursuant to resolution of the City of Eagle as adopted. Such fee shall be
reasonably related to the cost of administering this by the City of Eagle.
         c.   Any modification to an oil and gas post-extraction site that
materially alters the size, location, number of accessory equipment or
structures, shall require a modification of the permit under this subsection K.
Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
         d.   Upon receiving application for post-extraction the City Zoning
Administrator shall comply with section
8-7-3-5 of this title.
      5.   Permit Application: The applicant shall provide to the City of Eagle
at the time of permit application:
         a.   A narrative describing an overview of the post-extraction project
including the number of acres to be disturbed for development, the process
proposed for post-extraction, including, compressor stations, dehydration
facilities, tanks, pits or ponds, collection lines, equipment and structures
number and description of equipment and structures to the extent known.
Injection wells for wastewater or processed water is prohibited. In addition to
the narrative statement, each application shall contain the following:
            (1)   The surface owner's name, address, and phone number.
            (2)   The mineral owner's name, address, and phone number (if
different than the surface owner).
         b.   The address of the oil or gas post-extraction site and a legal
description of the parcel as determined by the City of Eagle and information
needed to gain access to the well site in the event of an emergency.
         c.   The contact information of the individual or individuals
responsible for the operation and activities at the oil or gas post-extraction
site shall be provided to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by the City of Eagle. Such information shall include a
phone number where such individual or individuals can be contacted twenty four
(24) hours per day, three hundred sixty five (365) days a year. Annually, or
upon any change of relevant circumstances, the applicant shall update such
information and provide it to the City of Eagle and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by City of Eagle.
         d.   A scaled site plan, including elevations or visual aids, of the
oil or gas post-extraction site showing the planned access roads, compressor
stations, dehydration facilities, tanks, pits or ponds, collection lines,
equipment and structures and all permanent improvements to the site and any
post construction surface disturbance in relation to natural resources.
Included in this map shall be an area within the development site for vehicles
to locate while gaining access to the oil or gas post-extraction site.
         e.   A narrative and map describing the planned access routes to the
well sites on public roads including the transportation and delivery of
equipment, machinery, water, chemicals and other materials used in the post-
extraction operation of the oil or gas well site.
         f.   Comply with Idaho State Water Quality Standards pursuant to IDAPA
58.01.02.850-852 addressing procedures for Hazardous Materials Spills (850),
Petroleum Release Reporting, Investigation, and Confirmation (851) and,
Petroleum Release Response and Corrective Action (852).
Pursuant to IDAPA 20.07.02 section 310.15 (General Drilling Rules) prepare a
comprehensive emergency and spill response guidance document known as a Spill
Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan, to address key State and
Federal regulations such as 40 CFR 112.1 through 40 CFR 112.10 (SPCC
Regulation) and IDAPA 20.07.02 (Rules Governing Conservation of Oil and Natural
Gas) and IDAPA 58.01.01 sections 800-852 (Water Quality Standards). As needed,
incorporate the unique elements of a Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency
Plan and obtain approval by the applicable fire district and the Eagle Police
Department. The SPCC Plan will be prepared by a qualified registered
professional engineer (State of Idaho) and kept at each drilling/production/
workover facility. All oil-handling personnel must be trained to implement the
SPCC Plan, with emphasis upon maintaining oil storage tanks/containers,
secondary containment systems and promptly/safely handling emergency spills,
leaks and accidental discharges of any oil-based fluids and oil-laden water at
the facility. Applicant shall provide the SPCC Plan to the City of Eagle and
all emergency responders at least thirty (30) days prior to drilling of an oil
or gas well and at least annually thereafter while drilling activities are
taking place at the oil or gas well site. Drilling shall not commence until the
City has approved the plan. The plan shall contain the MSDS (material safety
data sheet) or similar disclosure for all chemicals used on site with no
exemption for trade secrets. Such plan shall also contain a provision that
within twenty four (24) hours of the discovery of any oil and/or gas leak,
spill, and/or emission release, the City shall be notified and all operations
shall cease immediately until such equipment has been repaired and prior to
operation, operator shall submit certification from a licensed and qualified
professional verifying that the equipment has been adequately repaired and the
equipment is safe to return to service. Such certification will be reviewed by
the City Engineer. Prior to any changes, the City shall be notified regarding
any modifications to operations or a change in the use of chemicals.
         g.   Conduct an appropriate site orientation of the SPCC Plan for all
applicable emergency responders, as determined by the City of Eagle. The
orientation shall be conducted prior to the commencement of post-extraction
activities. The cost and expense of the orientation shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
         h.   A narrative describing the environmental impacts of the proposed
project on the site and surrounding land and measures proposed to protect or
mitigate such impacts shall be provided to the City of Eagle. A copy of any
remediation and/or mitigation plan filed with the State shall be submitted to
the City and approved prior to the commencement of operations. The City
reserves the right to provide additional requirements to a remediation and/or
mitigation plan.
         i.   The applicant, at its own expense, shall provide, prior to post-
extraction, current documentation of baseline water testing, conducted by an
independent third-party, on a minimum of three (3) domestic wells (2
downgradient and 1 upgradient), which wells shall be located within one-fourth
(1/4) of a mile of the well site. Applicant shall provide at least one test
prior to post-extraction and conduct and provide test results every quarter for
the first year of operation. Thereafter, such wells shall be retested at least
twice annually and the results submitted to the City. Depending upon the depth
of the domestic wells selected for testing, the City may require an additional
monitoring well(s) at the well site. If two (2) domestic wells are not found
within one-fourth (1/4) mile, the applicant shall install a monitoring well
downgradient of the post-extraction site for such testing. The depth and
location of the monitoring well(s) shall be approved by the City and based on
subsurface geology and aquifer information provided by the applicant. All
monitoring wells shall also be approved by the Idaho Department of Water
Resources. The following parameters to be tested, include, but are not limited
to, water temperature, pH, specific conductivity, total dissolved solids, major
ions, (chloride, fluoride, sulfate, nitrate, silica, calcium, sodium,
potassium, magnesium), trace elements (aluminum, arsenic, barium, boron, iron,
manganese, selenium, uranium, iodine), radiochemical (gross alpha/gross beta
radioactivity, in addition to uranium), and organic constituents (benzene,
toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes (BTEX), methane, methyl tertiary butyl ether
(MTBE)), heavy metals (cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, strontium, vanadium),
compounds (formaldehyde, hydrofluoric acid, nitrogen oxides) and anything else
as determined by the City Engineer.
         j.   Automatic emergency shut off valves that can be operated remotely
shall be installed on post-extraction facilities with access to valves provided
to the City and the applicable fire district in case of fire or explosion.
         k.   The applicant shall comply with all State and Federal air and
water quality regulations. The applicant shall report the receipt of any air or
water quality complaints to the City within twenty four (24) hours of receipt.
         l.   The applicant shall submit proof of a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of no less than fifteen
million dollars ($15,000,000.00) per occurrence with an aggregate of thirty
million dollars ($30,000,000.00) and a company authorized to do business in the
State of Idaho shall write the policy. The policy shall not contain any
exclusions of coverage for hydraulic fracturing or mining extraction
activities. The certificate shall require at least thirty (30) days' notice to
the City prior to termination of coverage for any reason. The applicant shall
secure substitute liability insurance coverage prior to actual termination;
failure to maintain comprehensive general liability insurance shall result in
immediate withdrawal of the permit by the City. At time of application, the
applicant shall provide written indemnification for the City.
      6.   Site Design And Installation:
         a.   Access: The permit application shall be submitted to the
appropriate road agency (ACHD or ITD) for comment. Any conditions provided by
the agency shall be required.
         b.   Height: No post-extraction facility shall exceed thirty five feet
(35').
         c.   Setbacks/Location:
            (1)   Post-extraction facilities shall not be constructed within:
                  One-quarter (1/4) of a mile from a highway;
                  One-half (1/2) mile from the property line of an occupied
structure, a water well, ditches or canals, an occupied school, hospital/
medical facility, or place of worship/assembly;
                  Otherwise comply with IDAPA 20.07.02.430.01, as may be
amended.
            (2)   Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and
facilities is an integral part of the oil and gas development, and as part of
the planning process, operator shall strive to consider the location of its
temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to
minimize interference with City of Eagle residents' enjoyment of their property
and future development activities as authorized by the City of Eagle applicable
ordinances.
         d.   Screening And Fencing:
            (1)   Security fencing with materials approved by the City, shall
be installed around post-extraction structures and ponds or pits prior to the
commencement of post-extraction.
            (2)   Security fencing shall be at least six feet (6') in height
equipped with lockable gates at every access point and have openings no less
than twenty feet (20') wide pursuant to International Fire Code. Additional
lockable gates used to access oil and gas post-extraction sites by foot may be
allowed, as necessary. The Fire Chief shall be provided with a method to access
the drill site in the case of an emergency, preferably by use of the Knox
System.
            (3)   Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the
oil or gas post-extraction site providing notice of the potential dangers and
the contact information in case of an emergency.
            (4)   In construction of post-extraction facilities, the natural
surrounding shall be considered to preserve existing trees and other native
vegetation. Existing trees and respective root systems should not be disturbed
whenever possible. Re- forestation/re-vegetation of the post-extraction site
will be provided by the owner/operator as required by rules governing oil and
gas conservation.
         e.   Lighting: Lighting at an oil or gas post-extraction site, either
temporary or permanent, shall be directed downward and inward and comply with
dark sky principles. Flaring is not permitted between sunset and sunrise.
         f.   Noise: Post-extraction activities shall comply with the City's
Noise Ordinance, title 4, chapter 9 of this Code.
         g.   Dust Control, Vibrations, And Odors:
            (1)   To prevent injury or nuisances to persons living and working
in the area surrounding the operation site, the operator shall conduct drilling
and production in a manner that minimizes dust, vibrations, or odors, and in
accordance with industry best practices for drilling and production of gas and
other hydrocarbons.
            (2)   The operator shall adopt proven technological improvements in
industry standards for drilling and production of reducing dust, vibration, and
odor.
            (3)   If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or odors
related to the post-extraction use present an unreasonable risk of injury,
operations shall cease until such issue is adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the City. If the City determines that the dust, vibrations, or
odors related to the post-extraction have become a nuisance to persons living
and working in the area, the City shall require the operator to adopt
reasonable methods for reducing the dust, vibrations, and odors. This may
include a requirement to install a mud shaker with construction of access roads
for vehicles exiting the site.
            (4)   Operator shall control fugitive dust arising from operations
and truck traffic. Operator shall dust proof the site by applying water, road
mixture, or other means that reduce dust. Petroleum based and synthetic
polymers, brine water, sulfur water, water in mixture with any hydrocarbon,
including used motor oil, and electrochemical products are prohibited.
            (5)   Temporary housing is prohibited. Applicant shall provide for
adequate screening and restroom facilities.
         h.   Hours Of Operation: Site development, other than drilling shall
be conducted only between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Monday through Friday and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on Saturday and at no time on Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and
materials associated with drilling and well servicing, site preparation and
other related work conducted on the site shall be limited to the above same
work hour restrictions except in cases of an emergency. (Ord. 792, 6-26-2018)
      7.   Waiver: In the case of an application for permit under this
subsection K, a waiver from an imposed condition(s) may be granted if the
condition(s) is in conflict with chapter 3, title 47 of the Idaho Code.
The applicant will have the burden to show there is a conflict with chapter 3,
title 47 of the Idaho Code, and that the local and State rules cannot be
implemented harmoniously. (Ord. 794, 2-12-2019)
   L.   Home Occupations: The provisions herein are to permit the establishment
of home occupations that are compatible with the districts in which they are
located. The intent of the regulations of this chapter is to establish
performance standards for all home occupations. Home occupations shall be
classified as either Class "A", "B" or "C" home occupations and shall be
regulated as follows:
      1.   Class A home occupations:
         a.   Shall be limited to those uses identified on the Official
Schedule of District Regulations section within this title as permitted within
the underlying zone of the property. For instance, if the zone of the property
is R-2-DA-P, the underlying zone is R.
         b.   Shall require a city issued business license.
         c.   Shall not require a home occupation permit.
      2.   Class B home occupations:
         a.   Shall be those uses conducted entirely within the dwelling or
accessory structure, except that, outdoor swimming lessons and dog training
classes shall be permitted.
         b.   Shall require a city issued business license.
         c.   Shall not require a home occupation permit.
      3.   Class C home occupations:
         a.   Shall be those uses including activities conducted outside of the
dwelling or accessory structure, except for those uses classified as Class A or
B home occupations.
         b.   Shall require a city issued business license.
         c.   Shall require City Council approval of a conditional use permit
for the home occupation permit if deemed to be in compliance with Eagle City
Code with conditions assuring said compliance.
         d.   Shall have the outdoor area of use designed to assure no damage
results to adjacent property.
         e.   No outdoor display or storage of unregistered vehicles, vehicle
parts, materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed on the
premises, except for lawfully parked registered vehicles.
         f.   Shall have a minimum of forty feet (40') between the outdoor area
of use and the property line.
         g.   Shall have a minimum of two (2) acres for sports fields, sports
courts, horse riding lessons, and other similar uses as may be determined by
the City Council.
         h.   Shall have a minimum of three (3) acres for uses such as small
wedding venues and other similar uses as may be determined by the City Council.
         i.   Shall include conditions of approval specified by the City
Council to regulate the hours of operation, days of operation, number of
events, numbers of employees/customers/patrons/attendees, and other conditions
specifically related to the proposed use to assure compliance with this
chapter.
         j.   Within seven (7) calendar days after a written decision has been
rendered by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the
applicant with written notice of the action on the request.
         k.   The home occupation permit shall be valid for a maximum of five
(5) years at which time a new permit shall be required.
      4.   Regulations Applicable to All Home Occupations:
         a.   The operator of every home occupation shall reside in the
dwelling unit on the property where the home occupation operates or on an
adjacent property owned by the same.
         b.   A home occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit,
within an approved accessory structure, or outdoors in accordance with this
section. Parcels on which the home occupation is located may be adjacent to the
parcel in which the dwelling unit is located so long as the adjacent parcels
are under the same ownership.
         c.   For home occupations conducted within a dwelling unit the total
area used for the home occupation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the total floor area of the dwelling.
         d.   For home occupations conducted within an accessory structure, the
entire area of an accessory structure may be used for the home occupation
provided the use within the structure is permitted by the building code adopted
by the city.
         e.   The home occupation business must be clearly incidental to the
residential use of the property.
         f.   No alteration of the exterior of the dwelling in which the home
occupation is being conducted shall be made which changes the character thereof
as a dwelling.
         g.   No advertising or business signs are permitted in conjunction
with the home occupation.
         h.   No outdoor display or storage of unregistered vehicles, vehicle
parts, materials, goods, supplies or equipment shall be allowed on the
premises, except for lawfully parked vehicles.
         i.   On-site parking for any vehicle primarily used in connection with
the home occupation (employees/customers/patrons/attendees) shall be provided
on a dust free surface in addition to parking required for the dwelling unit.
         j.   The minimum number of covered parking spaces for the dwelling
unit shall not be reduced below the minimum number required by this title.
         k.   Sale of goods on the premises shall be limited to the products
produced by the home occupation.
         l.   Deliveries of bulk material other than by mail, local courier, or
inter-city courier pertaining to the home occupation shall not exceed one (1)
per week and shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday. Further, traffic circulation shall not be restricted or
disturbed as a result of a delivery to a home occupation.
         m.   The home occupation shall not interfere with the delivery of
utilities or other services to the area.
         n.   The home occupation shall not generate any noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare or electrical interference with radio or
television transmission in the area that would exceed that which is normally
produced by a dwelling unit use.
         o.   No toxic, explosive, flammable, radioactive or other restricted
or hazardous material shall be used, sold or stored on the site.
         p.   The home occupation shall at all times comply with all applicable
city codes and the requirements of other regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction.
      5.   Prohibited Home Occupations:
         a.   The following uses are prohibited for home occupation use:
Residential:
Mobile home (single unit) (primary residence)
Mobile home (single unit) (temporary living quarters)
Mobile home court (RV)
Mobile home park
Multi-family dwelling
Planned unit development
Two-family dwelling
Commercial:
Adult business
Airport
Ambulance services
Arts and crafts shows
Auction facility
Automotive body shop
Automotive emission testing facility
Automotive gas station or fuel islands
Automotive gas station/service shop
Automotive, mobile home, travel trailer, and/or farm implement sales
Automotive repair
Automotive storage
Automotive vehicle vinyl wrap shop
Automotive washing facility
Bakery plant (wholesale)
Banks/financial institutions (no drive-up service)
Banks/financial institutions (with drive-up service)
Bar
Building supply outlet
Cabinet shop
Cemetery
Childcare:
Group Daycare Facility (7-12 children)
Daycare Center (13+ children)
Christmas tree sales
Circuses and carnivals
Club or lodge
Coffee roasting facility
Commercial entertainment facilities (indoor)
Commercial entertainment facilities (outdoor)
Communication facilities
Contractor's yard and/or shop
Convenience store with fuel service
Convenience store with no fuel service
Detention facilities
Drive-in theater
Drugstore
Electronic sales, service, or repair shop
Emergency healthcare
Emergency services
Equipment rental and sales yard
Flex space
Food and beverage sales
Hardware store
Heliports
Home and business services
Hospital
Hotel
Institution
Kennel
Laboratories
Laundromat
Laundry (with drive-up service)
Laundry (with no drive-up service)
Live entertainment events
Microbrewery
Mobile office
Mortuary
Motel
Nonprofit rehabilitation center
Nursing/convalescent home
Office, medical and dental - however, counseling services are permitted
Parking lot, parking garage
Parking lot, parking garage, commercial
Pawnshops (auto)
Pawnshops (general)
Personal wireless facilities (enclosed building, height - 35' or less)
Personal wireless facilities (enclosed building, height - over 35')
Personal wireless facilities (height - 35' or less)
Personal wireless facilities (height - 36' - 50')
Personal wireless facilities (height - over 50')
Restaurant (drive-in)
Restaurant (no drive-through)
Restaurant (with drive-through)
Retail sales (general)
Retail sales (limited)
Retail sales (pharmacies and medical)
Shopping center
Shopping mall
Sign shop, including painting
Small engine repair (mower, chain saws, etc.)
Storage (fenced area)
Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments
Tire shop, including recapping
Trade fair
Travel services
Truck stop
Upholstery shop
Vet clinic (animal hospital)
Welding, tool shop
Winery
 
         b.   As determined by the Zoning Administrator, uses that are not
consistent with this chapter and that impair the integrity of and/or exert a
negative influence on the residential neighborhood in which they are located,
and/or other uses similar to those prohibited home occupation uses listed in
this section shall be prohibited.
         c.   All uses listed under the Industrial classification within the
Official Schedule of District Regulations shall be prohibited.
         d.   Repair or painting of motorized vehicles such as repair or
painting/wrapping of autos, trucks, trailers and boats, except that hobbyist
restoration of vehicles is permitted if entirely enclosed within an accessory
structure or garage and all other conditions herein are satisfied.
         e.   Upon the submittal of a waiver application and findings adopted
by the zoning administrator addressing compliance with the following criteria,
the use(s) noted in subsection a. above may be permitted:
            (1)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
            (2)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighborhood uses;
            (3)   Will be compatible with the scale and design of the
structures and overall existing development pattern of the surrounding area;
            (4)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
            (5)   If the waiver application is denied, the decision may be
appealed in accordance with chapter 7 of this title. If no appeal is submitted,
the decision is final.
   M.   Mobile Home Park 1 :
      1.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
      2.   Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future
neighboring uses;
      3.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage,
refuse disposal and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for
the establishment of the proposed park shall be able to provide adequately any
such service;
      4.   Will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and the
comprehensive plan;
      5.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
streets or roads;
      6.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural,
scenic or historic features of major importance;
      7.   Will meet the minimum health standards as set forth by the Idaho
State Department of Health and Welfare; and
      8.   Will have a minimum total area for the mobile home park of five (5)
acres.
   N.   Outdoor Storage Of Commercial And Industrial Materials:
      1.   Will be screened from view from any existing, adjoining residence or
residentially zoned area, whether or not such property is separated by an
alleyway or street; and
      2.   Will not be located in any front yard setback area.
   O.   Riding Stables And Schools:
      1.   Will locate all stables or loafing sheds not nearer than three
hundred feet (300') from any residence, except for an owner's residence. All
facilities shall be set back a distance of thirty feet (30') from any property
line;
      2.   Will be designed and located with full consideration being given to
their proximity to adjacent uses and their effect upon adjacent and surrounding
properties, as to the storage of horse trailers, and the factors of noise and
odor; and
      3.   Will require that the owner or operator of such use shall have a
continuous obligation to maintain adequate housekeeping practices and to
prevent the creation of a nuisance.
   P.   Rifle And Pistol Range:
      1.   Will be designed with a backstop;
      2.   Will be designed to avoid a line of fire that is directed toward any
residence or business within one mile;
      3.   Will incorporate landscaping that is compatible with the surrounding
landscaping; and
      4.   Will provide supervision and security measures during periods of
use.
   Q.   Sanitary Landfill:
      1.   Will conform to time limits for daily operation as defined by the
council;
      2.   Will provide a surety, for privately owned sites, to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the zoning certificate;
      3.   Will provide for a paved street to the facility; and
      4.   Will be supervised during the hours of operation.
   R.   Wrecking Yard:
      1.   Will be completely enclosed by a solid six foot (6') high or higher
site obscuring fence;
      2.   Will not result in the storage of automobile, junk or salvage
material that is visible from any public right of way;
      3.   Will not result in the storage of automobiles that exceed the height
of the fence; and
      4.   Will have such landscaping that is appropriate with the surrounding
area.
   S.   Personal Wireless Facilities, Spires, Poles, Antennas, Steeples,
Towers, And Other Such Structures:
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   To accommodate the communication needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community, the council finds that regulations regarding personal wireless
facilities, spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and other such
structures are necessary in order to:
            (1)   Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication
services to the residents and businesses of the city;
            (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of spires, poles, antennas,
steeples, towers, and other such structures through careful design and sitting
standards;
            (3)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from spire,
pole, antenna, steeple, tower, and other such structures' failure, through
structural standards and setback requirements; and
            (4)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and
buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to
reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community, like church
steeples, windmills, bell towers, clock towers, cupolas, light standards,
flagpoles, or trees.
      2.   Towers And Personal Wireless Facilities In Zoning Districts:
         a.   Central Business District: Personal wireless facilities shall be
camouflaged or concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be
aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in the
central business district.
         b.   Mixed Use District: Personal wireless facilities shall be
camouflaged or concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be
aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in the
mixed use district.
         c.   Residential (R) Districts:
            (1)   On residentially zoned parcels, towers supporting amateur
radio antennas shall not be permitted in the front, side or street side yard.
            (2)   Personal wireless facilities shall be camouflaged or
concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in all residential (R)
districts.
         d.   PS (Public/Semipublic) District:
            (1)   Personal wireless facilities may be permitted to be attached
to existing light standards and power line support devices (or replacement
equivalent of same height) provided, however, the antenna(s) are either flush
mounted or mounted in a manner that provides minimum visual impact.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all provisions of this subsection S shall be
applicable to wireless antennas located on existing light standards and power
line support devices.
            (2)   Personal wireless facilities shall be camouflaged or
concealed, not readily identifiable as such, designed to be aesthetically
compatible with existing and proposed uses on the site in the public/semipublic
district unless installed in accordance with subsection S2d(1) of this section.
      3.   Collocation Requirements:
         a.   A proposal for a new tower mounted personal wireless facility in
excess of thirty five feet (35') in height shall not be approved unless the
city council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the
proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within the following radii of the proposed tower:
            (1)   A two (2) mile radius for towers with a height over one
hundred ten feet (110').
            (2)   A one mile radius for towers with a height over eighty feet
(80') but not more than one hundred ten feet (110').
            (3)   A one-half (1/2) mile radius for towers with a height over
fifty feet (50') but not more than eighty feet (80').
            (4)   A one-fourth (1/4) mile radius for towers with a height over
thirty five feet (35') but not more than fifty feet (50').
         b.   It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the
proposed tower or antenna cannot be accommodated on an approved tower or
building within the required search radius due to one or more of the following
reasons:
            (1)   Unwillingness of another tower or facility owner to entertain
shared use.
            (2)   The proposed collocation of an existing tower or facility
would be in violation of any local, state or federal law.
            (3)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
            (4)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
            (5)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer.
            (6)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, or
other professional qualified to provide necessary documentation.
         c.   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower
shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least
two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred ten feet (110') in
height, for at least one additional user if the tower is over fifty feet (50')
in height.
         d.   Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
         e.   Personal wireless facilities proposed at a location which has an
approved conditional use permit (approved after the effective date hereof) for
an existing facility which was required to allow collocation shall not be
required to obtain a separate conditional use permit as long as all the
requirements of the previously approved conditional use permit will be complied
with. Design review, and subsequent building permit, will be required for any
such proposal.
      4.   Tower And Antenna Design Requirements:
         a.   All personal wireless facilities shall be required to obtain
design review approval prior to construction.
         b.   Personal wireless facility towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the city council determines that an alternative design would better
blend into the surrounding environment.
         c.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
and connection lines approved by the issuing authority, no part of any antenna
or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with
either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right of way,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
         d.   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons. The climbing pegs
within the bottom twenty feet (20') of the tower shall be removed and shall
only be used when the tower is being serviced.
         e.   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material.
         f.   Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances.
      5.   Tower Setbacks:
         a.   Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district
with the exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers may encroach
into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another
industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
         b.   The base of the personal wireless facility shall be set back a
minimum distance of two (2) times the height of the tower from the property
line of any residential dwelling.
         c.   If the tower does not exceed the height limitations of the zone
in which it is located, the tower shall meet the setback requirement of the
zone except as allowed in subsection S5a of this section. If the tower exceeds
the height limit of the zone in which it is located, the tower shall be set
back one foot (1') for every ten feet (10') in total tower height. In either
case, the tower shall be constructed to the telecommunications industry
association/electronic industries association (TIA/EIA) 222 revision F standard
entitled "Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Supporting Structures" or as
hereinafter may be amended. Otherwise, the tower shall be located a minimum of
one foot (1') for each foot of height from all property lines (the fall zone).
No storage or structures other than the accessory utility buildings, are
permitted in the fall zone, except as may be specifically permitted by the city
council through a conditional use process.
         d.   Towers shall be set back from all existing public right of way
lines (or planned right of way lines if additional is to be acquired in the
future) by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the tower including
all antennas and attachments.
         e.   Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a
public street.
         f.   A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied, at the sole discretion of the city council, to allow the
integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church
steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure.
         g.   If any tower setback requirement conflicts with other setback
requirements of this code the setback with the greater distance shall prevail,
except as may be allowed in subsection S5f of this section.
      6.   Tower Lighting, Signage, And Attachments:
         a.   No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any
way, except during time of repair or installation, any stationary lights,
strobe lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as
specifically required by the federal aviation administration, federal
communications commission, or other federal or state authority.
         b.   When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be
attached to the tower if approved by the city.
         c.   The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning
or equipment information signs, is prohibited.
         d.   No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in
any way, any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during
periods of construction or repair.
      7.   Amateur Radio Antennas:
         a.   In accordance with the federal communications commission's
preemptive ruling PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting
amateur radio antennas may exceed thirty feet (30') in height provided that a
determination is made by the city that the proposed tower height is technically
necessary to successfully engage in amateur radio communications. A conditional
use permit is required for any amateur radio antenna in excess of thirty five
feet (35').
      8.   Accessory Utility Buildings:
         a.   All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower are
required to have design review approved by the city prior to construction.
      9.   Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers:
         a.   As a condition of approval of any required conditional use permit
for personal wireless facilities, all abandoned or unused towers and associated
facilities shall be required to be removed within sixty (60) days of cessation
of use as a personal wireless facility unless a time extension is granted by
the city. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of the
use as a personal wireless facility, shall be submitted at the time of
application. In the event that the tower and associated facilities are not
removed within the sixty (60) days, the tower and associated facilities may be
removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property.
      10.   Additional Application Submittal Requirements:
         a.   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this code,
development applications for personal wireless facilities, shall include the
following supplemental information:
            (1)   Documentation from a qualified and licensed professional
engineer showing that the proposed facility will be in compliance with the FCC
standards regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
            (2)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
which describes the tower height and design (including a cross section and
elevation); documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas; describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate; documents what steps the applicant will take
to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications;
includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and includes other
information necessary to evaluate the request.
            (3)   For all personal wireless facilities, a letter of intent
committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of
the tower, as required by this code, if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
            (4)   Documentation showing that the proposed tower complies with
regulations administered by federal aviation administration.
            (5)   Written approval of the site location with specific reference
to the height of the antenna structure and any lighting issues, from the
federal aviation administration, the chief of the Idaho bureau of aeronautics,
and the Boise airport commission and an aviation easement approved by the Boise
airport commission.
            (6)   Propagation charts showing existing and proposed transmission
coverage at the subject site and within an area large enough to provide an
understanding of why the facility needs to be in the chosen location.
            (7)   A written analysis demonstrating that the proposed site is
the most appropriate site within the immediate area. For the purposes of this
subsection, the analysis shall include all properties within the search radii
stated above. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
               (A)   Description of the surrounding area, including topography;
               (B)    Natural and manmade impediments that would obstruct
adequate cellular telephone transmissions;
               (C)   Physical site constraints that would preclude construction
of a cellular telephone facility on any other site;
               (D)   Technical limitations of the system that limit siting
options.
      11.   Permits:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reerect,
or replace, any tower without first making application to the city and securing
a building/zoning permit.
         b.   A building/zoning permit shall not be required for antennas and/
or towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for emergency communication,
or for broadcast remote pick up operations. Temporary antennas shall be
permitted for a maximum of seventy two (72) hours unless specifically approved
by the city council.
         c.   In addition to the findings required and conditions permitted for
conditional use permits, as stated within section
8-7-3 of this title, the city council shall make an additional finding
concerning the duration of the conditional use permit. Upon finding that the
conditional use permit is to be limited in duration, a condition limiting the
duration and the basis for such a condition shall be included within the
findings of fact and conclusions of law for the conditional use permit.
      12.   Additional Requirements For Notice Of Public Hearing:
         a.   All personal wireless facilities requiring a conditional use
permit shall comply with the conditional use notice requirements within this
code. Tower mounted personal wireless facilities shall comply with the
following additional requirements:
            (1)   All property owners within one thousand feet (1,000') of all
property lines of the site (or lease boundary lines, if applicable) shall be
notified of the public hearing by the city, by mail, a minimum of fifteen (15)
days before the scheduled public hearing. The applicant will be required to
provide the names of the property owners to the city.
      13.   Restricted Areas:
         a.   Personal wireless facilities in excess of thirty five feet (35')
in height and not contained within a building shall not be permitted within the
"restricted area for telecommunications towers" as shown on exhibit A located
at the end of this section. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, personal
wireless facilities may be allowed within the restricted area provided they are
camouflaged or concealed, not readily identifiable as such, and designed to be
aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed uses within the restricted
area.
EXHIBIT A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cc83bda73e097be2f37482d7e2b07596312e63f6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1238.png]
 
   T.   Motorized Watercraft:
      1.   The operation of motorized watercraft, including, but not limited
to, any outboard or inboard motorboats, personalized watercraft, or any other
motorized or jet propelled watercraft are prohibited upon the ponds, lakes,
streams, and all other waterways within the City limits.
      2.   This prohibition will not include use of motorized watercraft on the
Boise River within the City limits, as jurisdiction over the Boise River is
governed by the State of Idaho.
      3.   The use and operation of motorized watercraft by emergency service
personnel within the City limits are exempt from the provisions within this
subsection.
   U.   Accessory Dwelling Units:
      1.   The minimum lot size for the inclusion of an accessory dwelling unit
is seventeen thousand (17,000) square feet or greater unless otherwise approved
as part of a development agreement or PUD. Accessory dwelling units on lots of
seventeen thousand (17,000) square feet or less shall count as a unit for the
purpose of calculating development density.
      2.   The maximum size of the accessory dwelling shall be as follows:
 
Lot Size                      Accessory Dwelling
                              Unit Maximum Size
5,000 to 7,499 square feet1   500 square feet
7,500 to 16,999 square feet1  640 square feet
17,000 to 39,999 square feet  800 square feet
40,000 square feet or greater 1,200 square feet
 
   Note:
   1.    See subsection U1 of this section.
      3.   Accessory dwelling units may only be located to the rear or side of
the principal dwelling and shall not be located in front of the front plane of
the principal structure unless otherwise permitted as part of a development
agreement or PUD approval.
      4.   Accessory dwelling units must comply with all required setback and
lot coverage limitations for the principal dwelling for the underlying zone.
      5.   Detached accessory dwelling units shall meet minimum building
separation standards as described in the building code.
      6.   All accessory dwelling units require a zoning permit to be issued
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      7.   An existing principal single-family dwelling shall exist on the lot
or shall be constructed and shall obtain an occupancy permit prior to or in
conjunction with the accessory unit.
      8.   Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed for each parcel.
      9.   Exterior design of the accessory dwelling unit will be compatible
with the principal residence on the lot and not detract from the single-family
appearance of the lot or obscure and confuse the front entrance of the
principal structure.
      10.   Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the off street parking
requirements for apartment and multi-family dwellings under section
8-4-5 of this title.
      11.   The entrance to the accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted
to face toward the street unless the accessory unit is located completely
behind the rear plane of the principal structure.
      12.   The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 294, 5-13-1997; Ord. 422,
4-23-2002; Ord. 465, 3-23-2004; Ord. 683, 11-27-2012; Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; Ord.
672, 12-10-2013; Ord. 756, 8-23-2016; Ord. 792, 6-26-2018; Ord. 794, 2-12-2019;
Ord. 809, 4-9-2019; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020; Ord. 858, 10-
26-2021; Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 7, chapter 3 of this Code.
8-3-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS ON STATE STREET AND EAGLE ROAD:
The city has a substantial investment in the street improvements constructed
along State Street between Ballantyne and Edgewood Lanes and along Eagle Road
between the Highway 55 bypass and Ranch Drive as part of the Eagle downtown
revitalization project. It is essential to the public health, safety and
welfare that any new construction along the designated portions of those
streets comply with the following standards. In addition, State Street and
Eagle Road are state highways and are subject to the jurisdiction both of the
Idaho department of transportation, hereafter defined as "department", and the
Ada County highway district, hereafter defined as "district". Applications for
any building permit for construction adjacent to the above designated portions
of State Street and Eagle Road shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Street Cuts: No utility cuts into the pavement of State Street or Eagle
Road will be permitted without a permit from the department, or district,
whichever is applicable.
   B.   Curb, Gutter And Sidewalks: Construction of standard six inch (6")
vertical curb and gutter, and five foot (5') sidewalks meeting the department,
or district standards, whichever is applicable, shall be constructed.
   C.   Plans: Plans for curb, gutter, sidewalk and pavement match design must
be submitted to and approved by the department, or district, whichever is
applicable, for compliance with standards.
   D.   Streetlights And Trees: Applicants who propose development adjacent to
State Street between Cobblestone Lane to Stierman Way, and adjacent to Eagle
Road between Aikens and Idaho Streets shall be required to install streetlights
and trees approved by the city. City approval shall include installation,
location and spacing of streetlights and trees determined by the city. Light
poles and bases installed by the city during the 1993 Eagle downtown
revitalization project in accordance with specifications and drawings for
streetlight and trees are on file at city hall. Trees must be installed in tree
wells. Power to the streetlights and irrigation water for the trees must be
provided by the applicant. Tree types must be from an approved list provided by
the city.
   E.   Guarantee Of Improvements:
      1.   In lieu of the actual installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks,
the city council may permit the applicant to provide a financial guarantee of
performance bond which shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specified
improvements, to be held in trust by the district, as estimated by the
district, and shall be with a surety company authorized to do business in the
state of Idaho. (Ord. 230, 11-9-1993)
      2.   In lieu of the actual installation of streetlights, street trees,
tree wells and irrigation, the city council may permit the applicant to provide
a financial guarantee or surety in the form of a letter of credit, certificate
of deposit, or cash which shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of the
specified improvements, to be held in trust by the city, as estimated by the
city engineer, and shall be with a surety company authorized to do business in
the state of Idaho. (Ord. 422, 4-23-2002)
   F.   Inspections: The applicant shall be required to pay the city inspection
fees for the inspection of streetlights and trees.
   G.   Improvements: The applicant shall be required to pay the district
inspection fees for the inspection of all other improvements in the right of
way. (Ord. 230, 11-9-1993)
CHAPTER 4
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING; SITE AND BUILDING LIGHTING
SECTION:
8-4-1: Interpretation Of Provisions
8-4-2: Application Of Provisions
8-4-3: Design And Maintenance
8-4-4: Additional Parking Regulations And Requirements
8-4-4-1: Location Of Parking Spaces
8-4-4-2: Additional Design And Maintenance Regulations And Requirements
8-4-4-3: Joint/Collective Parking Facilities
8-4-4-4: Parking Disabled Vehicles
8-4-4-5: Parking In Lieu Payments
8-4-4-6: Bicycle Parking
8-4-5: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
8-4-6: Additional Loading Space Regulations And Requirements
8-4-1: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following shall govern:
   A.   Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed
herein shall be determined by the administrator. Among the factors for
determining the number of spaces to be required for a use not listed herein,
the administrator shall compare the proposed use with a use which has similar
traffic generating characteristics as outlined in the most recent version of
the Institute Of Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual".
   B.   Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number.
   C.   All development located within the design review overlay district shall
comply in all respects with the site and building lighting requirements
established herein. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2016)
8-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered, or
its use changed unless permanently maintained off street parking and loading
spaces have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this title.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use,
shall not apply to any existing building or structure. Where a new use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such spaces as
may be required by this title.
   C.   Whenever a building, structure, or use, constructed or changed in use
after the effective date hereof, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number
of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise to
create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces per this
title, additional parking spaces shall be provided so that the existing
building, structure, or use, and proposed enlargement or change in use, shall
then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
   D.   If more than one use is located on the site, the number of off street
parking spaces shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed for
each use unless a joint/collective parking facility is approved as provided for
in section
8-4-4-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 309, 1-27-1998)
8-4-3: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Paving: The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth
in this chapter, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas,
shall be improved with material such as asphalt or concrete, to provide a
durable and dust free surface. Gravel or dirt surfaces shall not be permitted
unless used as part of a home occupation.
   B.   Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper
drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways. Drainage plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
city engineer and, for any site abutting a public street, such plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the Ada County highway district, or highway district
having jurisdiction.
   C.   Access: Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be
located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be
clearly visible by a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway
from a public or private street.
   D.   Maintenance: The owner of property used for parking and/or loading
shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust,
trash and other debris.
   E.   Compact Spaces: A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the total spaces
provided may be designed, designated and used for compact size vehicles. The
minimum standards for compact vehicle spaces and driveways are set forth in
subsection
8-4-4-2F of this chapter. Compact spaces shall be located along the perimeter
of the parking lot or in those areas most distant from the structure or use
being served. Parking areas immediately adjacent to or within close proximity
to the building entrances shall be designated for standard (full size) spaces.
Compact spaces shall be clearly marked as such on the pavement or curb. Surplus
parking spaces (those spaces that exceed the minimum number required by this
title) shall also comply with the thirty percent (30%) maximum per total number
of spaces permitted for compact spaces. The allowed percentage of compact
spaces may only be increased by conditional use approval from the city council.
(Ord. 309, 1-27-1998; amd. Ord. 827, 10-22-2020)
8-4-4: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
8-4-4-1: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   The following regulations shall govern the location of off street
parking spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on
the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve.
      2.   Parking spaces for retail or customer parking for commercial,
industrial, or public/semipublic uses shall be located not more than seven
hundred feet (700') from the principal use measured along the sidewalk, or
walkway available for public use, from the primary entrance of the principal
use to the furthest parking space within the parking lot.
      3.   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential
uses shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the
principal use measured along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use,
from the primary entrance of the principal use to the furthest parking space
within the parking lot.
      4.   Parking spaces for employee parking on a daily basis where the
vehicle is used occasionally, regardless of the nature of employment, shall be
located not more than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') from the
principal use measured along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use,
from the primary entrance of the principal use to the furthest parking space
within the parking lot.
      5.   When off site parking is provided, a directional sign shall be
erected on the premises and shall advise the public of the distance and
direction to the off site parking area. Any such sign shall conform to
applicable requirements of section
8-2A-8 of this title, and at a minimum shall be approved in writing by the
zoning administrator prior to installation.
   B.   No part of any parking area for more than ten (10) vehicles shall be
closer than twenty feet (20') to any dwelling unit, school, or hospital or
other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot, unless separated
by an acceptably designed screen. If on the same lot with a one-family
residence, the parking area shall be located and screened as required by the
design review board. (Ord. 309, 1-27-1998)
8-4-4-2: ADDITIONAL DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site And Building Lighting:
      1.   All parking areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Any lights used to illuminate a site and building shall be arranged
to reflect the light away from the adjoining property.
      3.   Except as noted in subsection A4 of this section, all site and
building lighting shall be recessed or shielded to direct all light downward
and the source of the light (including the lamp and any nonopaque material/lens
covering the lamp) shall not be directly visible by a person of average height
standing on the property line of any public right of way, or any private
street, or on the property line of any residentially zoned parcel of land or
parcel of land used for residential purposes.
      4.   When historic style light pole fixtures designed such that the
portion of the fixture housing the light bulb is to be exposed as a design
element of the light fixture (as identified in the EASD book) are approved,
shielding shall only be required so the light is not directly visible by a
person of average height standing on the property line of any residentially
zoned parcel of land or parcel of land used for residential purposes. The light
used shall be 3000K maximum LED (or approved equivalent) and the light fixture
shall be provided with optics to direct light downward.
      5.   Light pole fixtures shall have a maximum height of:
         a.   Twenty feet (20') for parking lots with less than two hundred
(200) spaces;
         b.   Twenty five feet (25') for parking lots with more than two
hundred (200) spaces but less than five hundred (500) spaces;
         c.   Thirty feet (30') for parking lots with more than five hundred
(500) spaces;
         d.   Fifteen feet (15') for any pole within fifty feet (50') of a
property line of any residentially zoned parcel of land or parcel of land used
for residential purposes.
      6.   Except as otherwise permitted within this title, incandescent
lights, two hundred fifty (250) watt maximum high pressure sodium lights, 3000K
maximum LED lights (or approved equivalent) shall be the only type of site and
building lighting permitted.
      7.   Metal halide lighting shall be permitted with the following
additional conditions:
         a.   Light wattage shall be a maximum of three hundred twenty (320)
watts.
         b.   The light fixture shall be no higher than seventeen feet (17').
         c.   The design review board shall make the following findings prior
to approving metal halide lighting:
            (1)   The lighting shall be harmonious with and in accordance with
the general objectives, or with any specific objective of chapter 2, article A
of this title;
            (2)   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
            (3)   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
         d.   Historic style light pole fixtures designed such that the portion
of the fixture housing the light bulb is exposed as a design element of the
light fixture (as identified in the EASD book) shall not be permitted to have
metal halide lighting.
      8.   Existing lighting, for a site which is a part of any application,
shall be changed to comply with current city code.
      9.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to supply power
in perpetuity to all lighting, including streetlights located within the right
of way, required by this title.
      10.   Lighting plans shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning
administrator prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit.
   B.   Access: Any parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any
vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or onto a public or private
street shall be traveling in a forward motion. This requirement does not apply
to public alleyways.
   C.   Striping: All parking areas with a capacity over twelve (12) vehicles
shall be provided with standard parking space striping between spaces to
facilitate the movement into and out of the parking spaces.
   D.   Screening And/Or Landscaping: Whenever a parking area is located in or
adjacent to a residential district, it shall be effectively screened on all
sides which adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes by an
acceptably designed wall, fence, or planting screen. Such wall, fence, or
planting screen shall not be less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet
(6') in height and shall be maintained in good condition. The space between
such fence, wall or planting screen and the lot line of the adjoining premises
in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or
evergreen ground cover, and maintained in good condition. In the event that
terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of such wall,
fence, or planting screen will not serve the intended purpose, then no such
wall, fence, or planting screen and landscaping shall be required.
   E.   Wheel Blocks: Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel
blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a
parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
   F.   Off Street Parking Design And Dimension Tables:
   STANDARD VEHICLES
 
Parking angle                                  45°    69°    90°    Parallel
Width of parking space                         9 feet  9 feet  9 feet  9 feet
Curb length per space                          13 feet 10 feet 9 feet  23 feet
Length of parking space                                              
(measurement to be perpendicular from the curb 15 feet 18 feet 19 feet 23 feet
or front of space if no curb is provided)
Width of driveway aisle                        13 feet 17 feet 24 feet 12 feet
 
   COMPACT VEHICLES
 
Parking angle                                  45°    69°    90°    Parallel
Width of parking space                         8 feet  8 feet  8 feet  8 feet
Curb length per space                          11 feet 9 feet  8 feet  19 feet
Length of parking space                                              
(measurement to be perpendicular from the curb 11 feet 14 feet 15 feet 19 feet
or front of space if no curb is provided)
Width of driveway aisle                        12 feet 15 feet 22 feet 12 feet
 
   G.   Reduction For Planter Overhangs: When a parking space abuts a landscape
planter, the front two feet (2') of the required length for a parking space may
overhang the planter.
(Ord. 309, 1-27-1998; amd. Ord. 756, 8-23-2016; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
8-4-4-3: JOINT/COLLECTIVE PARKING FACILITIES:
   A.   Off street parking spaces required by this chapter for any specific use
shall not be considered as providing parking spaces for any other use except
where a joint/collective parking facility has been approved pursuant to the
following:
      1.   The applicant shall show that:
         a.   There is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours
of the building, structure or use for which the joint/collective parking
facility is proposed;
         b.   The peak hours of parking demand from the uses shall not coincide
so that the peak demand will be less than the parking required;
         c.   The shared parking spaces shall serve the uses without conflict;
         d.   The adequacy of the quantity and efficiency of parking provided
will equal or exceed the level that can be expected if a joint/collective
parking facility was not requested; and
         e.   If a public transit system serves the area, the applicant may
provide documentation showing that the parking demand will be reduced.
      2.   The proposed reduction of required spaces, applicable to each use,
shall be shown by the applicant.
      3.   The city may require the applicant to submit survey data, or
additional documentation substantiating a request for a joint/collective
parking facility.
      4.   The joint/collective parking facility may be on a site other than
the site where the use is located, but shall be located no further than that
permitted by subsection
8-4-4-1A of this chapter.
      5.   The spaces to be provided shall be available as long as the uses
requiring the spaces are in operation.
      6.   The parties concerned in the joint/collective parking facility shall
submit a written agreement in a form to be recorded for such joint/collective
use, approved by the city attorney as to form and content, and such agreement,
when approved as conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the
zoning administrator prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit, or prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. The agreement
shall include:
         a.   A guarantee that there will be no substantial alteration in the
uses that will create a greater demand for parking;
         b.   A guarantee among the landowners for access to a use of the
joint/collective parking facility;
         c.   A provision that the city may require parking facilities in
addition to those originally approved upon findings by the city council that
adequate parking to serve the uses has not been provided;
         d.   A provision stating that the city council, may for due cause and
upon notice and hearing, unilaterally modify, amend, or terminate the agreement
at any time; and
         e.   Any other information required to be documented on such agreement
by the city in an effort to assure compliance with this title.
      7.   The zoning administrator may permit a maximum reduction in the
number of spaces to be provided not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the sum
of the number of spaces required for each use only if the provisions of this
chapter have been met. The maximum allowable reduction in the number of spaces
to be provided shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the sum of the number
required for each use served unless a conditional use is approved by the city
council.
      8.   No use shall be continued if the parking is removed from a joint/
collective parking facility unless substitute parking facilities are provided.
(Ord. 309, 1-27-1998)
8-4-4-4: PARKING DISABLED VEHICLES:
The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential or commercial district
for a period of more than two (2) weeks shall be prohibited unless such vehicle
is stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building. (Ord. 309, 1-27-
1998)
8-4-4-5: PARKING IN LIEU PAYMENTS:
Within the central business district, as defined by the city of Eagle
comprehensive plan, the required number of parking spaces may be met by a cash
in lieu payment to the city prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit or
certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. The fee shall be for the city
to provide public off street parking in the vicinity of the use, the maximum
distance of which shall not exceed the maximum distance permitted by this
title. The fee shall be five thousand seven hundred dollars ($5,700.00) per
space, or such sum as may be adopted by resolution of the city council. In
addition to the above fee the owner shall be required to pay an annual per
space maintenance fee as shall be determined by resolution of the city council.
The city shall not provide more than twenty (20) spaces for any single use
without the specific approval of the city council. When considering in lieu
payments the city may set limitations on the number of spaces for which an in
lieu fee may be tendered.
All in lieu funds received for reduction of parking spaces under this section
shall be placed into a special and separate parking improvement and acquisition
account to be used solely for the purchase and improvement of municipal parking
lots and structures to be located within the central business district, as
defined by the city of Eagle comprehensive plan, and may be for use by the
general public. (Ord. 309, 1-27-1998)
8-4-4-6: BICYCLE PARKING:
One bicycle parking space within an approved rack shall be required for each
thirty (30) required automobile parking spaces or fraction thereof for office
and commercial developments. Multi-family residential developments shall
provide one bicycle rack space per each ten (10) units. Bicycle parking racks
shall be in a well lit area, and shall be designed in accordance with the
parking facility criteria of the "Bicycle-Pedestrian Design Manual For Ada
County" as prepared for the Ada County highway district with the exception that
bicycle racks do not have to be covered unless required by the design review
board, or planning and zoning commission or city council. (Ord. 309, 1-27-1998)
8-4-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
In accordance with subsection
8-4-1A of this chapter, parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses
not listed herein shall be determined by the administrator. Among the factors
for determining the number of spaces to be required for a use not listed
herein, the administrator shall compare the proposed use with a use which has
similar traffic generating characteristics as outlined in the most recent
version of the institute of transportation engineers trip generation manual.
For the purpose of this title, the following space requirements shall apply,
except that in the DDA and TDA the space requirement listed herein shall be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) for all nonresidential uses and adjacent on
street parking shall be included in the minimum requirement:
Type Of Use Off Street Parking Spaces Required
Type Of Use                           Off Street Parking Spaces Required
RESIDENTIAL                            
                                      For each unit with 2 or more bedrooms - 2
                                      including 1 covered; for each 1 bedroom
                                      or studio unit - 1.5 including 1 covered.
Apartments or multi-family dwellings  0.25 spaces per unit shall be provided
                                      for guest parking. Garages shall not be
                                      used for household storage and shall be
                                      kept available for parking
Boarding houses, lodging houses,      1 for each sleeping room or 1 for each
dormitories and fraternity houses     permanent occupant, whichever number is
which have sleeping rooms             greater
Mobile home court (RV)                1 for each trailer/RV space
                                      For each unit with 2 or more bedrooms - 2
                                      including 1 covered; for each 1 bedroom
Mobile home or manufactured           unit - 1 covered. 0.25 spaces per unit
home park                             shall be provided for guest parking.
                                      Adjacent on street parking spaces on a
                                      local street may be credited toward the
                                      guest parking requirement
Single-family dwelling (lots          2 including 1 covered
less than 15,000 square feet)
Single-family dwelling (lots          2
15,000 square feet or more)
Two-family dwelling                   For each unit - 2 including 1 covered
COMMERCIAL                             
                                      1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
Ambulance services                    area; plus 2 enclosed ambulance storage
                                      spaces
Artist studios                        1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
                                      area
Auction facility                      As required with conditional use permit
                                      1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Automobile washing facility           of sales, office, or lounge area; plus
                                      queue for 3 cars per washing station
Automotive gas station/service        1 for each 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for
shop or fuel islands                  each service bay (spaces in front of bays
                                      or pumps shall not be counted)
Automotive, mobile home, travel       1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
trailer, and/or farm implement sales  area; plus 1 per 500 square feet outdoor
                                      display
Automotive repair shop, body shop,    1 per 225 square feet of gross floor area
or tire shop
                                      1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area
Automotive storage                    of office space; plus 1 per 1,000 square
                                      feet of gross storage area
                                      1 for each 200 square feet of gross floor
Banks/financial institutions          area; plus queue for 4 cars per drive up
                                      window
Catering service                      1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Childcare - family                    1
Childcare - group                     2
Childcare - daycare center            3 for each classroom but not less than 9
                                      for the building
Churches and other places of          1 for each 5 seats
religious assembly
Clinic                                1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Club or lodge                         1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area
Commercial entertainment facilities:   
Auditoriums, sports arenas,           1 for each 3 seats
theaters and similar uses
                                      3 for each alley or lane, plus 1
Bowling alleys                        additional for each 100 square feet of
                                      the area used for restaurant, cocktail
                                      lounge, arcade area or similar use
Dance floors, skating rinks           1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area
                                      1 for each 4 persons' capacity, plus 1
Outdoor swimming pools, public        for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30 square
or community or club                  feet floor area used for seating
                                      purposes, whichever is greater
Tennis and racquetball clubs          3 per court
Communication facilities              1 per 500 square feet gross floor area
Convenience store                     1 per 250 square feet gross floor area;
                                      plus 1 for each 2 gasoline pumps
Detention facilities                  As specified by conditional use permit
Emergency health care                 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
                                      1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
Emergency services                    area; plus minimum of 2 enclosed vehicle
                                      storage spaces
                                      1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
Equipment rental and sales yard       area; plus 1 per 500 square feet outdoor
                                      display
Food and beverage sales               1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Health clubs, spas, and weight        1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
reduction salons
Home and business services            1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Hospitals                             1 for each bed
Hotels, motels                        1 for each sleeping room, plus 1 for each
                                      2 employees
Kennel                                1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Laboratories                          1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area
Laundromat                            1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area
                                      1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
Laundry                               area; plus queue for 3 cars per drive up
                                      window
                                      1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
Maintenance and repair services       area; plus 1 per 500 square feet of
                                      outdoor storage area
Mortuaries, funeral parlors, and      1 per 4 seats
similar type uses
                                      1 per 500 square feet of outside display/
Nursery, plant materials              lathe house/green house area, plus 1 per
                                      250 square feet gross floor area
Nursing/convalescent homes, sani-
tariums, children's homes, asylums    1 for each 3 beds
and similar uses
Offices, business and professional    1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Offices, medical and dental           1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Pawn shops                            1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Personal improvement                  1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Personal services                     1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Printing and/or blueprinting          1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
                                      1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
Restaurant with drive-through         area; plus queue space for 5 cars for
                                      drive up service
Restaurants, dining rooms, taverns,   1 per 150 square feet of gross floor
nightclubs, etc.                      area; plus 1 per 35 square feet dance
                                      floor
                                      1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
                                      area; in the DDA and TDA 1 per 1,000
Retail sales of large items such as   square feet of gross floor area shall be
furniture and appliances              required for any such use and on street
                                      parking shall be included in the minimum
                                      requirement
                                      1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                      area; in the DDA and TDA 1 per 500 square
Retail sales not listed under another feet of gross floor area shall be
use classification                    required for any such use and on street
                                      parking shall be included in the minimum
                                      requirement
Riding academies/stables              1 per 4 stalls
                                      1 per 400 square feet gross floor area of
Shop, contractors (and/or yard)       shop; plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of
                                      gross storage area (indoor and outdoor)
Storage (enclosed building and/or     1 per 1,000 square feet of gross storage
fenced area)                          area
Travel services                       1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Vet clinic (animal hospital)          1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
INDUSTRIAL                             
Automotive wrecking yard or           1 per 1,000 square feet gross storage
salvage                               area; plus 1 per 300 square feet office
                                      or sales area
                                      1 per 1,000 square feet gross area used
Industry (custom)                     for industrial purposes; plus 1 per 300
                                      square feet office or sales area
                                      1 per 750 square feet of gross floor area
Industry (limited)                    used for industrial purposes; plus 1 per
                                      300 square feet office or sales area
Industry (research and development)   1 per 500 square feet
Manufacturing facilities and          1 per 500 square feet gross area used for
processing plants                     manufacturing/processing; plus 1 per 300
                                      square feet office or sales area
                                      1 per 1,000 square feet gross area up to
Warehousing, wholesaling, distri-     20,000 square feet plus 1 per 2,000
bution and storage                    square feet gross area over 20,000 square
                                      feet
PUBLIC/SEMIPUBLIC                      
Business, technical and trade         1 for each 2 students
schools
Colleges, universities                1 for each 4 students
                                      1 per 300 square feet gross floor area;
Cultural facilities                   plus 1 per 90 square feet for area for
                                      assembly purposes
                                      2 for each classroom and 1 for every 5
Elementary and junior high schools    seats in the auditoriums or assembly
                                      halls
Government offices                    1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
High schools                          As required with conditional use permit
Kindergartens, childcare centers,     3 for each classroom, but not less than 9
nursery schools and similar uses      for the building
Libraries, museums and art            1 for each 400 square feet floor area
galleries
 
(Ord. 309, 1-27-1998; amd. Ord. 405, 1-23-2002; Ord. 661, 7-12-2011; Ord. 671,
6-26-2012; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
8-4-6: ADDITIONAL LOADING SPACE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Use Of Parking Space To Satisfy Requirements Prohibited: In no case
shall the required off street loading berths be part of the area used to
satisfy the off street parking requirements.
   B.   Location: The off street loading facilities required for the uses
mentioned shall not project into the public right of way or setback area.
   C.   Size: The size of an off street loading space shall not be less than
the following, exclusive of access platform and loading area:
 
Width:  12 feet
Length: 35 feet or 65 feet (see subsection E of this section)
Height: 15 feet
 
D. Access:
      1.   Convenient access to loading spaces from streets or alleys shall be
provided. They shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width.
      2.   Design and location of entrances and exits for required off street
loading areas shall be subject to review of the administrator.
   E.   Loading Space Requirements And Dimensions: Off street loading spaces
for commercial uses shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
 
Gross Floor Area  Quantity And Type1
  (Square Feet)
14,000 - 36,000   (1)B
36,001 - 60,000   (2)B
60,001 - 100,000  (2)B and (1)A
 
For each additional 75,000 or fraction thereof, an additional type A space will
be provided.
1.   Type B spaces are 35 feet in length.
      Type A spaces are 65 feet in length.
(Ord. 309, 1-27-1998)
CHAPTER 5
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Intent
8-5-2: Authority To Continue Nonconforming Use
8-5-3: Extension Or Enlargement Of Nonconforming Use
8-5-4: Repairs And Maintenance
8-5-5: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
8-5-6: Buildings Under Construction
8-5-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to permit nonconforming uses to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent
of this title that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-5-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING USE:
If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective date hereof that would not be allowed in
the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Additions Or Alterations: Unless permitted in accordance with section
8-5-2C of this title, no existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by
this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when a residential dwelling is
destroyed due to catastrophic fire or other natural disaster it may be rebuilt,
subject to reasonable regulation by the city, upon the structure's original
footprint. A permit for reconstruction shall be obtained within six (6) months
of the fire or natural disaster event.
   B.   Expansion: No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any
additional land area.
   C.   Change Of Nonconforming Use: Any nonconforming use of a structure and
land may, upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the council, be
changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that the council shall find
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the
council may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with other
provisions of this title. Upon the change of a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use through the issuance of a conditional use permit, the terms
and provisions of the conditional use permit shall prevail and the previous
nonconforming use rights shall no longer exist. If any term or condition of the
conditional use permit is violated, the conditional use permit may be revoked,
at which time the use will be considered an illegal use. Thereafter, the use
and zoning shall conform to those permitted or conditional uses allowed under
the zoning code in effect at that time.
   D.   Change To Conforming Use: Any structure, or structure and land in
combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   E.   Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: When a nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned
for more than one year (except when government action impedes access to the
premises), the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
   F.   Elimination Of Nonconforming Structure: Where nonconforming use status
applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the
structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land, except as
otherwise may be permitted in this section.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980; amd. Ord. 756, 8-23-2016; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
8-5-3: EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE:
Nonconforming uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted
uses in the districts in which such use is located. A nonconforming use shall
not be extended or enlarged after the effective date hereof by attachment on a
building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the
premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally
prohibited in the district in which such use is located. (Ord. 40, 10-1978,
rev. 9-1980)
8-5-4: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, that
the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of
such official. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-5-5: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   Single Nonconforming Lots Of Record: In any district in which single-
family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record (see definition
of "lot of record" in section
8-1-2 of this title) at the effective date hereof, notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lot must be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership
(see subsection B of this section). This provision shall apply even though such
lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district; provided, that hard dimensions and
requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
   B.   Nonconforming Lots Of Record In Combination: If two (2) or more lots or
a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the effective date hereof, and if all or part of the
lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width
and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for
the purposes of this title and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold
in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements
established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which
creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this title.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-5-6: BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and
upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. (Ord.
40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
CHAPTER 6
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose, Goals, And Objective
8-6-2: Effect Of Other Zoning Provisions
8-6-3: Ownership Requirements
8-6-4: Uses Permitted
8-6-5: Site And Structure Regulations And Requirements
8-6-5-1: Minimum Area
8-6-5-2: Common Area Open Space
8-6-5-3: Underground Utilities
8-6-5-4: Housing For Older Persons
8-6-5-5: Arrangement Of Residential Units
8-6-5-6: Arrangement Of Commercial And Office Uses
8-6-6: Procedure For Approval Of Planned Unit Development
8-6-6-1: Preapplication Meeting
8-6-6-2: Preliminary Development Plan
8-6-6-3: Final Development Plan
8-6-7: Natural Features Analysis
8-6-8: Transportation Analysis
8-6-9: Application Submission Standards
8-6-1: PURPOSE, GOALS, AND OBJECTIVE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish clear development
standards that will achieve the city of Eagle's vision for development as
presented in the Eagle comprehensive plan. The standards will be designed to
create livable communities that provide exemplary open spaces and recreational
opportunities, that encourage a diversification of housing types, styles and
living options for a wide range of income levels and lifestyles, and thereby
enhance the living experience within the city of Eagle.
   B.   Goals: To provide guidance and establish expectations for development
within the city of Eagle. The PUD provides clear standards and options for
development within the city including lot sizing, open space and the
diversification of housing types.
   C.   Objective: To guide land development and construction through the
planned unit development (PUD) to achieve the following:
      1.   A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of
housing and building types, lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area
requirements;
      2.   A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if
permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses, office uses and services;
      3.   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural
topography and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation,
and prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
      4.   A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through
conventional development resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets; and
      5.   A development pattern in harmony with the objective for land use
density, transportation and community facilities as presented in the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-2: EFFECT OF OTHER ZONING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of
this chapter and those of the other chapters of this title, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this chapter shall be
governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this title.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, planned unit
developments shall also be subject to the requirements set forth in chapter 2,
article A, "Design Review Overlay District", of this title; title 10, chapter
1, "Flood Control Regulations", of this code; and title 9, "Land Subdivisions",
of this code. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-3: OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner or a
person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the PUD.
The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner
or owners of property included in the development. However, the application may
be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property.
Before approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire project
shall be under single ownership or control. Documentation showing single
ownership or control shall be presented with the final development plan
application. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-4: USES PERMITTED:
All uses that may be allowed within the land use district are permitted within
a PUD. Also, up to ten percent (10%) of the gross land area may be directed to
other commercial, office, public and quasi-public uses that are not allowed
within the land use district; provided, that there is a favorable finding by
the council:
   A.   That the uses are appropriate with the residential uses;
   B.   That the uses are intended to serve principally the residents of the
PUD;
   C.   That the uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD;
   D.   That the uses be located and so designed as to provide direct access to
a collector or an arterial street without creating congestion or traffic
hazards; and
   E.   That a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the residential development
occurs prior to the development of the related commercial or office land uses.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
8-6-5-1: MINIMUM AREA:
A PUD for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less than
the following, however, the zoning administrator may permit the submittal of a
PUD which does not meet the minimum area requirements provided the council
finds that unique or special circumstances exist with regard to the site so as
to warrant the exception and that the PUD will be designed and operated in
accordance with the provisions of this title:
   A.   Three (3) acres for residential development.
   B.   Five (5) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or
office uses.
   C.   Ten (10) acres for commercial and office use.
   D.   Ten (10) acres for commercial and office use with subordinate
residential uses. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-5-2: COMMON AREA OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Required Common Area Open Space: A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of
the gross land area developed in any residential PUD project shall be reserved
for common area open space and recreational facilities for the residents or
users of the area being developed.
   B.   Active Open Space: A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the common
area open space shall be developed as active open space, as defined in title 9
of this code.
   C.   Compliance: All common area open space shall be evaluated for its
compliance with the following:
      1.   Landscaping: Streetscape, open spaces and plazas, use of existing
landscaping, pedestrianway treatment and recreational areas;
      2.   Siting: Visual focal points, use of existing physical features such
as topography, view, sun and wind orientation, circulation pattern, physical
environment.
   D.   Direct Access: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all lots shall be
designed to be adjacent to, or at a minimum, have direct access to common area
open space. The term "direct access" means all building lots are to be located
a maximum of two hundred fifty feet (250') away from a pathway connecting to a
common area open space lot. Building lots separated from a common area open
space lot by a local roadway shall be deemed to have achieved direct access.
The required planter strip located between the sidewalk and the street will not
be permitted to fulfill this requirement.
   E.   Dedication Of Land For Public Use: A required amount of common open
space land reserved under a PUD shall either be held in corporate ownership by
owners of the project area for the use of each owner who buys property within
the development or be dedicated to the public and retained as common open space
for parks, recreation and related uses. Public utility and similar easements
and right of way for watercourses and other similar channels are not acceptable
for common open space dedication unless such land or right of way is usable as
a trail or other similar purpose and approved by the council.
   F.   Maintenance: The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces
shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final development
plan. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-5-3: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems, are required
within the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances to these systems which can be
effectively screened may be exempted from this requirement if the council finds
that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the proposed
PUD. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-5-4: HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS:
   A.   To provide an incentive for communities for "older persons" (55 and
over - as defined by the federal fair housing act of 1999, or any subsequent
revision thereof) to be included within lower density residential PUDs the
council may authorize an increased residential density to allow a maximum of
three (3) dwelling units per gross acre within any zoning designation which
limits density to less than three (3) dwelling units per gross acre
specifically and solely for any portion of a PUD planned for a community for
"older persons". Such a density increase shall not be permitted in an A or A-
R zoning designation.
Character, identity, landscaping and architectural/siting variation are to be
incorporated into any community for "older persons". The community may consist
of single-family, two-family or multi-family dwelling units, or a mixture
thereof, and should be clustered and include amenities for "older persons".
Zero lot line development with common open space areas shall be the only type
of development permitted to be considered for such an increase. The zero lot
line development shall allow for minimal front and/or rear yard areas for each
residential unit if proposed by the developer and approved by the city.
However, the exterior side walls of all residential buildings shall abut a
common area lot line. The intent of the zero lot line development is to allow
for large areas of open space as opposed to a sea of side yard and rear yard
fences dividing residential lots. For purposes of this section, the minimum lot
size referenced elsewhere within this code shall be calculated by considering
the entire community for "older persons" as a whole. Also, the PUD shall be
designed so the community for "older persons" portion of the development does
not abut residential parcels adjacent to the PUD and sufficient buffering be
provided as may be required by the city. Stand alone communities consisting of
only housing for "older persons", as defined, may be allowed to request a gated
community with private roads.
The following site criteria must be met in order to consider approval of the
density increase for the community for "older persons":
      1.   For a planned unit development containing multiple housing types,
the land area containing housing exclusively for "older persons" shall not
encompass a land area exceeding sixteen percent (16%) of the total land area
within the entire planned unit development;
      2.   The total land area of the entire planned unit development shall be
a minimum of eighty (80) acres. The total land area of a stand alone planned
unit development consisting of only "older persons" housing shall be a maximum
of thirty (30) acres;
      3.   The entire PUD shall be served by either a municipal or community
water and sewer system;
      4.   Any limitations regarding individuals occupying the community for
"older persons" must be in accordance with local, state and federal
regulations, and must specifically be in accordance with the federal fair
housing act as revised in 1999, or any subsequent revision thereof. "Older
persons" shall be as defined within the aforementioned act;
      5.   The community for "older persons" shall be prohibited within any
100-year floodplain;
      6.   Open space requirements shall be as follows (where this section and
any other section of this title or title 9 of this code conflict or overlap,
this section shall control):
         a.   If the residential lots (not including the community for "older
persons" portion of the PUD) meet the minimum lot size requirement or are
reduced below the minimum lot size requirements such that no residential lot is
less than one acre in size, the entire PUD shall consist of a minimum of twenty
percent (20%) of open space.
         b.   If the residential lots (not including the community for "older
persons" portion of the PUD) are reduced below the minimum lot size requirement
such that any residential lot is less than one acre in size, the entire PUD
shall consist of a minimum of twenty six percent (26%) of open space.
         c.   Pathways, buffer areas, public park sites, public school sites,
and public golf courses and/or driving ranges proposed within any such PUD
shall be included, in their entirety, with any other open space areas proposed
when calculating the minimum open space required.
         d.   A minimum of one 5,000-square foot clubhouse/indoor recreation
facility shall be provided with the community for "older persons" portion of
the PUD.
      7.   The final plat shall include a note indicating that the portion of
land permitted for the density bonus for "older persons" shall be for "older
persons" as defined by the federal fair housing act as revised in 1999, or any
subsequent revision thereof.
      8.   Enforcement of the provisions of the federal fair housing act of
1999, or any subsequent revision thereof, must be the responsibility of the
homeowners' association and so noted in the CC&Rs. (Ord. 717, 4-8-2014)
8-6-5-5: ARRANGEMENT OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS:
To encourage land use plans to be submitted as a planned unit development (PUD)
so as to provide an enhanced integration of open space and a variety of housing
options, the following design criteria shall be considered by the city:
   A.   All lots within the PUD shall comply with the minimum lot size in the
underlying zone as established in section
8-2-4 of this title, except that a decrease in the minimum lot size may be
allowed if there is an "offsetting increase" of the same square footage in open
space and a favorable finding is made by the council that the smaller lots are
appropriately integrated into the overall design and that the building product
type is compatible with the PUD and surrounding area.
As an incentive to submit a PUD versus a standard subdivision, the initial
starting point for minimum open space, prior to any "offsetting increase" being
added, shall be the area that is equal to ten percent (10%) of the site. This
allowance shall only be permitted under the following criteria:
      1.   The total common area open space shall be equal to or greater than
twenty percent (20%), inclusive of the "offsetting increase" square footage.
      2.   A favorable finding by the council must be obtained assuring that
character, identity and architectural and siting variation are incorporated
into the development and that these factors make up a substantial contribution
to the objectives of the PUD. These design elements are as follows:
         a.   Landscaping, streetscape, open spaces and plazas, use of existing
landscaping, pedestrianway treatment and recreational areas;
         b.   Siting, visual focal points, use of existing physical features
such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation, circulation pattern,
physical environment, variation in building setbacks and building grouping
(such as clustering); and
         c.   Design features, street sections, architectural styles,
harmonious use of materials, parking areas broken by landscaping features and
varied use of housing types.
      3.   Setbacks for modified lots sizes shall conform with the closest
compatible base zone under section
8-2-4 of this title.
   B.   An area equal to the square footage utilized to create lots that are
larger than the minimum lot size may be credited toward the creation of lots
which are proportionally smaller than the minimum lot size in the underlying
zone established in section
8-2-4 of this title, provided:
      1.   There is a favorable finding by the council that the smaller lots
are appropriately integrated into the overall design and that the building
product type is compatible with the PUD and surrounding area.
      2.   The number of lots below the minimum lot size do not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the total number of lots within the development.
   C.   PUDs located within one-fourth (1/4) mile of an arterial roadway, as
identified on the transportation and pathway network plan in the Eagle
comprehensive plan, may be permitted to design and construct up to fifteen
percent (15%) of the units within the development as multi-family/attached
units with the following specifications:
      1.   A favorable finding is made by the council that the attached units
are appropriately integrated into the overall design and that the building
product type is compatible with the PUD and surrounding area.
      2.   A maximum of six (6) units can be attached in a single housing
group.
      3.   All attached units shall be located adjacent to common area open
space.
      4.   Attached units shall be located within the portion of the
development site that is in closest proximity to the arterial.
      5.   Design review approval is required for all attached units.
      6.   Height, area, and setback regulations for attached units shall be as
follows:
 
              Minimum Yard Setbacks                            
               Note Conditions A to E*
                                      Interior Side  Minimum    Minimum Lot
Maximum Height Front Rear Street Side (Outside Wall) Building   Area
                                                     Separation
35'            20'   25'  20'         10'            20'        2,000 square
                                                                feet per unit
 
* Note Conditions:
   A.   Additional 5 feet per story side setback for multi-story structures is
required.
   B.   The street side setback may be reduced to 0 feet for buildings which
are separated from the street by a minimum 25 foot wide common area open space
lot.
   C.   The rear setback may be reduced to 12.5 feet for buildings on lots
which are separated from other lots by a minimum 25 foot wide common area open
space lot.
   D.   The rear setback may be reduced to 0 feet for buildings on lots which
are separated from other lots by a minimum 50 foot wide common area open space
lot.
   E.   The rear setback may be reduced to 12.5 feet for buildings with rear
load (alley) garages.
 
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-5-6: ARRANGEMENT OF COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE USES:
When PUDs include commercial or office uses, buildings and establishments shall
be planned as groups having common parking areas and common ingress and egress
points in order to reduce the number of potential accident locations at
intersections. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of
the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design
of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal
traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may
be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the standpoint
of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas.
All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate
improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a
neat and orderly manner. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-6: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
When the PUD also qualifies as a subdivision, the processing of the conditional
use permit and subdivision application 1  shall occur at the same time. The
granting of a conditional use permit for a PUD shall require a preapplication,
the submission of a preliminary development plan and approval by the council of
a final development plan as specified within this title. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9 of this code.
8-6-6-1: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
The developer shall meet with the administrator prior to the submission of the
preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early
and informally the purpose and effect of this chapter and the criteria and
standards herein, and to familiarize the developer with the comprehensive plan,
zoning title, subdivision title 1  and such other plans and ordinances as
deemed appropriate. The developer may also meet with the commission or council
prior to submitting an application. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 9 of this code.
8-6-6-2: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Application For Preliminary PUD: An application for preliminary PUD
shall be filed with the administrator by a property owner or person having
existing interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. At a minimum,
the application shall contain the following information filed in triplicate:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, registered
engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan;
      3.   Legal description of property;
      4.   Description of existing use;
      5.   Zoning districts;
      6.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the zoning administrator,
showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the administrator may require to show the relationship of the PUD to
the comprehensive plan and to existing schools and other community facilities
and services;
      7.   A preliminary development plan, at a scale approved by the zoning
administrator, showing:
         a.   Topography at two foot (2') intervals;
         b.   Location and type of residential, commercial and industrial land
uses;
         c.   Layout, dimensions and names of existing and proposed streets;
         d.   Rights of way;
         e.   Utility easements;
         f.   Parks and community spaces;
         g.   Layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines;
         h.   Preliminary improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage,
electricity, telephone and natural gas and such other characteristics as the
administrator deems necessary;
      8.   Proposed schedule for the development of the site; and
      9.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in
question to initiate the proposed development plan within one year.
The application for preliminary PUD shall be accompanied by a written statement
by the developer setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the PUD would
be in the public interest.
   B.   Public Notice: The same provision for public hearing and legal
notification as required for conditional use permits, section
8-7-8 of this title, shall be followed.
   C.   Approval In Principle Of Preliminary Development Plan:
      1.   The commission shall review the preliminary development plan to
determine if it is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title;
whether the proposed development advances the general welfare of the community
and neighborhood and whether the benefits, combination of various land uses and
the interrelationship with the land uses in the surrounding area justify the
deviation from standard district regulations and its recommendation to the
council. The commission's recommendation in principle of the preliminary
development plan shall be necessary before an applicant may submit a final
development plan. Approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
      2.   The council shall consider all provisions of this chapter including
the general standards applicable to conditional use permits and criteria for
conditional uses before approving in principle a preliminary development plan.
The council may, upon the finding that unique or special circumstances exist
with regard to the preliminary development plan, consider specific deviations
from the requirements of this chapter provided conditions are placed on the PUD
to assure that it will be designed and operated in accordance with goals and
objectives of this chapter. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
8-6-6-3: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Application For Approval: Upon approval in principle of a preliminary
development plan, an application for approval of the final development plan
shall be filed with the administrator by at least one property owner or person
having a presently existing interest in the property for which the PUD is
proposed. Each application shall be signed by the owner or applicant, attesting
to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application for
final development plan. At a minimum, the applicant shall provide the following
information:
      1.   A survey of the proposed development site showing the dimensions and
bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography and existing features
of the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses;
      2.   All the information required on the preliminary development plan,
the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling
units, nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;
      3.   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated
residential population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population;
anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for
each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposed an exception from
the standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing development;
      4.   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary,
water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations;
waste disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of
earthwork required for site preparation and development;
      5.   Site plan showing buildings, various functional use areas,
circulation and their relationship;
      6.   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
      7.   Landscaping plans; and
      8.   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements
or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be
commonly owned and maintained.
   B.   Action By The Council: The council shall either approve, approve with
supplementary conditions or disapprove the application as presented. Upon
granting or denying the application, the council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The facts submitted with the application and presented to them
establish that:
         a.   The proposed development can be initiated within one year of the
date of approval;
         b.   Each individual phase of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent phase capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained and the uses proposed
will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will
have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations;
         c.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate
to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic
in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD;
         d.   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the
locations proposed;
         e.   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by
the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the PUD and the adopted policy of the council;
         f.   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
         g.   The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan;
and
         h.   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed;
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the council
shall direct the administrator to issue zoning permits only in accordance with
the approved final development plan and the supplementary conditions attached
thereto. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
   C.   Expiration And Extension Of Approval Period: The approval of a final
development plan for a PUD shall be for a period not to exceed one year to
allow for preparation and recording of the required subdivision plat and the
development of the project. If no construction has begun within one year after
approval is granted, the approved final development plan shall be void, unless
an extension of time is approved as provided herein.
      1.   A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of an
approved final development plan may be granted by the city council, at its sole
discretion, if the following findings are made:
         a.   No outstanding city code violations exist on the subject
property. If such violations exist, they may be conditioned by the city council
to be cured as a condition of the extension of time;
         b.   The final development plan, as previously approved, remains in
the best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this code between the
date of final development plan approval and the application date of the time
extension request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous situations which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates how the completion of the final development plan will commence
within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress for completion of the final development plan within the
year.
      2.   The city council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This section does not limit the number of extensions the city
council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in
subsection C1 of this section are met. Nothing in this section requires the
city council to grant any extension of an approval period. (Ord. 647, 11-23-
2010)
8-6-7: NATURAL FEATURES ANALYSIS:
   A.   Planned Unit Development (PUD) applications shall require a natural
features analysis (NFA) and natural features map(s) to be submitted with the
preliminary development plan as specified below:
      1.   The NFA shall outline the resources present on or within the
boundaries of the site, as well as the associated effects (direct and indirect)
of the proposed development on or to those resources. In addition to the
resources listed below, impacts to open space, wildlife habitat, and
agriculture (if applicable) shall be addressed.
      2.   The NFA shall be completed by a resource specialist, i.e. someone
showing sufficient education, experience, and/or credentials in the specific
resources outlined below. The minimum experience for the author of the NFA
shall be one of the following: a BS/BA from an accredited college or university
in a related field of study plus at least ten (10) years direct field
experience, a MS/MA from an accredited college or university in a related field
of study plus at least five (5) years direct field experience, or a Certified
Environmental Professional as defined by the American Society for Testing and
Materials or the National Association of Environmental Professionals. If the
resource specialist is a Certified Environmental Professional, they must also
provide evidence supporting their qualifications (academic or professional
experience) related to the resources identified below.
      3.   The NFA shall include a mitigation plan that adequately addresses
the impacts to the resources affected. As the associated impacts to the
resources are permanent in nature, the proposed mitigation action shall also be
in effect in perpetuity. The mitigation plan shall include adaptive management
principles (monitoring and alternative actions if unsuccessful), a funding
source and funds manger (if required), and justification that the plan would
effectively mitigate the impacts.
      4.   The NFA shall also include the following:
         a.   Hydrology: Analysis and map of natural drainage patterns and
water resources including an analysis of streams, natural drainage swales,
ponds or lakes, wetlands, floodplain areas or other areas subject to flooding,
poorly drained areas, permanent high ground water areas, and seasonal high
ground water areas throughout the site.
         b.   Soils: Analysis and map of types of soils present in the site
area including delineation of prime agricultural soil areas, aquifer recharge
soil areas, unstable soils most susceptible to erosion, and soils suitable for
development. The analysis of soils shall be based on the Ada County soils
survey (United States department of agriculture, natural resources conservation
service).
         c.   Topography: Analysis and map of the site's terrain including
topographic mapping of elevations with details sufficient to determine property
topography and any slopes. If a drainage channel borders the proposed
development, the contour lines shall extend the additional distance necessary
to include the entire drainage facility abutting the site. Additionally, if
determined by the administrator, for adequate analysis of impacts, contour
lines a distance determined by the administrator shall extend beyond the
proposed development boundary.
         d.   Vegetation: Analysis and map of existing vegetation of the site
including, but not limited to, existing trees, plants, and ground cover
species.
         e.   Wildlife: Analysis and map of existing or potential wildlife
species.
         f.   Sensitive Plant And Wildlife Species: Analysis and map of
sensitive plant and wildlife species of the site including, but not limited to,
those species listed in the Idaho conservation data center (state of Idaho
department of fish and game).
         g.   Historic Resources: Analysis and map of existing historic
resources as identified on the Ada County historic resources inventory and/or
the State of Idaho Historic Preservation Office.
         h.   Hazardous Areas: Analysis and map of all potentially hazardous
areas including, but not limited to, land that is unsuitable for development
because of flood threat, poorly drained areas, high ground water, steep slopes,
rock formation, buried pipelines, or other similar conditions likely to be
encountered.
         i.   Agriculture: Analysis and map of existing agricultural resources
including farming and ranching.
         j.   Map Features: The map shall show important features, including,
but not limited to, the following: outline of existing resources (see above)
and structures, watercourses, wetlands, power lines, telephone lines, railroad
lines, airport influence areas, any existing easements, municipal boundaries,
and section lines.
         k.   Other Supplemental Data: Other supplemental data may be required
by the city including, but not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Approximate location of any areas of fill.
            (2)   The elevations of all corner points on the boundaries of the
proposed plat.
            (3)   The presence of any significant natural or cultural
resources, i.e. wetlands or riparian areas, state or federally listed species
of concern (plants, insects, and wildlife), culturally significant sites for
Tribes, sites identified on the national register, or others.
   B.   Mitigation Plan: A mitigation plan is intended to off-set the spatial
and temporal impacts (direct and indirect) to existing resources (see above) of
a site from a proposed action. Mitigation actions should be similar in scope
(size or intensity), timeframe (permanent impacts addressed in perpetuity), and
location (within in ten (10) miles of the Eagle City limits). This can be
accomplished a number of ways, including but not limited to (examples only):
      1.   Permanently protecting an equivalent amount of land being impacted:
this can be accomplished with local land banks, development of off-site
conservation easements, or other similar approaches using existing lands that
could otherwise be developed in the future;
      2.   Increased habitat or use value of residual lands: increasing the
value of the residual lands within a specified project area to offset the loss
of open space, wildlife habitat, or ag lands. For example, if one hundred (100)
acres were being developed, the developer could set aside twenty-five (25)
acres (seventy- five (75) acres developed) and increase the value of the
residual habitat through enhancement measures so that the residual lands would
provide the same level of habitat value as the 100 acres;
      3.   A combination of the two actions above coupled with a community
education plan;
      4.   Conservation and Education Program (CEP): payment on a per lot basis
to the City's Conservation and Education Program with fees established by
resolution of the city council;
      5.   Or any other proposed mitigation that adequately mitigates impacts
to resources as determined by the city council. (Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
8-6-8: TRANSPORTATION ANALYSIS:
Planned Unit Development (PUD) applications shall require an analysis of
impacts to the regional transportation system resulting from the proposed land
uses and population prepared in coordination with, as applicable, the Idaho
Transportation Department, Ada County Highway District, Community Planning
Association Of Southwest Idaho, Valley Regional Transit, and any other local
jurisdiction(s) having authority over the public highways and streets
materially affected by the planned community. The traffic impact study shall be
submitted to ITD and ACHD thirty (30) days prior to submission of the PUD
application to the city. (Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
8-6-9: APPLICATION SUBMISSION STANDARDS:
   A.   Qualifications: All technical reports and recommendations shall be
prepared under the supervision of and signed by a qualified expert in each
relevant field based on the following qualifications:
      1.   Hazardous Areas, Hydrology, And Soils: Professional engineer
licensed in the state of Idaho;
      2.   Economist: A professional who demonstrates experience in community
development, land use, and/or public administration, specifically with regard
to land development feasibility, public services provision, public finance
policy, and the economic and fiscal impacts of private development. A graduate
degree in economics, public finance, or public administration and at least
seven (7) years of experience; or a bachelor's degree in economics, public
finance, or public administration and at least ten (10) years of experience; or
a bachelor's degree and at least fifteen (15) years of experience;
      3.   Planner: A professional who is engaged in professional planning,
either currently or in the past, as defined by the American Institute Of
Certified Planners (AICP), and who has completed a graduate degree in planning,
from a program accredited by the planning accreditation board (PAB), plus two
(2) years of professional planning experience; or a bachelor's degree in
planning, from a PAB accredited program, plus three (3) years of professional
planning experience; or any other postgraduate, graduate or undergraduate
degree plus four (4) years of professional planning experience; or no college
degree plus eight (8) years of professional planning experience;
      4.   Transportation: A professional engineer licensed in the state of
Idaho;
      5.   Historical And Cultural Resource Findings: Archaeologists, history
and architectural history consultants with submitted documentation that they
have demonstrated that they meet the secretary of the interior's 36 CFR 61
qualifications;
      6.   Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Plan And Habitat Analysis: A
professional(s) whose experience demonstrates considerable knowledge of
planning and conducting field research for wildlife habitat projects, and
formulating specific plans to mitigate wildlife habitat impacts. For the
wildlife component, a graduate degree in wildlife biology or a closely related
field and at least five (5) years of experience; or a bachelor's degree in
wildlife biology or a closely related field and at least ten (10) years of
experience; or a bachelor's degree and at least fifteen (15) years of
experience. For the vegetative component, a graduate degree in botany, plant
ecology, or closely related field and at least five (5) years of experience; or
a bachelor's degree in botany, plant ecology, or closely related field and at
least ten (10) years of experience; or a bachelor's degree and at least fifteen
(15) years of experience;
      7.   Wetlands: A certified wetlands specialist or other qualified
individual meeting the Army Corps of Engineers Standards;
      8.   Slope Stabilization: A professional engineer licensed in the state
of Idaho;
      9.   Revegetation: A licensed landscape architect or restoration
specialist whose experience demonstrates considerable knowledge in the
implementation and execution of slope stabilization, revegetation projects, and
vegetation management; and
      10.   Groundwater: An individual or entity identified on the department
of environmental quality (DEQ) environmental consulting firms list (available
on the DEQ website) or a hydrologist with technical background and experience
in planning, conducting, and coordinating complex hydrologic studies in
groundwater modeling and analysis.
      11.   Wildland Fire Specialist: Certified wildland fire specialist or
individuals recognized by local fire districts as qualified specialist.
   B.   Digital Submissions:
      1.   Digital submissions, in a format approved by the administrator,
shall accompany all paper submissions; and
      2.   Digital mapping shall be formatted to be compatible with the city's
geographic information system.
   C.   Mapping: All maps shall have a legend, north arrow, scale, title and
author. All data or shape files used to develop the map(s) will be submitted
with appropriate meta and/or attribute data in ARC-GIS or similar city-approved
format. (Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
CHAPTER 7
ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
8-7-1: Zoning Administrator
8-7-2: Zoning Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
8-7-3: Conditional Uses
8-7-3-1: Purpose And Interpretation Of Conditional Use
8-7-3-2: General Standards For Conditional Uses
8-7-3-3: Public Sites And Open Spaces
8-7-3-4: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
8-7-3-5: Conditional Use Permit
8-7-4: Appeals, Variances And Requests For Reconsideration
8-7-4-1: Administrative Appeals
8-7-4-2: Variances
8-7-4-3: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
8-7-4-4: Procedure For Approval Of A Variance
8-7-4-5: Request For Reconsideration By Affected Persons
8-7-5: Amendments
8-7-6: Zoning Upon Annexation
8-7-7: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
8-7-8: Notice Requirements
8-7-9: Violations And Penalties
8-7-10: Application Deemed Null And Void
8-7-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Position Created, Appointment: For the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of titles 8, 9, and 10 of the Eagle City Code, a zoning
administrator is hereby created, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
consent of the council. The zoning administrator or the zoning administrator's
designee shall administer titles 8, 9, 10, and 11 of the Eagle City Code.
   B.   Duties: For the purpose of this title, the administrator shall have the
following duties:
      1.   To advise interested persons of the zoning ordinance provisions of
this title;
      2.   To notify the news media regarding matters of public interest;
      3.   To aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications;
      4.   To issue zoning permits, certificate of occupancy permits,
notifications and such similar administrative duties;
      5.   To investigate all violations of this title and notify in writing
the person responsible for such violation(s), ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation; and
      6.   To assist the council in carrying out the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020)
8-7-2: ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Zoning Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: No building or other structure shall be erected,
moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or
land be established or changed in use without a permit therefor issued by the
administrator. Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity with the
provisions of this title.
      2.   Application For Permit: The application for zoning permit shall be
signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all
information supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state
that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun or is not
substantially completed within one year. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:
         a.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
         b.   Legal description of property;
         c.   Existing use;
         d.   Proposed use;
         e.   Zoning district;
         f.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape
of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings
on the lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s)
or alteration;
         g.   Building heights;
         h.   Number of off street parking spaces or loading berths;
         i.   Number of dwelling units;
         j.   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
         k.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for, the enforcement of this title.
      3.   Approval Of Permit, Issuance: Within thirty (30) days after the
receipt of an application, the administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application in conformance with the provisions of this title. All zoning
permits shall, however, be conditional upon the commencement of work within one
year. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
administrator after the administrator shall have marked such copy either as
approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy and
one copy of plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the administrator.
The administrator shall issue a placard, to be posted in a conspicuous place on
the property in question, attesting to the fact that the use or alteration is
in conformance with the provisions of this title.
      4.   Expiration and Revocation of Permit: If the work described in any
zoning permit has not begun within one year from the date of issuance thereof,
said permit shall expire. It shall be revoked by the administrator and written
notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. Additionally, the
administrator may, in writing, suspend or revoke a zoning permit and may issue
a stop work order; upon any violation of any requirement, law, regulation, code
or ordinance related to property for which the zoning permit has been issued;
whenever the permit is found to have been issued in error; or on the basis of
incorrect information having been supplied to the city.
   B.   Certificates Of Occupancy:
      1.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: It shall be unlawful to use or
occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or
part thereof thereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued therefor by the administrator stating that the
proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title
and with all conditional provisions that may have been imposed.
      2.   Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the administrator for a period not exceeding six (6)
months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its
completion.
   C.   Unlawful Acts:
      1.   Failure To Obtain Permit Or Certificate: Failure to obtain a zoning
permit or certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this title.
      2.   Use And Construction Contrary To Plans: Zoning permits or
certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the administrator authorize only the use and arrangement set forth
in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 40, 10-1978,
rev. 9-1980; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-7-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
8-7-3-1: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION OF CONDITIONAL USE:
   A.   Purpose: It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of
uses are appearing daily, and that many of these and some other more
conventional uses possess characteristics of such unique and special nature
relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public
facilities that each specific use must be considered individually.
   B.   Interpretation Of Conditional Use: Any use which is permitted as a
conditional use in a district under the terms of this title shall not be deemed
a nonconforming use in such district, but shall, without further action, be
considered a conforming one.
   C.   Exceptions or waivers of standards within Title 8 or Title 9, other
than use, inclusive of the subject matter addressed by Section
8-7-4-2 or Section
9-6-3 “Variances” may be permitted through issuance of a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-7-3-2: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES:
The commission/council shall review the particular facts and circumstances of
each proposed conditional use in terms of the following standards and shall
find adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
   A.   Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established in section
8-2-3 of this title for the zoning district involved, or section
8-7-3-1 (C) of this chapter, or as may otherwise be established by this title;
   B.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives
or with any specific objective of the comprehensive plan and/or this title;
   C.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of
the same area;
   D.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses;
   E.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools; or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
   F.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
   G.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare or odors;
   H.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
   I.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of agricultural
lands or any natural open space, scenic, cultural, or historic feature of major
importance without adequate mitigation as determined by the city council. (Ord.
40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021; Ord. 868, 8-8-2022)
8-7-3-3: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following:
   A.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use shown on the future acquisition map, as authorized
in section 67-6517, Idaho Code, is located in whole or in part within a
proposed development, the commission shall notify the appropriate public agency
concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of the
date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to suspend
consideration on the permit for sixty (60) days from the date of the request;
however, if an agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days, the commission
shall resume consideration of the conditional use application.
   B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the development.
   C.   Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and
large scale developments, the council may require sufficient park or open space
facilities of acceptable size, location and site characteristics that may be
suitable for the proposed development. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-7-3-4: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
In granting any conditional use, the council may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-7-3-5: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Application For Conditional Use Permit: An application for conditional
use permit shall be filed with the administrator by at least one owner or
lessee of property for which such conditional use is proposed. At a minimum,
the application shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of existing use;
      4.   Zoning district;
      5.   Description of proposed conditional use;
      6.   A plan for the proposed site for the conditional use showing the
location of all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the commission may require to
determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and requirements of
this title; and
      7.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property;
the effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on
adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and
other properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to
the comprehensive plan.
   B.   Supplemental Information: Prior to granting a conditional use permit,
the council may request studies from the planning staff or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects on the proposed
conditional use. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
   C.   Procedure For Approval Of Conditional Use Permit: The commission shall
hold a public hearing on each conditional use permit application as specified
in section
8-7-8 of this chapter. The council may approve, conditionally approve or deny a
conditional use permit under the conditions as herein specified and considering
such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this title.
      1.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a conditional use permit,
the commission shall hold a public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. That public hearing shall be scheduled within
thirty (30) days of receipt of an application. Notice shall be provided as
required by section
8-7-8 of this chapter.
      2.   Action By The Commission And Council: Within fifteen (15) days after
the public hearing, the commission shall transmit its recommendation of
approval or denial to the council. Within forty five (45) days after receipt of
the commission's recommendation, the council shall approve or deny the
application. The city council shall follow notice and hearing requirements set
forth in section
8-7-8 of this chapter. If the application is approved or approved with
modifications, the council shall direct the administrator to issue a
conditional use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the council
for approval.
Upon granting or denying an application, the council shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit. (Ord. 270, 5-29-1996)
      3.   Notice To Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a decision has been
rendered, the administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of
the action on the request.
   D.   Conditions Of Permit: Upon the granting of a conditional use permit,
conditions may be attached to said permit including, but not limited to, those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
      3.   Controlling the duration of development;
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services; and
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this title. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
   E.   Transfer Of Permit: A conditional use permit is not transferable from
one parcel of land to another. Conditional use permits are an entitlement to
the specific property on which the approval was granted and upon any transfer
of title for the property the conditional use permit transfers to the new owner
(s) without further application or approval, provided, however, the new owner
(s) shall be bound by the same conditions of approval applicable to the
conditional use permit that was transferred. The new owner(s) shall provide
written acknowledgement to the city accepting the terms of the transferred
conditional use permit within sixty (60) days of purchase and receipt by the
new owners of actual notice of the existence of the conditional use permit for
the parcel, whichever event occurs later; otherwise, the permit may be declared
void after notice and public hearing before the city council.
   F.   Effect Of Issuance On Other Conditional Uses: A conditional use permit
shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other
conditional use permits.
   G.   Time Limitations, Extensions:
      1.   Once a conditional use is approved and exercised, said use may
continue without further temporal constraints, provided that the use complies
with its intended purpose, or city approved modifications thereafter, and does
not violate any codes, subject to the following:
         a.   An approved conditional use permit shall be valid for a term
approved and conditioned by the city council.
         b.   An extension of the time limit for an approved conditional use
may be granted by the city council, at its sole discretion, without further
notice and hearing, if the following findings are made:
            (1)   There are no outstanding city code or conditional use permit
violations on the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be
conditioned by the city council to be cured as a condition of the extension of
time;
            (2)   The conditional use, as previously approved, remains in the
best interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
            (3)   There have been no significant changes to this code between
the date of conditional use approval and the date of the time extension request
that would require substantial modifications to the project;
            (4)   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or
have been discovered on the project site; and
            (5)   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate.
   H.   Modification Of Permit: A conditional use permit may be modified by the
city council after public notice has been provided in accordance with section
8-7-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 647, 11-23-2010; amd. Ord. 827, 10-22-2020)
8-7-4: APPEALS, VARIANCES AND REQUESTS FOR RECONSIDERATION:
8-7-4-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
Zoning Administrator decisions may be appealed to the City Council. Any such
appeal shall be filed in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   Who May Appeal: Appeals may be filed by anyone affected by the
decision.
   B.   Appeal Period: Any appeal shall be filed within fourteen (14) calendar
days after the date of the Zoning Administrator's written decision. If the last
day for appeal is a day city hall is closed, the appeal period shall extend to
the next day city hall is open. Appeals filed beyond the appeal period shall
not be accepted.
   C.   Form of Appeal: An appeal shall be filed in writing with the City
Clerk. The appeal shall clearly and concisely state the extent of the appeal,
the applicable code section(s) being appealed, the reason and grounds for the
appeal, and the specific impact on the appellant. The appeal shall be
accompanied by the filing fee established by the City Council.
   D.   Effect of Appeal: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action taken unless the administrator certifies to the council after the notice
of appeal is filed that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay
would, in the administrator’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the council or by a court based upon
an application, with notice to the administrator showing due cause.
   E.   Decision on the Appeal: The City Council may affirm, affirm in part,
reverse, or modify the decision being appealed. The City Council may adopt
additional conditions of approval as the facts warrant. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev.
9-1980; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-7-4-2: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority To Grant Variances: The council may authorize, in specific
cases, such variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same
district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship.
   B.   Application And Standards For Variance: A variance from the terms of
this title shall not be granted by the council unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted to the administrator and the council
containing:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
      4.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this title;
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant; and
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
A variance shall not be granted unless the council makes specific findings of
the fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it which
support conclusions that the above mentioned standards and conditions have been
met by the applicant. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-7-4-3: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
Under no circumstances shall the council grant an appeal or variance to allow a
use not permissible under the terms of this title in the district involved, or
any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this title in
said district. In granting any appeal or variance, the council may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violation
of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the appeal or variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
8-7-4-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A VARIANCE:
   A.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a variance, public hearings
in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall be
held. The public hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be
scheduled after receipt of an application. The commission shall follow the
notice requirements provided by section
8-7-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Action By Commission And Council: After the public hearing, the
commission shall transmit its recommendation of approval, conditional approval
or denial to the council. The city council shall follow the notice requirements
provided by section
8-7-8 of this chapter and, after receipt of the commission's recommendation,
the council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the request for appeal
or variance.
Upon granting or denying an application, the council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
variance. (Ord. 270, 5-29-1996)
   C.   Notice To Applicant: After a decision has been rendered, the
administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on
the request. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-7-4-5: REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION BY AFFECTED PERSONS:
   A.   Appeals Of City Council Decisions: For any application required or
authorized pursuant to the Local Land Use Planning Act, an affected person may
seek judicial review of any final decision of the city council.
      1.   A decision of the city council is not a final decision until it has
been rendered in writing.
      2.   Any affected person seeking judicial review shall first seek
reconsideration of the final decision within fourteen (14) calendar days. Such
written request shall be provided to the city clerk along with any such fee as
adopted by resolution of the city council and shall identify specific
deficiencies in the decision for which reconsideration is sought and the legal
basis for relief.
      3.   In the event no action is taken by the city council within sixty
(60) calendar days of receipt of a request for reconsideration the request is
deemed denied. If the city council chooses to reconsider the final decision,
the city council shall provide the applicant or affected person a written
decision on such action. The city council may then reopen the matter and have
additional public hearing(s) if it believes additional information is
necessary. The notice for public hearing shall comply with section
8-7-8 of this title.
      4.   Notice To Applicant Or Affected Person: Within ten (10) calendar
days after the written decision has been rendered, the administrator shall
provide the applicant or affected person with a written notice of the action on
the request.
      5.   A failure to request reconsideration is a failure of the applicant
or affected party to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev.
9-1980; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-7-5: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare
or good zoning practices require, the council may, by ordinance after receipt
of recommendation thereon from the commission and subject to procedures
provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations,
restrictions and boundaries or classification of property.
   B.   Initiation Of Zoning Amendments: Amendments to this title may be
initiated in one of the following ways:
      1.   By adoption of a motion by the commission;
      2.   By adoption of a motion by the council; or
      3.   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who
has existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment.
   C.   Application For Amendment: Applications for amendments to the official
zoning map, adopted as part of this title by reference, shall contain at least
the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the council;
      3.   Present land use;
      4.   Present zoning district;
      5.   Proposed use;
      6.   Proposed zoning district;
      7.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the administrator may require;
      8.   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered;
      9.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the
comprehensive plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with
the surrounding area; and
      10.   A fee as established by the council. (Ord. 256, 2-7-1995)
   D.   General Procedure For Amendments: Zoning districts shall be amended in
the following manner:
      1.   Request for an amendment to this title shall be submitted by the
commission which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested.
      2.   Request shall be reviewed by the commission and shall be evaluated
to determine if such action shall create a demand for public infrastructure
that is not currently available for the site including, but not limited to,
municipal sewer and water services.
      3.   If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the commission may recommend and the council may adopt or reject the amendment
under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided.
      4.   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted comprehensive
plan, the request shall be submitted to the planning or planning and zoning
commission, or in its absence, the council, which shall recommend, and the
council may adopt or reject an amendment to the comprehensive plan, under the
notice and hearing procedures provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code. After
the comprehensive plan has been amended, this title may then be amended as
hereinafter provided for. (Ord. 530, 10-18-2005)
   E.   Public Hearings, Notice: The commission shall hold a public hearing and
make recommendations on proposed zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may
consist of text or map revisions.
      1.   Zoning Text Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a
zoning text amendment to the council, shall conduct at least one public hearing
in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The
commission shall follow the notice requirements provided in section
8-7-8 of this chapter. Following the commission's hearing, if the commission
makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further
notice and hearing shall be provided before the commission forwards the
amendment with its recommendation to the council.
      2.   Zoning Map Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a zoning
map amendment that is in accordance with the comprehensive plan to the council,
shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. The commission shall follow the notice
requirements provided in section
8-7-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 270, 5-29-1996)
   F.   Action By Commission:
      1.   Recommendation By The Commission: Within forty five (45) days from
the receipt of the proposed amendment, the commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the council. The commission may recommend that the amendment
be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment
requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied. The commission
shall ensure that any recommendations for amendments are in accordance with the
following findings:
         a.   The proposed zoning ordinance amendment is in accordance with the
comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives and the future land use
map;
         b.   The information provided from the agencies having jurisdiction
over the public facilities needed for this site indicate that adequate public
facilities exist, or are expected to be provided, to serve any and all uses
allowed on this property under the proposed zone;
         c.   The proposed zone is compatible with the zoning and uses in the
surrounding area;
         d.   No nonconforming uses will be created with this rezone.
   G.   Action By Council:
      1.   The Council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment
to this title as recommended by the commission, shall conduct at least one
public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission.
Following the Council hearing, if the Council makes a material change from what
was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the Council adopts the amendment. The City Council shall make
findings as required in subsection F of this section. (Ord. 530, 10-18-2005)
      2.   Upon granting or denying an application to amend this title, the
Council shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
amendment.
   H.   Effect Of Amendment Approved: In the event the Council shall approve an
amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made part of this title upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance.
   I.   Resubmission Of Application: No application for a reclassification of
any property which has been denied by the Council shall be resubmitted in
either substantially the same form or with reference to substantially the same
premises for the same purposes within a period of one year from the date of
such final action, unless there is an amendment in the comprehensive plan which
resulted from a change in conditions as applying to the specific property under
consideration. (Ord. 256, 2-7-1995; amd. Ord. 530, 10-18-2005)
8-7-6: ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the Council shall request and
receive a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the
Planning Commission and the Zoning Commission, on the proposed comprehensive
plan and changes to this title for the unincorporated area. Each commission and
the City Council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures for Zoning
Ordinance map amendments set forth in section
8-7-8 of this chapter. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an
ordinance of annexation, the Council shall amend the comprehensive plan and
this title. (Ord. 270, 5-29-1996)
8-7-7: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a
collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals, variances,
conditional use permits, plan approvals and other matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this title requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses 1 . The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the Office of the Administrator and may be altered or
amended only by the Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses
have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ord. 40, 10-1978, rev. 9-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-4 of this Code.
8-7-8: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Hearings: On every land use action for which notice is provided
below, both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall hold
a public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. No notice of a City Council hearing shall be given prior to receiving a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Following any hearing,
if a material change from what was advertised in the notice and presented at
the public hearing is proposed, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the final decision is made.
   B.   Neighborhood Meetings: Applicants shall conduct a neighborhood meeting
within six (6) months of the application submittal date for comprehensive plan
amendments, annexations, rezones, variances, conditional uses, zoning ordinance
map amendments, and subdivisions. A neighborhood meeting shall not be required
for City initiated applications.
      1.   Meeting Requirements:
         a.   It shall be the sole duty of the applicant to provide mailed
written notice, in a form deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator, to
all property owners or purchasers of record owning property within five hundred
(500) feet of the exterior boundary of the application property. Notice by mail
shall also be provided to homeowners’ associations that are contiguous to the
exterior boundary of the application property. Mailed notice to neighborhood
associations and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed
change shall be provided, as determined by the zoning administrator. The
neighborhood meeting written notice shall be provided by mail a minimum of
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled neighborhood meeting. For
application properties which are five hundred (500) acres in size or larger and
include two hundred fifty (250) or fewer dwelling units, notice of the
neighborhood meeting shall be provided to all property owners and purchasers of
record owning property within one-half (½) mile of the exterior boundary of the
application property. For application properties which are five hundred (500)
acres in size or larger and include more than two hundred fifty (250) dwelling
units, notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be provided to all property
owners and purchasers of record owning property within two (2) miles of the
exterior boundary of the application property.
         b.   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is for the applicant to
provide project information to the property owners or purchasers of record
mentioned in subsection B1a of this section.
            (1)   Meetings shall be on a Saturday between ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., or on a weekday between six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. The meeting shall not be on a federal
holiday, a federal holiday weekend or the day before or after a federal holiday
or federal holiday weekend.
            (2)   The meeting shall be held either on the application property
or at a location with suitable meeting facilities if such facilities are
located within the city of Eagle planning boundary as identified within the
comprehensive plan.
         c.   The neighborhood meeting shall be conducted prior to the
submittal of the application.
         d.   Application materials shall include a written verification of the
neighborhood meeting and a dated copy of notice provided to affected property
owners.
   C.   Published And Mailed Notice For Comprehensive Plan And Zoning And
Subdivision Ordinance Text Enactments, Amendments, And Repeals: At least
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to each hearing, notice of the time and place
of the hearing and a summary of the proposed action shall be made available to
other papers, radio, and television stations serving the city for use as a
public service announcement. Notice shall be sent to all political subdivisions
providing services within the city, including school districts, at least
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing.
   D.   Published And Mailed Notice For Annexation, Comprehensive Plan Land Use
Map Amendment, Zoning Ordinance Map Amendment, Development Agreement,
Conditional Use Permit, Variance, Planned Unit Development, And Subdivision: At
least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to each hearing, notice of the time and
place of the hearing and a summary of the request and proposed action shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
city. Notice shall also be made available to other papers, radio, and
television stations serving the city for use as a public service announcement.
At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the hearing, additional notice
shall be provided to political subdivisions providing services, including
school districts. Notice by mail shall be provided to all property owners and
purchasers of record owning property within five hundred (500) feet of the
exterior boundary of the application property. Notice by mail shall also be
provided to homeowners' associations that are contiguous to the exterior
boundary of the application property. Mailed notice to neighborhood
associations and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed
change shall be provided as determined by the zoning administrator. For
application properties which are five hundred (500) acres in size or larger and
includes two hundred fifty (250) dwelling units or fewer, notice of the public
hearing shall be provided to all property owners and purchasers of record
owning property within one-half (½) mile of the exterior boundary of the
application property. For application properties which are five hundred (500)
acres in size or larger and include more than two hundred fifty (250) dwelling
units, notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all property owners
and purchasers of record owning property within two (2) miles of the exterior
boundary of the application property.
   E.   Posted Notice: Except as noted within this subsection, any time notice
is required under subsection D of this section, the land being considered shall
be posted in a manner as determined by the zoning administrator, not less than
ten (10) calendar days prior to the planning and zoning commission hearing and
again not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the city council hearing.
For comprehensive plan land use map amendments and/or zoning ordinance map
amendments consisting of changes to more than ten (10) parcels of land posted
notice shall not be required unless all parcels under request for amendment are
contiguous and if the parcels abut a public right of way. In such cases a
minimum of one (1) four foot by eight foot (4' x 8') plywood sign shall be
placed adjacent to the right of way. Otherwise, three (3) notices in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation, with the third notice
appearing a minimum of ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing,
shall be published. Posted notice shall not be required for City initiated
applications. Except as noted herein, posting of the property must be in
substantial compliance with the following requirements:
   1.   Signage Requirements:
      a.   The sign(s) shall consist of four foot by four foot (4' x 4')
plywood or other hard surface mounted on two (2) four by four (4 x 4) posts in
such a manner that it is perpendicular to the roadway along which the sign is
posted.
      b.   Centered at the top of the four foot by four foot (4' x 4') sign
board(s) in six inch (6") letters shall be the words "Public Notice". In
addition, each sign will inform the public of the name of the applicant, and if
applicable, the proposed development, the date, time, place, and nature of the
public hearing and a summary of the proposal to be considered. Each sign shall
be painted white and the letters shall be painted black and shall appear on
both sides. An example of this sign is listed below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cc83bda73e097be2f37482d7e2b07596312e63f6/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1290.png]
 
         c.   Size Of Signs for Conditional Use Permits Made Pursuant to
Subsections
8-3-2 (E),
8-5-2 (C), and
8-7-3-1 (C): In lieu of the conditions required within this section the Zoning
Administrator may, upon finding that adequate notice will be provided, permit
the use of smaller, weather-resistant sign(s) to inform the public of the name
of the applicant, the date, time, place, and nature of the public hearing and a
summary of the proposal to be considered.
      2.   Location Of Signs: The sign(s) shall be posted on the land being
considered along each roadway that is adjacent to it. The signs shall be
located on the property outside of the public right-of-way, if they can be so
located and remain clearly visible from the roadway; otherwise, the consent of
the owner of the right-of-way must be obtained and the sign(s) located therein.
In the event that the land being considered includes properties with five
hundred feet (500') or more of road frontage, a sign shall be placed on each
end of the property roadway frontage. If the property includes a corner lot,
three (3) signs shall be posted, one on the corner and one near each end of the
property roadway frontages.
      3.   Upon finding that adequate notice will be provided, the Zoning
Administrator may waive the size and location requirements of subsection E(1)
and E(2) of this section.
      4.   Certification: The applicant shall submit a certification to the
City Clerk no later than seven (7) days prior to the hearing as to what, where,
and when sign(s) were posted. Unless the certification is received by such
date, the hearing will be canceled.
      5.   Sign Removal; Penalty: No later than three (3) days after the
noticed hearing and any continuation thereof, sign(s) must be removed. A
penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day shall be imposed against each
applicant for late removal of the signs. (Ord. 312A, 2-10-1998; amd. Ord. 503,
1-11-2005; Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; Ord. 809, 4-9-2019; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord.
827, 10-22-2020; Ord. 888, 11-9-2022; Ord. 907, 3-26-2024)
8-7-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Complaints Regarding Violations: Whenever a violation of this title
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be
filed with the Administrator. The Administrator shall properly record such
complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this
title. (Ord. 270, 5-29-1996)
   B.   Penalties: The City Attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever
criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of
this title. Penalties for failure to comply with or violations of the
provisions of this title shall be as follows:
Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any
of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official
or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Council or any other public official or private citizen from
taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation
of this title or of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 809, 4-9-2019)
8-7-10: APPLICATION DEEMED NULL AND VOID:
Any application subject to this code for which the applicant does not provide
the required submittal information as specified in writing by the Zoning
Administrator shall be deemed null and void 60 days after the request is made
by the city if the information is not provided. This deadline may be extended
at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator if it is determined that the
applicant is making a good faith effort to produce the requested information.
Once deemed null and void, the application fees shall not be refundable and a
new application and new fees will be required. (Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
8-8-1: Eagle Area Of City Impact Boundary
8-8-2: Annexation To Occur Only In Area Of City Impact (Rep. by Ord. 444, 6-8-
2004)
8-8-3: Applicable Plan Policies And Ordinances
8-8-4: Amendment Of Plan Policies And Ordinances
8-8-5: Zoning Within The Eagle City Area Of City Impact
8-8-6: Renegotiation Of Plan Policies And Chapter Application Provisions
8-8-1: EAGLE AREA OF CITY IMPACT BOUNDARY:
   A.   The Eagle area of city impact is the area designated on the Eagle area
of city impact boundary map dated July 8, 2004, incorporated herein by
reference and as may be amended from time to time, copies of which are
available at the Eagle city hall and the Ada County development services
department.
   B.   In case a property under single ownership is divided by the boundary
line of the Eagle area of city impact, if such line divides such property so
that one or both of the parts has a depth of three hundred feet (300') or less,
such part may be included in the jurisdiction within which the remainder and
larger portion of the property is located.
   C.   The city shall not annex the land designated in ordinance 275. (Ord.
475, 6-22-2004)
8-8-2: ANNEXATION TO OCCUR ONLY IN AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
(Rep. by Ord. 444, 6-8-2004)
8-8-3: APPLICABLE PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   The Eagle comprehensive plan, as adopted and amended by the city on
September 14, 2004, by resolution 04-15, shall apply within the Eagle area of
city impact, adopted on June 22, 2004, by ordinance 475 and as may be amended
from time to time. Subsequent amendments to the aforesaid Eagle comprehensive
plan shall apply within the Eagle area of city impact if the city and the
county so agree. (Ord. 486, 11-9-2004)
   B.   The Ada County comprehensive plan, as adopted by Ada County on June 17,
1996, by resolution 882, and hereby amended, shall apply within that part of
the amended Eagle area of city impact identified in ordinance 475 separate from
the Eagle area of impact identified in ordinance 461.
   C.   Applications for subdivision development in the Eagle area of city
impact shall be evaluated for conformance to the design and improvement
standards contained in title 9, chapter 3, and sections
9-4-1 through
9-4-1-12 of this code.
   D.   All subdivision plats situated within the area of city impact shall be
submitted to the city for their recommendation.
   E.   The Ada County zoning ordinance shall be used to implement this
chapter. (Ord. 476, 6-22-2004)
   F.   The following additional standards shall be used to ensure
compatibility between the Eagle comprehensive plan and the Ada County zoning
ordinance:
      1.   "Density" shall be defined as the ratio of the total number of
dwelling units within a development divided by the total area. Fractional
densities which are greater than the density shown on the corresponding
comprehensive plan land use map designation will not be allowed. Floodway areas
and lands used for public uses such as schools and public service facilities
shall be excluded from the total land area used for calculating residential
densities. (Ord. 466, 3-16-2004; amd. Ord. 476, 6-22-2004)
8-8-4: AMENDMENT OF PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   All applications to Ada County (the "county") or to the city for
amendments to their respective comprehensive plans and implementing ordinances
which apply within the Eagle area of city impact shall be sent by the entity
receiving such application to the other entity. A separate referral process
shall be adopted by resolution by each entity, regarding procedures and time
period for, and the effect of, sending such amendments, and such resolution may
be amended from time to time upon mutual agreement in writing by the county and
the city.
   B.   All county applications for planned developments, subdivisions, rezones
and conditional use permits within the Eagle area of city impact shall be sent
to the city of Eagle, in accordance with the referral process established
pursuant to subsection A of this section. (Ord. 121, 10-13-1987)
8-8-5: ZONING WITHIN THE EAGLE CITY AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   A.   County zoning districts shall be in accordance with the adopted plan
policies identified in section
8-8-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 121, 10-13-1987)
8-8-6: RENEGOTIATION OF PLAN POLICIES AND CHAPTER APPLICATION PROVISIONS:
   A.   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), the city of Eagle or
the board of Ada County commissioners may request, in writing, the
renegotiation of any provision of this chapter at any time. Within thirty (30)
days of receipt of such written request by either party, a meeting between the
two (2) jurisdictions shall occur.
   B.   While renegotiation is occurring, all provisions of this chapter shall
remain in effect until this chapter is amended or a substitute ordinance is
adopted by Eagle and Ada County, in accordance with the notice and hearing
procedures provided in title 67, chapter 65 of Idaho Code, or until a
declaratory judgment from the district court is final. Provided, however, that
this chapter or stipulated portions thereof shall be of no further force and
effect if both jurisdictions so agree by mutually adopted resolution. (Ord.
121, 10-13-1987)
CHAPTER 9
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 1
SECTION:
8-9-1: Notice To Other Agencies And Maintenance Of Register Of Historic
Properties, Landmarks And Districts
8-9-2: Moratorium On Application For Alteration Or Demolition While Designation
Is Pending
8-9-3: Permit For New Construction Or Demolition Within Designated Historic
Districts
8-9-4: Procedure For Issuance Of Permits For New Construction Or Demolition
Within Designated Historic Districts
8-9-5: Information Required For Application For Permit For New Construction Or
Demolition Within Historic Districts
8-9-6: Guidelines For Review Of Applications For New Construction Or Demolition
Within Historic Districts
8-9-7: Historic Building Alteration Permit Required For Demolition, Remodeling,
Rehabilitation Or Renovation
8-9-8: Procedure For Application For Historic Building Alteration Permit
8-9-9: Changes To Publicly Owned Property
8-9-10: Ordinary Repair
8-9-11: Historic Easements
8-9-12: Minimum Maintenance Requirement
8-9-13: Exemption From Health Or Building Codes
8-9-14: Amendment Or Rescission Of Historic Property, Landmark Or District
Designation
8-9-15: Change In Use Of Structures Or Properties Within A Designated Historic
District
8-9-16: Violations
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 2, chapter 7 of this code.
8-9-1: NOTICE TO OTHER AGENCIES AND MAINTENANCE OF REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PROPERTIES, LANDMARKS AND DISTRICTS:
In addition to all other transmittals and notices required by this chapter, the
city clerk's office shall notify the Idaho state historical society and other
agencies regarding the designation of historic properties, landmarks and
districts, and shall maintain a register of such properties, landmarks and
districts.
   A.   Within five (5) days after the designation by ordinance of any historic
property, landmark or district, the city clerk's office shall notify the Idaho
state historical society and other governmental agencies having a regulatory or
legally prescribed duty affecting such historic property, landmark or district.
The notice shall briefly state the fact of said designation, identify the
boundary of the designated district or site, or the address of the designated
historic property or landmark, and summarize the effects said designation will
have.
   B.   The city clerk's office shall maintain a current register and map of
all historic properties, landmarks and districts. Such register and map shall
be made available for public and governmental review. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989;
amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-2: MORATORIUM ON APPLICATION FOR ALTERATION OR DEMOLITION WHILE DESIGNATION
IS PENDING:
No permit for erection, alteration, restoration, demolition or move shall be
approved for any sites, buildings, structures or objects being considered for
designation as historic properties, landmarks or districts subsequent to the
day request for such designation is received by the commission; provided,
however, that after ninety (90) days have elapsed from the date of initiation
of such designation for properties and landmarks, and one hundred fifty (150)
days from the date of initiation of such designation for districts, if final
action on such designation has not been completed, the permit application may
be approved. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-3: PERMIT FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION WITHIN DESIGNATED HISTORIC
DISTRICTS:
   A.   In order to preserve the integrity of historic buildings and structures
within a designated historic district, and to ensure that any new buildings or
structures constructed within a designated historic district shall be
compatible within such district, no exterior portion or features of any
buildings, sites, structures, or objects within said district shall be
demolished, no new construction shall be undertaken, and no outdoor signs shall
be erected while designation is pending and following the designation of an
historic district, until after an application for a permit has been submitted
to, and approved by, the Eagle design review board and the commission 1 .
   B.   The commission shall not consider interior arrangement of privately
owned properties and shall take no action under this section except for the
purpose of preventing the new construction, movement or demolition of
buildings, structures, appurtenant fixtures, outdoor advertising signs or
natural features of an historic district which would not be in keeping with the
historical, architectural or cultural aspects of the historic district. (Ord.
157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 7 of this code.
8-9-4: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION
WITHIN DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
   A.   Application shall be submitted by the owner of the property requiring
such a permit. The application shall contain such information as required by
the commission under section
8-9-5 of this chapter and shall be made to the building department. The
building inspector shall carry out initial review and shall then forward
application to the commission as deemed necessary. The building inspector may
deny the application or approve and issue permits without submission to the
commission.
   B.   The commission shall hold a public hearing as deemed necessary
concerning the application; provided, that the hearing shall be set within
forty five (45) days after receipt of the required information. Notice of the
time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given at least fifteen (15)
days prior to such hearing by one publication in the official newspaper of the
city and by written notice by first class mail of such hearing to the applicant
and all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of such property.
   C.   Within fifteen (15) days following completion of such hearing, the
commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for
a permit using the guidelines set forth in section
8-9-6 of this chapter. All decisions of the commission shall be in writing and
include findings of fact and conclusions of law and a copy shall be sent to the
applicant by first class mail and a copy transmitted to the building department
of the city, which department shall issue any permit approved by the
commission.
   D.   Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the commission may appeal
to the city council.
   E.   The commission may approve an application for a permit in any case
where failure to issue such permit would result in extreme hardship to the
applicant. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-5: INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMIT FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OR
DEMOLITION WITHIN HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
An application for a new construction or demolition permit shall contain the
following information:
   A.   A clear statement of the proposed work, to include such things as
colors, materials, landscaping and signs.
   B.   Plans describing the size, height and complete appearance of the
proposed work.
   C.   A site plan showing all existing buildings and structures and the
proposed work.
   D.   In cases where the application is for a demolition, the necessity for
the demolition shall be justified.
   E.   Any other information deemed necessary by the commission. (Ord. 157,
10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-6: GUIDELINES FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION
WITHIN HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
In reviewing applications for permits for new construction or demolition for
buildings, structures and objects within an historic district, the commission
shall consider the following factors:
   A.   The historical and architectural value and significance of the property
or structure.
   B.   The physical condition of the property or structure.
   C.   The general compatibility of the proposed work to the property or
structure itself, as well as to the surrounding neighborhood or district.
Exterior design, arrangement, proportion, detail, scale, color, texture and
materials proposed to be used shall be taken into consideration.
   D.   Where the proposed work includes landscaping, the relationship of
landscaping to the property itself, as well as to the surrounding neighborhood
or district.
   E.   Where the proposed work includes erection of or changes to signs, the
style, materials, size and location of signs and their compatibility with the
historic character and scale of the property or structure as well as to the
surrounding neighborhood or district. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-
8-2001)
8-9-7: HISTORIC BUILDING ALTERATION PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DEMOLITION, REMODELING,
REHABILITATION OR RENOVATION:
A permit must be obtained from the building department prior to the demolition,
remodeling, rehabilitation or renovation of any property or landmark which has
been given historic designation or for which such designation is pending. The
commission may delay approval of such permit for a maximum of one hundred
eighty (180) days, during which time the commission may negotiate with the
owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the
property. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-8: PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION FOR HISTORIC BUILDING ALTERATION PERMIT:
   A.   Application for an historic building alteration permit shall be
submitted by the owner of the property requiring such permit. The application
shall be made to the building department of the city. The building inspector
shall carry out initial review and shall then forward the application to the
commission as deemed necessary. In cases of minor changes, the building
inspector may approve and issue permits without submission to the commission.
   B.   The commission shall hold a public hearing concerning the application
within forty five (45) days of receipt of such application from the building
department. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be
given as required by subsection
8-9-4B of this chapter.
   C.   Within fifteen (15) days following completion of such hearing, the
commission shall recommend that the application be approved or that approval be
delayed for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. All decisions
of the commission shall be in writing, a copy transmitted to the building
department of the city, and a copy sent to the applicant. In all decisions, the
commission shall provide a written decision including findings of fact and
conclusions of law and notify the applicant by first class mail.
   D.   Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the commission may appeal
to the city council.
   E.   The commission may approve a permit for historic building alteration in
any case where failure to issue such permit would cause extreme hardship. (Ord.
157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-9: CHANGES TO PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY:
No exterior or interior portion of a designated property, landmark, site,
structure or object which is owned by the city shall be altered, restored,
reconstructed, remodeled, moved or demolished until such time as an application
for such work has been submitted to and approved by the commission. (Ord. 157,
10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-10: ORDINARY REPAIR:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance
or repair of any exterior feature of an historic building, landmark or
structure within an historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, color or outer appearance thereof. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989;
amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-11: HISTORIC EASEMENTS:
The city may acquire by donation, historic easements upon the recommendation of
the commission and approval of the council to the extent the council determines
that the acquisition will be in the public interest. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989;
amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-12: MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT:
The owner of a designated historic property, landmark, structure, area or site,
or property, landmark, structure, area or site within a designated historic
district, shall not permit such property, landmark, building, structure, area
or site to fall into a state of disrepair which may result in the deterioration
of any exterior appurtenance or architectural feature so as to produce or tend
to produce, in the judgment of the commission, a detrimental effect upon the
character of the district as a whole, or upon the life and character of a
building, structure, site or landmark. This shall include:
   A.   All of the exterior portions of such buildings, landmarks, structures,
areas or sites.
   B.   All interior portions thereof which, if not maintained, may cause or
tend to cause the exterior portions of such buildings, landmarks or structures
to deteriorate, decay or become damaged or otherwise fall into a state of
disrepair. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-13: EXEMPTION FROM HEALTH OR BUILDING CODES:
The council, in order to promote the preservation and restoration of historic
properties within the city, may exempt a historic property, landmark or
structure within a historic district from the application of such standards
contained in the city health or building codes as the council, upon
recommendation from the commission, shall determine would otherwise prevent or
seriously hinder the preservation or restoration of said historic property,
landmark or structure; provided, that the restored building or structure will
be no more hazardous, based on life safety, fire safety and sanitation
standards, than the existing building. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-
8-2001)
8-9-14: AMENDMENT OR RESCISSION OF HISTORIC PROPERTY, LANDMARK OR DISTRICT
DESIGNATION:
   A.   If, in the judgment of the commission, any building, structure, site,
object, area of historical importance or district which has been designated as
a historic property, landmark or district has ceased to comply with the
designation criteria or no longer exhibits the characteristics which qualified
it for designation, such property or properties may be recommended for
exclusion from the boundary of the district they are within, or if the district
as a whole no longer meets such criteria, it may be recommended for rescission
of designation; or such property or landmark may be recommended for rescission
of historic designation.
   B.   Property owners residing within a designated historic district, and
owners of designated landmarks and historic properties may ask the commission
for rescission of such designation.
   C.   The procedure with respect to a recommendation for rescission or
amendment of historic designation shall be the same as required for the
original designation as described in sections
2-7-6 and
2-7-8 of this code. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-15: CHANGE IN USE OF STRUCTURES OR PROPERTIES WITHIN A DESIGNATED HISTORIC
DISTRICT:
No change in the use of any structure or property within a designated historic
district shall be permitted until after a request for such change has been
submitted, and approved by the commission. Such request shall also be made
prior to the approval of any change of zoning classification which would affect
a historic district. (Ord. 157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
8-9-16: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 697, 5-14-2013)
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, each day during which there exists any
violation of any provision herein will constitute a separate violation. (Ord.
157, 10-24-1989; amd. Ord. 391, 5-8-2001)
CHAPTER 10
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
8-10-1: Requirements And Restrictions
8-10-1: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: Development agreements are a discretionary tool to be used by
the council as a condition of rezoning. Development agreements allow a specific
project with a specific use to be developed on property in an area that is not
appropriate for all uses allowed or conditional in the requested zone.
   B.   Initiation Of Development Agreement:
      1.   A development agreement may be initiated for the rezoning of a
particular parcel of land or collection of parcels of land through the
following methods:
         a.   On application by the property owner.
         b.   On recommendation of the zoning administrator.
         c.   On recommendation of the commission.
         d.   Required by the council.
      2.   In the event of a determination by the commission that a development
agreement should be entered into, the commission shall retain jurisdiction of
the matter, defer consideration of the rezone applied for and set a time limit
for submittal of the development agreement. The commission shall then proceed
as specified in this section.
      3.   In the event of a determination by the council that a development
agreement should be entered into, the council shall remand the matter back to
the commission for submittal of the development agreement. The council may
direct the commission on remand of the matter to the commission. The commission
shall then proceed as specified in this section.
      4.   In the event of either of the above, all time limits required by
this code may be stayed upon affirmative vote of the commission or council.
   C.   Form Of Development Agreement: A development agreement shall be in the
form required by the zoning administrator. No agreement shall be accepted by
the zoning administrator which does not include the following:
      1.   An affidavit by the owner of the parcel agreeing to submit the
parcel to a development agreement.
      2.   The specific use or uses of the parcel for which the development
agreement is sought.
      3.   The allowed or conditional use in the conditional zone for which
application has been made.
      4.   A concept plan of the project to be developed on the parcel. The
concept plan may include:
         a.   A description of the density allowed or sought; and
         b.   Maximum height, size, and location of any structures on the
property.
      5.   The time required to begin the use on the property.
      6.   A statement by the owner of the parcel that failure to comply with
the commitments in the development agreement shall be deemed consent to rezone
the use to the preexisting zone or, in the case of an initial zone at
annexation, a zone deemed appropriate by the council.
      7.   Any other matter mutually agreeable to the parties.
   D.   Approval Of The Development Agreement:
      1.   The council may require a development agreement be executed to allow
a rezone if, in the opinion of the council, approval of the requested rezone
does not satisfy the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance for rezone
approval, but the particular project or use contemplated has a value to the
community that would justify the use of a development agreement. A development
agreement may not allow a use on the parcel that is not an allowed or
conditional use in the requested rezone.
      2.   Development agreements may be recommended by the commission and
approved by the council only after public hearings. Each public hearing shall
follow the notice provisions of section
8-7-8 of this title.
      3.   The council may add conditions, terms, duties or obligations to the
development agreement.
   E.   Recordation Of Development Agreement: Following approval of a
development agreement by the city council, the development agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder at the expense of the property
owner. The development agreement, and all conditions, terms, duties or
obligations included therein, shall run with the land and shall be considered
continuing obligations of the owner or subsequent owner and each other person
acquiring an interest in the property.
   F.   Duty To Comply With Development Agreement: An owner, subsequent owner,
and each other person acquiring an interest in property that is restricted by a
development agreement adopted pursuant to this section, shall comply with the
terms, conditions, obligations and duties contained in the development
agreement.
   G.   Modification Of Development Agreement: A development agreement may be
modified by the city council only after complying with the notice and public
hearing provisions of section 67-6509 of the Idaho Code.
   H.   Termination Of Development Agreement:
      1.   A development agreement may be terminated by the city council for
failure to comply with the commitments expressed in the development agreement.
Such termination shall take place after a public hearing on the termination at
which time testimony shall be taken to establish noncompliance with the
conditions, terms, obligations or duties contained within the development
agreement. The public hearing shall follow the notice and hearing provisions of
section 67-6509 of the Idaho Code.
      2.   Upon termination of the development agreement, the property shall
revert to the zone applicable prior to the adoption of the development
agreement or application for rezoning designation change. All uses of the
property which are not consistent with the subsequently applied zone following
termination of the development agreement shall cease. The owner of the parcel
may apply for a conditional use of the parcel if such use is a conditional use
within the subsequently applied zone.
   I.   Enforcement Of Development Agreements: Development agreements may be
enforced by the city through specific enforcement, injunctive relief, damages
or criminal penalty for violation of this section. The foregoing enforcement
options available to the city shall not be deemed exclusive.
   J.   Execution Of Development Agreement: The property owner shall have one
year from the date of approval by the city council for the mayor to execute the
development agreement. If not executed by the property owner within this time
frame the development agreement approval will be considered void unless an
extension of time is approved by the city council. (Ord. 194, 12-10-1991; amd.
Ord. 270, 5-29-1996; Ord. 699, 5-28-2013; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020)
CHAPTER 11
MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
8-11-1: Purpose
8-11-2: Definitions
8-11-3: Minimal Property Maintenance Standard
8-11-4: Restoration Of A Damaged Or Dilapidated Building Or Completion Of An
Unfinished Building
8-11-5: Enforcement Procedures
8-11-6: Restoration And Demolition Fund
8-11-7: Recovery Of Cost Of Restoration Or Demolition
8-11-1: PURPOSE:
The city, exercising its police powers to preserve the general welfare of the
city, promote economic viability and prevent urban blight, hereby establishes
minimal property maintenance standards. Beyond being secured so that a building
is not a danger or an attractive nuisance, all property within the city shall
be maintained to the minimal property maintenance standards as listed below.
(Ord. 520, 6-28-2005)
8-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DAMAGED OR DILAPIDATED BUILDING: Any structure that has suffered significant
damage or deterioration either from age, lack of care, or abandonment or
natural or manmade calamity to the degree that the exterior of the building
walls, roof, doors and windows are burnt out, falling down, or are
significantly patched or boarded or are structurally unsound.
UNFINISHED BUILDING: Any structure where construction has commenced but has
been discontinued for a period of six (6) months and/or has not been finished
in accordance with the approved building permit and cannot be certified for
occupancy or final building inspection. (Ord. 520, 6-28-2005)
8-11-3: MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARD:
All damaged, dilapidated or unfinished buildings shall be restored or finished
to eliminate the detrimental visual damage or visual impact of the building(s).
A property owner shall take steps to restore or finish the building(s) per
plans approved by the Eagle city planning and zoning department, Eagle city
planning and zoning commission, Eagle city design review board, or Eagle city
council. No building or premises shall detrimentally impact the surrounding
neighborhood due to dilapidation, deterioration, decay, abandonment or
unfinished construction and render the enjoyment of the property essentially
uncomfortable or inconvenient to the neighborhood. (Ord. 520, 6-28-2005)
8-11-4: RESTORATION OF A DAMAGED OR DILAPIDATED BUILDING OR COMPLETION OF AN
UNFINISHED BUILDING:
Restoration of a damaged or dilapidated building or completion work on an
unfinished building shall begin within six (6) months of the building becoming
damaged or dilapidated or being deemed unfinished by the city. The city may
require that such buildings that are also unoccupied be secured (fenced or
boarded up) during the six (6) month period. This deadline may be extended by
the zoning administrator upon submission of documentation of insurance
settlement delays or similar complications beyond the owner's control.
Restoration of a damaged or dilapidated building, or completion of an
unfinished building shall be completed within one year from the date that the
restoration work or unfinished construction work is initiated. (Ord. 520, 6-28-
2005)
8-11-5: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   If a building is not maintained at a minimal property maintenance
standard for six (6) months or no efforts to restore or finish a building have
begun within six (6) months or completed within one year after restoration or
construction work has begun, the city shall order the owner of the property to
attend a prescribed city council meeting to address the reason(s) as to why the
building has not been restored or completed. If the address of the owner of
said building can be obtained through reasonable efforts, then the owner shall
receive notice of said meeting via certified mail. Otherwise notice shall be
sent to the owner of property as it appears on the last equalized assessment
roll of Ada County, or as known to the Eagle City Planning and Zoning
Department. Removal of the damaged, dilapidated or unfinished building shall be
ordered only if the following findings are made:
      1.   The building meets the definition of a damaged or dilapidated
building, or unfinished building; and
      2.   The building has existed in a damaged or dilapidated or unfinished
state for a period of at least six (6) months; or
      3.   The building has not been maintained at the minimal property
standards for a period of six (6) months; and
      4.   The property owner has previously received written notice that the
building is in violation of this Code and must be restored or finished; or
notice has been sent to the owner of property as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of Ada County, or as known to the Eagle City Planning
and Zoning Department.
      5.   The City Council, upon finding that the building is damaged,
dilapidated or unfinished, and that the property owner has not commenced or
completed restoration or finished the building within the time frames as set
forth in this chapter, then the City may proceed to obtain bids to restore the
building or clear the site of the offending building. The fact that the
building is not a danger or attractive visual nuisance shall not be a defense
for failing to restore or finish a building. (Ord. 520, 6-28-2005)
8-11-6: RESTORATION AND DEMOLITION FUND:
The City may establish a restricted fund to be designated for building
restoration and demolition pursuant to this chapter. Payments may be made out
of this fund upon the direction of the City Council to defray the costs and
expenses associated with restoration or demolition of said building. (Ord. 809,
4-9-2019)
8-11-7: RECOVERY OF COST OF RESTORATION OR DEMOLITION:
The City Clerk/Treasurer's Department, in coordination with the Planning and
Zoning Department, shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred with
restoration or demolition of said building. A certified mailed copy of said
assessment shall be sent to the property owner. If the property owner does not
respond within sixty (60) days, then the City may recover costs of the
abatement in a civil action or by filing a certified copy of the assessment
with the Ada County Recorder on or before August 1 of the year. The description
of the parcel(s) reported shall be those used for the same parcel(s) on the Ada
County Assessor's map for the current year. All such assessments remaining
unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of recording on the assessment roll
shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent
(10%) per annum or the current interest rate if higher, from and after said
date. All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the
sale of the property at a foreclosure sale shall be paid to the City of Eagle,
who shall credit the same to the Restoration and Demolition Fund. (Ord. 520, 6-
28-2005)
CHAPTER 12
DEVELOPMENT ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS
SECTION:
8-12-1: Purpose
8-12-2: Applicability
8-12-3: Process
8-12-4: Standards
8-12-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this article are intended to limit property access points
along state highways in order to maintain traffic flow and provide better
traffic circulation and safety for land use planning within the community.
(Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-12-2: APPLICABILITY:
The following standards shall apply to all development along state highways
including, but not limited to, State Highway 16, State Highway 20-26, State
Highway 44, and State Highway 55. (Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-12-3: PROCESS:
All development applications shall be reviewed by the City to assure compliance
with these standards. The City Council may consider and approve modifications
to the standards of this chapter upon specific recommendation of the Idaho
Transportation Department or if strict adherence is not feasible, as determined
by the City Council. (Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
8-12-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Access to and/or from State Highway 16, State Highway 20-26, State
Highway 44, and State Highway 55.
      1.   Use of existing driveway approaches shall be allowed to continue
provided that all of the following conditions are met.
         a.   The existing use is lawful and the access is permitted by ITD.
         b.   The intensity of any change of use does not increase the
estimated number of vehicle trips per day utilizing the access point.
      2.   If an applicant proposes a change of use increasing the intensity of
use of a driveway approach, the owner shall develop or otherwise acquire access
to a street other than the state highway. The use of the existing driveway
approach shall cease and the driveway approach shall be abandoned and removed.
         a.   No new driveway approaches directly accessing a state highway
shall be allowed.
         b.   Public street connections to the state highway shall only be
allowed at:
            (1)   The section line road; and
            (2)   The half mile mark between section line roads. These half-
mile connecting streets shall be developed as collector roads.
      3.   The applicant shall construct a street, generally paralleling the
state highway, to provide future connectivity and access to all properties
fronting the state highway that lie between the applicant's property and the
nearest section line road and/or half mile collector road. The intent is to
provide for future connectivity and access to all properties fronting the state
highway that lie between the applicant's property and the nearest section line
road and/or half mile collector road. The street shall be designed to collect
and distribute traffic.
         a.   The applicant shall be responsible to construct the segment of
the street within the applicant's property. This standard is not intended to
require off-site improvements.
         b.   The street shall meet the road standards of the Ada County
Highway District.
         c.   The street shall connect to the section line road at a distance
that is no closer than six hundred sixty (660) linear feet (as measured from
centerline to centerline) from the intersection with the state highway.
         d.   For the purposes of this article, such streets shall be termed
"backage roads".
         e.   Private streets may be considered by the council as otherwise
provided within Eagle City Code. Private streets shall be limited as may be
determined by the City Council to areas where there is sufficient access to
surrounding properties and a public street is not desirable in that location.
   B.   Design and construction standards for state highways.
      1.   The applicant shall have an approved permit from the Idaho
Transportation Department for construction of any access to the state highway
and/or any construction to be done within the highway right-of-way.
      2.   The width of right-of-way reservations shall be as set forth by the
ITD. (Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
TITLE 9
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Short Title
9-1-2: Authority
9-1-3: Purpose
9-1-4: Jurisdiction
9-1-5: Interpretation
9-1-6: Rules And Definitions
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF EAGLE, IDAHO. (Ord. 88, 11-15-1983)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are authorized by title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter
65 of the Idaho Code; and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, as
amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 88, 11-15-1983)
9-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to provide for:
   A.   The harmonious development of the city and its area of impact 1 ;
   B.   The coordination of streets and roads within a subdivision with other
existing or planned streets and roads;
   C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
   D.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
   E.   The avoidance of the scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services; or
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services;
   F.   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created, improved and maintained; and
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connection, or other
facilities shall be installed;
   G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any plats; and
   H.   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of approving authorities. (Ord. 88, 11-15-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 8 of this code.
9-1-4: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall apply to the subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the city, including the property outside the corporate limits of the
city as defined by the city and Ada County 1  under the requirements of
sections 50-1306 and 67-6526, Idaho Code, as amended. (Ord. 88, 11-15-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 8, "Area Of City Impact", of this code.
9-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
All subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval by the
council and shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. These
regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and where at variance with
other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply. (Ord. 88, 11-15-1983)
9-1-6: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
Terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
   A.   The present tense includes the past or future tense, the singular
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; and the
word "should" is preferred.
   C.   The masculine shall include the feminine.
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACHD: Refers to the Ada County Highway District.
ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator for the city of Eagle, Idaho.
ALLEY: See Title 8, Chapter 1, Section 2.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
BUILDING: A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or more
families, or a structure designed for use as an accessory to a structure used
for living quarters or a structure designed for commercial or industrial uses.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: An imaginary line established by a zoning ordinance that
requires all buildings to be set back a certain distance from lot lines.
BUILDING SITE: An area proposed or provided and improved by grading, filling,
excavation or other means for erecting pads for buildings.
CEMETERY: A lot that has been platted for the selling of sites for the burial
of animal or human remains.
CITY: The city of Eagle, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Eagle, Idaho.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from
minor streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the city.
COMMON AREA OPEN SPACE: Land within a development, not individually owned or
dedicated for public use (except for the portion of the 8 foot wide landscape
strip located adjacent to and within the public right of way of a local
street), or for use as private streets, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It may include
complementary structures and improvements (see definitions of Open Space; Open
Space, Active; and Open Space, Passive).
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An adopted document that herein may be referred to as a
comprehensive plan or comprehensive development plan.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common in real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof; together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property or in any combination thereof.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the Ada County recorder.
COVENANT: A written promise or pledge.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street connected to another street at one end only and provided
with a turnaround space at its terminus.
CULVERT: A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or driveway.
DEAD END STREET: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not
having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the
public by ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes as by the
recording of a plat. Dedicated land becomes public upon the acceptance by the
city.
DEVELOPER: Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
DITCH: An open channel artificially constructed.
DRAINAGE: Water that runs off the surfaces of a site or development. Synonymous
with "runoff" as used herein.
DRAINAGE CHANNEL: A natural channel, ditch, pipe or other conduit for liquid,
naturally or artificially situated to receive storm drainage at an inlet point
or multiple inlet points and then convey such storm drainage to an outlet
point.
DRAINAGE FACILITY: An artificially constructed or naturally occurring drainage
channel, or a retention facility, or partial retention facility.
DRAINAGE RECEIVER: A government entity, canal company or special taxing
district which maintains a drainage facility adjacent to the development and
agrees, as evidenced by a signed and dated public document, to accept a defined
quantity of storm drainage from the development. This definition also applies
to Ada County highway district, with regard to any runoff from any development
to any street.
Notice is particularly given that the presence of a natural drainage channel
does not relieve the developer from the requirement that any drainage must be
retained unless it is formally accepted by a drainage receiver.
DRAINAGEWAY: A drainage channel or drainage ditch.
DRIVEWAY: A travel way not dedicated nor intended for public use, privately
maintained, serving a maximum of two (2) lots or parcels.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or other structure proposed or built for occupancy
by people.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to
use land for specific purposes. Also, a right acquired by prescription.
ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional
engineering.
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered by
water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The floodplain includes the channel,
floodway or floodway fringe, as established pursuant to engineering practices
of the U.S. army corps of engineers, as follows:
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bend and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow
from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
Flood Of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway. Such
areas include those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by a
flood of 100-year frequency.
FRONTAGE STREET: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street, to provide access to abutting properties.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Eagle, Idaho.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or federal
agency.
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision, or portion thereof, having an average
slope of ten percent (10%) or more.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical construction
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
IRRIGATION WATER: Non-potable water used for irrigation purposes.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision, the size of which consists of eleven
(11) or more lots or dwelling units.
LOOP: A minor street in which both terminal points are on the same street of
origin.
LOT: A parcel, plot, tract, or other land area of sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements 1  for use, coverage and area, and created by
subdivision for sale, transfer, or lease, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage, as may be
required within this code, on an improved public street, or on an approved
private street, and may consist of:
   A.   A single lot of record;
   B.   A portion of a lot of record; and
   C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record.
LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street, highway,
alley, road or rights of way of record.
LOT TYPES: As used in these regulations, lot types are as follows:
   A.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersections of two (2) or more
streets.
   B.   Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only one
street other than a corner lot.
   C.   Through Lot: A lot with frontage on more than one street other than a
corner lot.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision not able to qualify as a minor subdivision,
including, but not limited to, subdivision of two (2) or more lots, or any size
subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local government
facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision containing not more than ten (10) lots
fronting on an existing street; not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements;
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property;
and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan,
official map, zoning title 2 , or this title.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following
characteristics:
   A.   Designed for long term occupancy and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower, bath and kitchen facilities
with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside
systems;
   B.   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on
flatbed or other trailers, or detached wheels; and
   C.   Arrived at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete,
including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation
supports, a connection to utilities and the like.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for exclusive
mobile home residential use.
MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe or iron
or steel rods, used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as
specified in section 50-1303, Idaho Code.
OPEN SPACE: A common area platted as a separate lot (except for the portion of
the 8 foot wide landscape strip located adjacent to and within the public right
of way of a local street) substantially open to the sky, exclusive of streets,
commercial and residential buildings, and shall be designated and intended as a
usable and convenient amenity for the residences of any proposed development.
OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE: Common area which includes, but is not limited to, athletic
fields, buildings or structures for recreational activities including picnic
areas, community garden, courses or courts, children's play area, dog play
area, and pathways, excluding passive open space areas. Landscape buffer areas
not required pursuant to subsection
8-2A-7J of this code may be considered, in part, as active open space provided
a pathway or other active amenity is located within and incorporated into the
buffer area. Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of water bodies
(i.e., ponds) within a development may be considered active open space provided
there is a finding that the ponds employ active recreation capabilities such as
fishing, rafting, canoeing, and the like.
OPEN SPACE, PASSIVE: Common area which includes, but is not limited to,
landscaped buffer areas required pursuant to subsection
8-2A-7J of this code (including the sidewalk within the buffer area), natural
areas, wetland areas, ornamental gardens, decorative fountains, and water
bodies, excluding active open space areas.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: Any unplatted contiguous parcel of land held in one
ownership as of November 15, 1983.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation
having any interest, legal or equitable, in the land to be subdivided.
PARTIAL RETENTION FACILITY: A constructed basin or underground storage vessel
built to retain a portion of the storm drainage it receives until it is
absorbed into the soil strata, and to allow not more than an amount as
designated by agreement with an adjacent drainage receiver to pass into an
adjacent drainageway or drainage facility.
PARTIAL RIGHT OF WAY: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the
required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of
land.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the
subdivider or his surety to the city clerk which guarantees that the subdivider
will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an approved
plat, and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the
provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages
up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the
requirements of the approved plat.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision designed as a combination of
residential, commercial and office uses or any combination thereof planned for
a tract of land to be developed as a unit under single ownership or control,
which is developed for the purpose of selling individual lots or estates,
fronting on private or dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more
principal buildings.
PLAT: The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, town site or
other tract of land or a replatting of such including certifications,
descriptions and approvals including the following:
   A.   Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by drawings of a
proposed subdivision; and
   B.   Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by drawings of an
approved subdivision development, the original and one copy of which is filed
with the county clerk and recorder.
PREDEVELOPMENT RUNOFF: The runoff quantity that would have been produced during
the design storm from the site in its original native soil condition, prior to
any construction of buildings or of modified surfaces.
PRESSURIZED IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A system that deliver irrigation water under
pressure through a closed distribution piping system.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent property
which is reserved or held in public ownership for future street extension or
widening.
RETENTION FACILITY: A constructed basin or constructed underground storage
vessel built to retain all of the storm drainage it receives until it is
absorbed into the soil strata.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way
which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The specifications as specified in this title or as
officially adopted by the city.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STORAGE VESSEL: An earthen basin or tank or vault structure employed to store
liquid. Earthen basins used to store storm drainage may be filled with porous
media (usually gravel) to attain structural stability, in which case the volume
of available storage is taken as the volume of the interstitial voids of the
porous media.
STORM DRAINAGE: The water running off the surfaces of a site as a result of
precipitation on the site (including rain, hail meltwater and snow meltwater).
STREET: See Title 8, Chapter 1, Section 2.
SUBDIVIDER: The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this title. The subdivider need not be the owner of the property;
however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient proprietary
rights in the property to represent the owner.
SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing any lot, tract or parcel of land
into two (2) or more parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
development, which shall also include the dedication of a public street and the
addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. Subdivisions shall be divided into
"minor subdivision", "major subdivision" and "large scale development", as
those terms are defined in this section. However, this title shall not apply to
any of the following:
   A.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does not
reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not increase the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
   B.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a
court decree for the distribution of property;
   C.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined
and allowed in the Idaho Code;
   D.   Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan;
   E.   Acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in conformance
with the comprehensive plan; and
   F.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of present land usage.
SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land surveyor to
do professional surveying.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, storm water and similar facilities providing service to and used by
the public.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot
coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, or other
ordinance provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the
placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not
be considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant
only upon a showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site
and the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in
relation to a larger area.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021; Ord.
868, 8-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8 of this code.
2 2. See title 8 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Application For Subdivision Approval Generally
9-2-2: Preapplication Procedure
9-2-3: Preliminary Plat
9-2-4: Final Plat
9-2-5: Fees
9-2-6: Record Of Lot; Plat Approval
9-2-7: Sale Of Lot; Plat To Be Recorded
9-2-8: Parcel Division
9-2-1: APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL GENERALLY:
Any person desiring to create a "subdivision" as herein defined shall submit
all necessary applications to the administrator. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-2-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Submission Of Preapplication: The subdivider shall submit a
preapplication to enable the administrator to review and comment on the
proposed subdivision.
   B.   Sketch Plan: The preapplication shall include at least one copy of a
sketch plan. The sketch plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of
the proposed subdivision, in schematic form, and including the following:
      1.   The general layout and approximate dimension of streets, blocks and
lots in sketch form;
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
      3.   The areas set aside for common area open space, schools, parks and/
or other public facilities.
   C.   Action By Administrator: The administrator shall notify the subdivider
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of an acceptable
preapplication as to the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal
with this title, shall provide the necessary forms and checklists and shall
comment on the following:
      1.   Compliance of the proposed development with existing local or state
governmental goals and objectives or comprehensive plans.
      2.   Determination if additional special permits or ordinance conflicts
such as rezone, special development permit or variance, are needed and the
manner of coordinating such permits.
      3.   Consideration of any unique environmental features or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property such as areas that have been designated by the state of Idaho as areas
of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like.
      4.   Consideration of other local and state governmental agencies that
the subdivider should contact before preparing a preliminary plat. (Ord. 566,
5-15-2007)
9-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Application Required:
      1.   Filing Of Preliminary Plat Application And Data: The subdivider
shall file with the administrator a complete subdivision application form and
preliminary plat data as required in this title.
      2.   Filing Of Planned Unit Development Application For Large Scale
Subdivisions: The subdivider shall file with the administrator complete
subdivision and planned unit development applications for all large scale
subdivisions as required in this title and in title 8, "Zoning", of this code.
   B.   Combining Preliminary And Final Plat In Minor Subdivisions: The
applicant may request that the subdivision application be processed as both a
preliminary and final plat if all the following exist:
      1.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots;
      2.   No use of private streets, new street dedication, or street widening
is involved;
      3.   No major special development considerations are involved such as
development in a floodplain, hillside development or the like;
      4.   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form; and
      5.   The proposed subdivision is not in conflict with the comprehensive
plan or any provision of the zoning title of the city.
   C.   Required Information And Data:
      1.   The contents of the preliminary plat and related information shall
be in such a form as stipulated by the city council; however, any additional
maps or data deemed necessary by the administrator may also be required.
      2.   The subdivider shall submit to the administrator at least the
following:
         a.   Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated. Each
copy of the preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall have the
dimensions of not less than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36"), shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet
(1" = 100'), shall show the drafting date, shall be stamped by a licensed Idaho
professional land surveyor or a licensed Idaho registered professional
engineer, and shall indicate thereon, by arrow, the generally northerly
direction;
         b.   Six (6) sets of preliminary engineering plans (not meant to be
cross sections or detailed designs) for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and
other required improvements. The engineering plans shall be stamped by a
licensed Idaho registered professional engineer and shall contain sufficient
information and detail to make a determination as to conformance of the
proposed improvements to applicable regulations, ordinances and standards;
         c.   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary
plat; and
         d.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large scale development,
hazardous and unique areas of development.
      3.   The following shall be submitted separately:
         a.   The name of the proposed subdivision;
         b.   The name, address and telephone numbers of the subdivider or
subdividers and the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat;
         c.   The name and address of all property owners and purchasers of
record (as shown on record in the county assessor’s office) owning property
within the described radius requirements (identified in section 8-7-8D of this
code) of the exterior boundary of the application property, to contiguous
homeowners’ associations, and any additional area that may be impacted by the
proposed change including any neighborhood associations as determined by the
zoning administrator.
         d.   The legal description of the subdivision;
         e.   The statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision,
such as residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing, commercial,
office, recreational or agricultural and a designation of any sites proposed
for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
         f.   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the
proposed subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development. A map shall be submitted showing the location of existing
buildings, water bodies or courses and the location of currently dedicated
streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent;
provided, that actual measured distances shall not be required;
         g.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to
the surrounding area (1/2 mile radius, scale option);
         h.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and
the adjacent land;
         i.   Streets, street names, rights of way and roadway widths,
including adjoining streets or roadways;
         j.   Lot lines and blocks showing the dimensions and numbers of each;
         k.   Contour lines, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope
is greater than ten percent (10%) and at two foot (2') intervals where land
slope is ten percent (10%) or less, referenced to an established bench mark,
including location and elevation;
         l.   A site report as required by the appropriate health district
where individual wells or septic tanks are proposed;
         m.   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited
to, storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages,
bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants and their respective profiles;
         n.   Any dedications to the public and/or easements, together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such; and
         o.   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in chapter 5 of this title.
   D.   Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Administrative Review:
         a.   Acceptance of Application: Following receipt of the completed
preliminary plat application and all other required information as provided for
herein, the zoning administrator shall deem the application as complete and
shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon.
         b.   Review By Other Agencies: The zoning administrator shall refer
the preliminary plat and application to as many governmental agencies as deemed
necessary and shall provide that any transmittal will be returned within
fifteen (15) days. Such agencies may include the following:
            (1)   Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
            (2)   The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or
districts and drainage districts;
            (3)   The superintendent of the school district; and
            (4)   Other agencies having an interest in the proposed
subdivision.
         c.   Recommendation By Administrator: The zoning administrator shall
provide that any transmittal as provided in subsection D1b of this section will
be returned within fifteen (15) days. At the end of the fifteen (15) day
period, the administrator shall prepare a recommendation to the commission. All
agency responses shall be supplied by the zoning administrator to the planning
and zoning commission.
      2.   Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing: In accordance with
the notice requirements set forth in section
8-7-8 of this code, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing
before the planning and zoning commission. All agency responses shall be
supplied by the zoning administrator to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      3.   Action By The Commission:
         a.   Commission's Findings: In determining the acceptance of a
proposed subdivision, the commission shall consider the objectives of this
title and at least the following:
            (1)   The conformance of the subdivision with the comprehensive
development plan;
            (2)   The availability of public services to accommodate the
proposed development, including compliance with title 6, chapter 5 of this
code;
            (3)   The continuity of the proposed development with the capital
improvement plan;
            (4)   The public financial capability of supporting services for
the proposed development; and
            (5)   The other health, safety and environmental problems that may
be brought to the commission's attention.
         b.   Action On Preliminary Plat: The commission may recommend
approval, conditional approval, disapproval, or tabling for a period not to
exceed forty five (45) days unless additional time is requested by the
applicant. The action, and the reasons for such action shall be included within
the commission's findings of fact and conclusion of law. The administrator
shall forward the commission's findings of fact and conclusions of law together
with a copy of the preliminary plat to the council for its action. Upon
granting or denying a preliminary plat, the commission shall specify:
            (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the
application;
            (2)   The reasons for recommending approval or denial; and
            (3)   The actions if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval of the preliminary plat.
         c.   Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the
commission's conclusion is favorable to the subdivider's request for the
subdivision to be considered as both a preliminary plat and final plat, then a
recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council in the same manner as
herein specified for a final plat. The commission may recommend that the
combined application be approved, approved conditionally or disapproved.
      4.   Action By The Council: In accordance with the notice requirements
set forth in section
8-7-8 of this code, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing
before the City Council. The City Council shall approve, approve conditionally,
disapprove, or table the preliminary plat for more information. Upon granting
or denying the preliminary plat, the council shall make findings as required in
subsection D3b of this section.
   E.   Approval Period:
      1.   The preliminary plat shall be null and void if a final plat
application is not received by the city and deemed complete by the Zoning
Administrator within two years from the approval date of the city council
findings of fact and conclusions of law for the preliminary plat.
If an application for extension of time is received by the city prior to the
expiration date of the preliminary plat a maximum twelve (12) month extension
of the time limit on the approved preliminary plat may be granted by the city
council, at its sole discretion, if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding city code or plat approval violations on
the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be conditioned by the
city council to be cured as a condition of the extension of time;
         b.   The preliminary plat, as previously approved, remains in the best
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this code between the
date of preliminary plat approval and the application date of the time
extension request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates that the final plat application will be filed within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated timing for the filing of the final plat application within the
year.
      2.   The city council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This section does not limit the number of extensions the city
council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in
subsection E1 of this section are met. Nothing in this section requires the
city council to grant any extension of an approval period. Upon filing an
extension of time application, the timing for expiration of the preliminary
plat shall be tolled until final action on the application has been made by the
City Council.
      4.   Projects with approved phasing plans do not need time extensions, so
long as the construction of improvements do not cease for more than one year in
any given phase.
      5.   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in
successive, contiguous segments through an approved phasing plan in an orderly
and reasonable manner, and conforms to such segments, if submitted within
successive intervals for one year, it may be considered for final approval
without resubmission for preliminary plat approval.
   F.   Modifications of Approved Preliminary Plat: The administrator shall
review the proposed modified preliminary plat and determine the processing
based upon the scope of the change. The modified plat shall be classified in
one of the following three categories and shall be processed as stated:
      1.   No material change: If the administrator determines that the
modification(s) do not constitute a material change to the approved preliminary
plat, the modified plat may be approved by the city council as a part of the
final plat application. To determine no material change the administrator shall
find that:
         a.   The modified preliminary plat is in compliance with all
applicable codes, regulations and conditions of approval; and
         b.   The number of lots (not including common lots) have not
increased; and
         c.   That the street configuration has not substantially changed.
      2.   Minor material change: If the administrator determines that the
modification(s) constitute a minor material change to the approved preliminary
plat, the modified plat shall be scheduled for decision by the City Council
through a public hearing with public notice as required within Section
8-7-8, except that an additional neighborhood meeting shall not be required. To
determine minor material change the administrator shall find that:
         a.   The modified preliminary plat is in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations; and
         b.   One or more of the conditions of approval are being requested to
be deleted or modified; and
         c.   The number of lots (not including common lots) have not
increased; and
         d.   The street configuration has not substantially changed.
      3.   Major material change: If the administrator determines that the
modification(s) constitute a major material change to the approved preliminary
plat, the modified plat shall be scheduled for recommendation by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and decision by the City Council, both through the public
hearing process with public notice and an additional neighborhood meeting as
required within Section 8-7-8. To determine major material change the
administrator shall find that the modified plat cannot meet the findings
required for sections 1 or 2 above. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 647, 11-23-
2010; Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Filing Of Final Plat: After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, and after approval of any design review application
associated with the site, a final plat application, may be submitted to the
city. The subdivider shall submit to the administrator the following:
      1.   Three (3) copies of the final plat; and
      2.   Three (3) copies of the final engineering construction drawings for
streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other public improvements.
   B.   Contents: The final plat shall include and be in compliance with all
items required under title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code and shall be prepared in
accordance with the specifications set forth in section 50-1304, Idaho Code.
The final plat shall include at least the following:
      1.   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated
by the city council;
      2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat;
      3.   Such other information as the administrator or city council may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat;
      4.   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof;
      5.   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of this title;
      6.   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards; and
      7.   The plat shall show building sites on each lot adjusted to setback
requirements.
   C.   Procedure For Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   Review By Administrator:
         a.   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the final plat, and compliance with
all other requirements as provided for herein, the administrator shall certify
the application as complete and shall affix the date of acceptance thereon.
         b.   Resubmission Of Final Plat: The administrator shall review the
final plat for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved
preliminary plat. If the administrator determines that there is substantial
difference in the final plat than that which was approved as a preliminary plat
or conditions which have not been met, the administrator may require that the
final plat be submitted to the commission and city council in the same manner
as required in the preliminary plat process.
         c.   Submission To The City Council: Upon the determination that the
final plat is in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional
requirements have been met, the administrator shall place the final plat on the
city council agenda.
      2.   Agency Review: The administrator may transmit one copy of the final
plat, or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to the
departments and agencies as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with the
preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review may also include the construction standards of improvements, compliance
with health standards, and the cost estimate for all improvements.
      3.   City Council Action: The city council shall approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove or table the final plat for additional information.
   D.   Conditional Approval Of Final Plat: With respect to financial assurance
to be provided to the city, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall
be conditioned on the accomplishment of one of the following:
      1.   The construction of improvements required by this title shall have
been completed by the subdivider and approved by the city council; or
      2.   Financial assurance acceptable to the city council shall have been
filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank
letter of credit.
   E.   Approval Period: The final plat shall be filed with the county recorder
within one year after the date of written approval by the city council.
Otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless the subdivider, prior
to said expiration date, applies for an extension of time and such extension is
granted by the city council.
      1.   A maximum twelve (12) month extension of the time limit of the
approved final plat may be granted by the city council, at its sole discretion,
if the following findings are made:
         a.   There are no outstanding city code or plat approval violations on
the subject property. If such violations exist, they may be conditioned by the
city council to be cured as a condition of the extension of time;
         b.   The final plat, as previously approved, remains in the best
interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
         c.   There have been no significant changes to this code between the
date of final plat approval and the application date of the time extension
request that would require substantial modifications to the project;
         d.   There are no hazardous conditions which have developed or have
been discovered on the project site;
         e.   The public facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate;
         f.   The applicant has provided a viable and acceptable plan which
demonstrates how recordation of the final plat will occur within the year; and
         g.   The applicant has provided a schedule that depicts the
anticipated progress for completion of the final plat within the year.
      2.   The city council reserves the right to revoke the extension of time
approval if it finds that any of the criteria herein are not met.
      3.   This section does not limit the number of extensions the city
council may grant to an applicant so long as the criteria set forth in
subsection E1 of this section are met. Nothing in this section requires the
city council to grant any extension of an approval period.
   F.   Required Certificates: The following certifications and signatures
shall be included on the final plat prior to recording by the county recorder:
      1.   Certification and signature of the city council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
      2.   Certification and signature of the city clerk and the city engineer
verifying that the subdivision meets the requirements of the city and has been
approved by the city council; and
      3.   Certification of the sanitation restriction on the face of the plat
in accordance with the provisions of section 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   G.   Record Of Final Plat: Upon approval of the final plat by the city
council, the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, posting of financial
assurance with the city pursuant to subsection D of this section, and the
inclusion of those certifications and signatures on the final plat as set forth
in subsection F of this section, the subdivider shall furnish proof to the
administrator that the final plat has been recorded. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd.
Ord. 647, 11-23-2010; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-2-5: FEES:
At the time of submission of an application for a preliminary plat, planned
unit development preliminary development plan, and final plat, a fee, as
established in the official fee schedule of the city, shall be paid 1 . There
shall be no additional fee for the combining of the preliminary and final plats
and there shall be no fee for a preapplication. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-4 of this code.
9-2-6: RECORD OF LOT; PLAT APPROVAL:
No final plat shall be filed with the county recorder or improvements made on
the property until the plat has been acted upon and approved by the city
council. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-2-7: SALE OF LOT; PLAT TO BE RECORDED:
No lots shall be sold until the plat has been recorded in the office of the
county recorder. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-2-8: PARCEL DIVISION:
Any time that an original parcel of land is divided or partitioned into not
more than two (2) parcels, thereby creating an additional parcel for the
transfer of ownership or development, the following application process and
procedures shall be followed:
   A.   Application: An application for parcel division on a form provided by
the zoning administrator shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      1.   Name, address, telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property and proof of ownership or agency.
      3.   Description of existing use.
      4.   Zoning district.
      5.   Description of parcels after proposed division.
      6.   Description of proposed use.
      7.   Documentation of the permission of the owner of the parcel to be
divided.
   B.   Procedure: Prior to approving an application under this section, the
city council shall make the following findings:
      1.   The minimum requirements under this code for acreage, density, lot
area and setback lines have been complied with;
      2.   The proposed parcel division is in conformity with the comprehensive
plan; and
      3.   The proposed parcel division is in the public interest and will not
adversely impact adjoining property interests.
   C.   Notice: Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the
administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on
the request. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Minimum Standards Required
9-3-2: Streets And Alleys
9-3-2-1: Location And Design
9-3-2-2: Street Widths
9-3-2-3: Intersections
9-3-2-4: Street Names
9-3-2-5: Private Streets And Private Alleys
9-3-3: Pedestrian Walkways
9-3-4: Blocks
9-3-5: Lots
9-3-6: Easements
9-3-7: Planting Strips And Reserve Strips
9-3-8: Public Sites And Open Spaces
9-3-9: Water System
9-3-10: Fences
9-3-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth in this chapter and with all applicable requirements set forth in
title 8, chapter 6, "Planned Unit Developments", of this code; provided,
however, that any higher standards adopted by any highway district, the Idaho
transportation department or health agency shall prevail over those set forth
herein. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
9-3-2-1: LOCATION AND DESIGN:
Street and road location and design shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Street Location And Arrangements: When an official street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall
conform to such plans.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
   C.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement
of streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to the
boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said
streets into adjacent areas, and shall have a cul-de-sac or temporary cul-de-
sac. A reserve street may be required and held in public ownership.
   D.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to
topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
   E.   Public alleys shall be approved by the Ada County Highway District and
Eagle Fire District. Dead end public alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
Private alleys shall be approved by the Eagle Fire District and shall be in
compliance with private alley regulations provided for within this Title.
   F.   Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial
street, it shall be required that there be frontage roads approximately
parallel to and on each side of such arterial street; or, such other treatment
as is necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties and to
separate through traffic from local traffic.
   G.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than seven
hundred fifty feet (750') in length and shall terminate with an adequate
circular turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') of right of way
including a landscape island with a minimum radius of ten feet (10'). A minimum
of forty feet (40') of pavement shall be provided between the landscape island
and the outside edge of the street as measured from the face of curb of the
island to the face of curb located on the outside edge of the street. One
traffic control sign stating that on street parking is prohibited within the
turnaround shall be installed at the entrance of the turnaround on the driver's
side of the street. The following exceptions may be considered by the council:
      1.   Alternative types of turnarounds for cul-de-sacs which will provide
access to less than thirteen (13) dwelling units may be permitted by the city
if approved by the fire department and the highway district having
jurisdiction.
      2.   In zoning districts which prohibit densities greater than one
dwelling unit per two (2) acres, cul-de-sac streets up to a maximum of one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') in length may be permitted by the city if
approved by the fire department and the highway district having jurisdiction.
No more than twenty (20) dwelling units shall be permitted on said cul-de-sac.
      3.   In zoning districts which prohibit densities greater than one
dwelling unit per five (5) acres, cul-de-sac streets up to a maximum of two
thousand eight hundred feet (2,800') in length may be permitted by the city if
approved by the fire department and the highway district having jurisdiction.
No more than twenty (20) dwelling units shall be permitted on said cul-de-sac.
   H.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with this title and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of
the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street
shall be dedicated within such tract.
   I.   Private Streets: Private streets that provide access to no more than
ten percent (10%) of the lots may be permitted within planned unit developments
provided that the standards within section
9-3-2-5 of this chapter are met.
   J.   Driveways: Driveways which provide access to no more than two (2) lots
shall be allowed within any subdivision provided at least one (1) of the lots
has the minimum street frontage required in section
8-2-4 of this code.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-3-2-2: STREET WIDTHS:
   A.   Street and road right of way widths, grade, alignment, and so forth,
shall conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive plan and shall
be approved by the highway district and/or other agency having jurisdiction.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, access from a frontage
road onto an arterial street shall be limited to one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') between points. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-2-3: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Angle Of Intersection: Angles of street and driveway intersections
shall be approved by the highway district having jurisdiction.
   B.   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all street and
driveway intersections shall be approved by the highway district having
jurisdiction.
   C.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-2-4: STREET NAMES:
The naming of streets shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   A street name shall not duplicate any existing street name within the
county except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street.
Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing
street names shall not be used.
   B.   All new streets shall be named as follows:
      1.   Streets having a predominately north-south direction shall be named
"avenue", except for section line streets which shall be named "road".
      2.   Streets having a predominately east-west direction shall be named
"street", except for section line streets which shall be named "road".
      3.   Meandering streets having a predominately north-south direction
shall be named "way".
      4.   Meandering streets having a predominately east-west direction shall
be named "drive".
      5.   Cul-de-sacs having a predominately north-south direction shall be
named "place".
      6.   Cul-de-sacs having a predominately east-west direction shall be
named "court". (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-2-5: PRIVATE STREETS AND PRIVATE ALLEYS:
Private streets and private alleys may be permitted, in the discretion of the
council, subject to the following:
   A.   Compliance: The council must find that any proposed private streets or
private alleys are in compliance with each of the following criteria:
      1.   Unique or special circumstances exist with respect to the proposed
use, design, location, topography, or other features of the development or its
surroundings such that private streets and or private alleys will serve to
enhance the overall development.
      2.   Safe and effective movement of both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, sidewalks, and parking are provided.
      3.   Adequate access for service and emergency vehicles is provided.
      4.   Access and good transportation planning to adjacent property and to
the area travel networks is not adversely affected.
      5.   Adjacent property will not be landlocked by the site layout.
      6.   Other than to provide emergency access, the private streets, or
private alleys, do not connect one public street to another, thereby
encouraging travel through the development served by the private street;
provided, however, that in order to provide secondary access, a private street
may have more than one connection to a public street and/or may be connected to
more than one public street if access thereto is controlled by automatic gates
or other control devices approved by the council.
      7.   The use or alignment of the private streets or alleys do not
interfere with the continuity of public streets.
      8.   An appropriate mechanism has been established for the repair and
maintenance of the private streets and private alleys, including provisions for
the funding thereof.
      9.   Private streets and private alleys are only permitted within a
planned unit development and are limited to providing access to no more than
ten percent (10%) of the lots, except that private streets and private alleys
may serve all single family attached dwelling lots.
   B.   Construction And Design Standards: Private streets and private alleys
shall conform to the following construction and design requirements:
      1.   All private street and private alley construction shall be in
accordance with Ada County highway district's structural standards for streets
and alleys including base course and asphaltic concrete mat thickness utilizing
the appropriate traffic index or as may be recommended by the city engineer and
approved by the city council, and shall further be in accordance with Ada
County highway district's intersection design and drainage requirements, or as
may be recommended by the city engineer and approved by the city council.
      2.   Except as may be otherwise set forth in this section, private
streets and private alleys shall meet such design and dimensional requirements
as the council may determine are appropriate considering the proposed use and
the site upon which the private streets are to be placed, however, all private
streets shall contain paved travel lanes a minimum of twelve feet (12') in
width and private alleys shall contain paved travel lanes a minimum of ten feet
(10') in width and shall provide for the safe, convenient, and effective
movement of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic for private streets and
vehicle traffic for private alleys. Vertical curbing shall be provided for
private streets that are less than thirty-four feet (34') in total width.
Alleys must utilize other curb types.
      3.   Sidewalks shall be required in accordance with subsection
9-4-1-6F of this title. However, alternative sidewalk and landscape strip
designs may be approved by the City Council based upon a finding made by the
Council that characteristics and qualities of the development justify the
alternate design. Sidewalks and planter strips, as referenced within subsection
9-4-1-6F of this title, shall not be required along alleys.
      4.   The design engineer shall identify on the construction drawings for
the review and approval by the city engineer, all traffic signs needed for the
project, including, but not limited to, designated parking and "no parking"
areas, speed, stop, and such other signs as are required for safe pedestrian
and vehicle travel.
      5.   All private streets and private alleys shall, during the progress of
construction, be inspected and tested, at the expense of the owner or
developer, by a qualified inspector in order to ensure compliance with the
construction and design standards set forth in this section, the construction
drawings as prepared by the registered professional engineer, and good
engineering and construction practices. Reports of such inspections and tests
shall be submitted, together with a certification of such compliance, for the
review and approval by the city engineer.
      6.   All dead end private streets and private alleys shall terminate at
one of the following approved turnaround areas:
         a.   A cul-de-sac designed in accordance with the provisions of
subsection
9-3-2-1G of this chapter and subject to the approval of the Eagle fire district
and city engineer and provided further that proper maintenance of the island is
provided for;
         b.   A hammerhead/tee type turnaround or as may be otherwise approved
by the Eagle fire district and the city engineer; or
         c.   Such other turnaround area as may be approved by the Eagle fire
district, city engineer, and city council.
         d.   Private streets and private alleys not exceeding 150-feet may
terminate with no turn-around if approved by the Eagle Fire District.
      7.   The design of all private streets and private alleys and related
storm drainage facilities shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer
in the state in substantial conformance with engineering and design standards
in effect at the time of preparation of the design. Construction drawings,
together with a certification of such conformity, shall be submitted for the
review and approval by the city engineer. No part of this section shall be
construed as allowing a private street that is not in conformance with current
engineering and design standards.
      8.   If any provision of this section is found to be in conflict with any
other applicable provision of this title, the provision which establishes the
higher and/or more restrictive standard shall prevail, unless specifically
determined otherwise by the city council.
   C.   Access And Maintenance Requirements: Provisions shall be made for the
future maintenance of and access to private streets and private alleys as
follows:
      1.   A plan and schedule for the future repair and maintenance of the
private street and private alley and drainage facilities for the period of the
expected lifetime thereof and a cost estimate therefor prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in the state, together with a proposed method for funding
the same, including, but not limited to, the creation and maintenance of a
reserve fund for that purpose, shall be submitted with the final plat
application for review and approval by the city engineer and city council.
      2.   The location of private streets and private alleys shall be clearly
depicted on the face of the plat and notes shall be included on the face of the
plat which shall:
         a.   Act to convey to each lot owner within the subdivision to be
served by the private streets or private alleys the perpetual right of ingress
and egress over the described private street;
         b.   Provide that such perpetual easement shall run with the land; and
         c.   Provide that the restrictive covenant for maintenance of the
private streets or private alleys cannot be modified and the homeowners'/
property owners' association or other entity cannot be dissolved without the
express consent of the city.
      3.   A restrictive covenant for repair and maintenance of the private
streets or private alleys shall be recorded at the time of recording the plat
which said covenant shall create a homeowners'/property owners' association or
substantially similar entity and make provision for the perpetual maintenance
of the private streets or private alleys in accordance with the approved plan
as provided for in subsection C1 of this section. Said restrictive covenant
shall also provide that the said covenant shall run with the land and that the
said covenant cannot be modified and that the homeowners'/property owners'
association or other entity cannot be dissolved without the express consent of
the city. The said restrictive covenant shall be reviewed and approved by the
city attorney prior to certification and signing of the final plat by the city
engineer.
      4.   The council may, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion, order
the owners or the entity responsible for the maintenance of any private streets
or private alleys approved in accordance with the provisions of this section to
undertake such repair and maintenance activities as it may determine is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and make such
expenditures from the funds reserved therefor as may be required thereby; and
the owner or responsible entity shall, as a condition of approval of any such
private street, be deemed to have agreed to comply with any such order and to
reimburse the city all of its costs, including attorney fees, incurred in
obtaining or enforcing any such order. Any order entered by the council
pursuant to this subsection may be enforced by a court of competent
jurisdiction and the city shall be entitled to recover its costs and attorney
fees incurred in connection therewith.
   D.   Conformity To Comprehensive Plan: All private streets and private
alleys shall, in all respects, conform to all applicable components of the
comprehensive plan.
   E.   Waiver: The council may waive or modify any of the standards or
requirements of this section when the private streets or private alleys have
been determined to be an integral element of the overall plan and scheme of the
development or will serve to enhance the overall development; provided,
however, that any such waiver shall not be injurious to public health or
safety. (Ord. 753, 8-23-2016; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-3-3: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Right of way for pedestrian walkways in the middle of long blocks may be
required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to
schools, parks or shopping areas. The pedestrian easement shall be at least ten
feet (10') wide. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-4: BLOCKS:
Every block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, except
where lots back onto an arterial or collector street, public or private alley,
natural feature, or subdivision boundary. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-5: LOTS:
Lots shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Zoning: Lots within any subdivision shall comply in all respects with
the official height and area regulations as set forth in section
8-2-4 of this code, except that lot sizes that vary from the standards within
section
8-2-4 of this code may be considered as part of the planned unit development.
   B.   Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots (such as when large lots are approved for septic tanks),
the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for future
resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan
thereof shall be approved by the city council prior to taking of such action.
   C.   Sufficient Area For Septic Tank: Where individual septic tanks have
been authorized, sufficient area shall be provided for a replacement sewage
disposal system. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-6: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines,
rear lot lines and side lot lines. Easement width shall be ten (10') feet along
rear and front lot lines and five feet along each side lot line, except that
lesser easement widths, to coincide with respective setbacks, may be considered
as part of a planned unit development.
   B.   A five foot (5') wide unobstructed drainageway easement shall be
provided in conjunction with the utility easement along each side lot line or
as required by the city council, except that lesser easement widths, to
coincide with respective setbacks, may be considered as part of a planned unit
development.
   C.   All natural drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or be improved
in a manner which will improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the
channel. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-3-7: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Planting Strips/Buffer Areas: Planting strips/buffer areas shall be
required to be placed next to incompatible features such as highways,
railroads, commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential
properties and to provide noise mitigation for those residents. Such planting
strips/buffer areas shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide unless a
greater width is required within section
8-2A-7 of this code. The landscape strip/buffer area shall not be a part of the
normal street right of way and shall comply with all landscape/buffer area
requirements within section
8-2A-7 of this code.
   B.   Reserve Strips:
      1.   Private Reserve Strips: Privately held reserve strip access to
streets shall be prohibited.
      2.   Public Reserve Strips: A one foot (1') reserve may be required to be
placed along half streets which are within the subdivision boundaries and shall
be deemed in fee simple to the city for future street widening. (Ord. 566, 5-
15-2007)
9-3-8: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following standards:
   A.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use as shown on the future acquisition map, as
authorized in section 67-6517, Idaho Code is located in whole or in part within
a proposed subdivision, the city council shall notify the appropriate public
agency concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of
the date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to suspend
consideration on the subdivision for sixty (60) days, the city council shall
resume consideration of the subdivision.
   B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
   C.   Special Development: In the case of planned unit developments and large
scale developments, the city council may require sufficient public and/or
private park or open space facilities of acceptable size, location and site
characteristics that may be suitable for the proposed development.
   D.   Common Area Open Space: The minimum percentage of the gross area that
must be set aside for common area open space in new subdivisions shall be as
follows:
 
Zoning District            Open Space
R-2                        18 percent
R-3                        18 percent
R-4                        18 percent
R-5                        18 percent
MU (with residential uses) 18 percent
 
      1.   Active Open Space: A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the common
area open space shall be developed as active open space, as defined in section
9-1-6 of this title.
      2.   Compliance: All common area open space shall be evaluated for its
compliance with the following:
         a.   Landscaping: Streetscape, open spaces and plazas, use of existing
landscaping, pedestrianway treatment and recreational areas;
         b.   Siting: Visual focal points, use of existing physical features
such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation, circulation pattern,
physical environment.
      3.   Direct Access: A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of all lots shall
be designed to be adjacent to, or at a minimum, have direct access to common
area open space. The term "direct access" means all building lots are to be
located a maximum of two hundred fifty feet (250') away from a pathway
connecting to a common area open space lot. Building lots separated from a
common area open space lot by a local roadway shall be deemed to have achieved
direct access. The required planter strip located between the sidewalk and the
street will not be permitted to fulfill this requirement.
      4.   Ownership And Management Of Open Space:
         a.   Ownership Of Open Space: The applicant must identify the owner of
the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities
located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the
association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the
subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner,
the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection
of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and
any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner.
         b.   Management Plan: Applicant shall submit a plan for management of
open space and common facilities (plan) that:
            (1)   Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance
and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including
provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long term capital improvements;
            (2)   Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for
maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines
the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided;
            (3)   Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the city
council; and
            (4)   Provides for enforcement of the plan.
         c.   Temporary Maintenance By City; Corrective Action: In the event
the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all
or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city of Eagle may assume
temporary responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and
take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The
costs of such maintenance shall be charged to the owner, homeowners'
association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners'
association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs
shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. The exercise by the city of
Eagle of its right to assume temporary maintenance responsibility to take
corrective action shall not relieve the property owner of their maintenance
responsibility nor should it be construed as the city assuming permanent
responsibility for such maintenance. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-9: WATER SYSTEM:
The provision of a public water system shall conform to the following
standards:
   A.   All subdivisions within the Eagle city water service area shall comply
with
title 6, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-3-10: FENCES:
Any fencing located adjacent to common area open spaces and on the street side
of all corner lots shall be an open fencing style such as wrought iron or other
similar decorative style, durable fencing material, unless the fence is located
on the property line between the required roadway buffer area and the
residential lot, in which case the fence may be a solid wood picture frame or
premium vinyl picture frame fence as identified in the EASD book. If the buffer
area is designed so that the fence is visible from the adjacent roadway, then
the fence shall include decorative columns spaced a maximum of sixty feet (60')
apart. Specific buffer area fences and decorative walls may be allowed as
otherwise required in subsection
8-2A-7J of this code. Chain link, cedar, and similar high maintenance and/or
unsightly fencing shall not be permitted within the above designated areas. A
section within the subdivision CC&Rs shall be created for the regulation of
fences to this effect. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
CHAPTER 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Improvements Required
9-4-1-1: Monuments
9-4-1-2: Streets And Alleys
9-4-1-3: Curbs And Gutters
9-4-1-4: Street Signs
9-4-1-5: Streetlights
9-4-1-6: Pathway And Trail Regulations
9-4-1-7: Sidewalk Design And Maintenance
9-4-1-8: Underground Utilities
9-4-1-9: Water Supply And Sewer Systems
9-4-1-10: Storm Drainage; Flood Controls
9-4-1-11: Fire Hydrants And Water Mains
9-4-1-12: Landscape Buffer Areas
9-4-2: Construction Of Improvements
9-4-2-1: Construction Plans
9-4-2-2: Guarantee Of Improvements
9-4-2-3: Inspections
9-4-2-4: Failure To Complete Required Improvement Construction
9-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with the following conditions and specifications.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-1-1: MONUMENTS:
Monuments shall be set in accordance with section 50-1303, Idaho Code. (Ord.
566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-1-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
All public streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications adopted by the Ada County highway district or the
Idaho transportation department, whichever the case may be. (Ord. 566, 5-15-
2007)
9-4-1-3: CURBS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Vertical curbs and gutters shall be constructed on collector and
arterial streets.
      2.   Rolled curbs and gutters shall be required on minor streets.
      3.   All construction shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the Ada County highway district.
   B.   Driveways, Curb Cuts: All driveway openings and curbs shall be as
specified by the Ada County highway district or the Idaho transportation
department. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-1-4: STREET SIGNS:
Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations at each
street intersection in accordance with the local standards. A per street sign
fee shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-1-5: STREETLIGHTS:
Unless determined otherwise by the city council as part of the design of the
subdivision, all subdividers within the city limits shall be required to
install, at the subdividers' expense, streetlights in accordance with city
specifications and standards at locations designated by the administrator.
After inspection and confirmation of installation and operation by the
administrator, the subdivider (and subsequent homeowners’ association) shall
assume ownership of the streetlights and shall pay the cost of maintenance and
power in perpetuity. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 858,
10-26-2021)
9-4-1-6: PATHWAY AND TRAIL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: The placement of Pathways and Trails are intended for
management of motorized and non-motorized forms of use, to provide safe,
convenient, and aesthetic alternative travel routes to common destinations such
as schools, parks, shopping centers, etc., and to promote economic development
and recreation options in areas that allow it. The following factors will be
considered in the placement of any Pathway or Trail: the utility, need, and
impact to existing neighborhoods; soils and hydrology; erosion potential;
impacts to native wildlife habitat; special status plant; wildlife species;
cultural resources; compliance with the City of Eagle Comprehensive Plan;
compliance with the City of Eagle Pathways and Trails Master Plan; compliance
with any approved Open Space, Wildlife Mitigation Plan, or similar document for
the development; design as it relates to both crime prevention and function;
and the responsibilities of ownership and maintenance.
   B.   Pathway and Trail Terms:
      1.   Pathways: Facilities that are designed to improve connectivity
throughout the Pathway system and developments. The term Pathways shall refer
to those facilities that are regulated and managed by the City or depicted in
the City's Pathways and Trails Master Plan.
      2.   Trails: Facilities that are designed to improve connectivity
throughout the Trail system and development. Trails shall have an open space
and trail planning/funding process approved by the City. Trails shall be
managed by the party outlined in the approved open space and trail planning/
funding process.
      3.   Trailhead: A designated area used for access to Pathways or Trails
that may include vehicle parking, bike parking, restrooms, and other facilities
related to trail use.
      4.   Regional Pathways and Trails: Facilities that are intended to
provide regional connectivity throughout the City.
      5.   Community Pathway: Facilities that are intended to provide routes to
and through developments connecting to or providing linkage to regional
facilities, arterials and collectors that provide alternative transportation
features, or adjacent developments.
      6.   Neighborhood Pathways: Facilities that are intended to be integrated
into the design of common area open spaces within neighborhoods and provide
connectivity on a neighborhood scale.
      7.   Tread: the finished usable surface of a pathway or trail:
         a.   Hard Surface: Refers to tread materials such as concrete,
asphalt, pavers, and rigid permeable composites.
         b.   Natural Surface: Refers to tread materials made of stone and
other natural materials that have been engineered for specific applications
such as gravel, and road mix.
         c.   Native Surface: Refers to tread materials made from non-
engineered materials, such as native soil or aggregate.
   C.   Management and Regulations:
      1.   All Pathways and Trails that are not deemed to be private, by the
City, shall have public access.
      2.   Such access shall be perpetual and non-revocable but may be
relocated by the landowner so long as the connectivity provided by the original
access is not materially affected.
      3.   Pathways within a platted area shall be identified on the plat with
a note, creating a public access easement for the pathway.
      4.   Details for pavers and rigid permeable composites, used on a
pathway, shall be approved by the City.
      5.   Trails shall be surveyed or provided with a center line in GIS or
CAD format with a defined area in the attribute, i.e., width and type of trail,
and conform to City data standards.
      6.   All Trails shall have an open space and trail planning/funding
process approved by the City. This process shall include:
         a.   Standardized application and review process for new or modified
Trails and open space projects.
         b.   A defined funding and management structure for implementation and
maintenance of the trail/pathway system in perpetuity.
         c.   If an open space and trail planning/funding process is created
after the subdivision has been approved by the City, City approval is required.
   D.   Pathways:
      1.   Signage:
         a.   Within public access easement(s) granted to the City; the City
shall reserve the right to display signage.
         b.   The physical form including materials, placement, and messaging
of any signage that the developer or HOA wishes to display within the public
access easement(s) granted to the City, or signage placed within a five hundred
feet (500') of a City-managed pathway with messaging directed to pathway users,
must be approved in writing by the City.
         c.   Developer shall add language to the governing documents of the
development (i.e CCR's, charters, bylaws, etc.) that ensures signage will not
be placed in any area that would otherwise mislead the public regarding their
right to public access of the Pathways.
      2.   Pet Waste Stations and Trash Receptacles:
         a.   For the health and safety of the public, pet waste bag stations
and trash receptacles may be required by the City within public access easement
(s) granted to the City.
         b.   Shall be maintained by the property owner or the City as
determined by the City.
      3.   Location:
         a.   The City shall require general conformity with the City's
Pathways and Trails Master Plan, the approved Open Space and Wildlife
Mitigation Plan, or similar document for that development. In addition to
conformity with the aforementioned plans, consideration shall be given for
connectivity to the following facilities:
            (1)   Schools;
            (2)   Park areas and open space;
            (3)   Other pathway and trail facilities, including nearby
trailheads;
            (4)   Nearby residential areas;
            (5)   Public land;
            (6)   Public and private transit facilities; and
            (7)   Future subdivision phases.
         b.   Pathways may be required to connect sites other than those noted
above when there is evidence that a pedestrian/cyclist would otherwise be
forced to travel alongside a designated arterial roadway, or other roadway that
may be hazardous for non-motorized forms of travel, in order to reach the
desired destination.
         c.   Pathways may be required to connect to locations other than those
noted above to adapt to the changing needs of the public or to mitigate bike/
pedestrian hazards or safety concerns.
         d.   Where environmental concerns are observed, the Pathway may be
redesigned pursuant to the City's approval.
      4.   Design: The City will be responsible for approving the design of
Pathways. While the City may exercise considerable discretion in determining
the design of Pathways, the following minimum standards shall be followed:
         a.   Those standards adopted by resolution of the City Council titled,
"The City of Eagle Pathways and Trails Design and Construction Standards.
         b.   For all Pathways maintained by the City, a minimum of a four foot
(4') wide landscaped area, natural open space, area/building and fence setback,
as measured from both edges of the path, shall be required, and will be owned
by either the abutting property owner(s) or a homeowners' association unless
accepted by a public entity. The four foot (4') wide landscaped area on either
side of the pathway may be decreased to a minimum of two feet (2') wide (as
measured from the edge of the tread to the easement line) when used in
conjunction with a meandering pathway. However, the total width of the
landscape area shall not be less than eight feet (8') (i.e., two feet (2') on
one side of the path and six feet (6') on the other). For safety purposes,
planting material in this area is limited to three feet (3') in height.
Exceptions may be granted by the City based on site limitations or alternative
management guidelines.
         c.   Alternative design(s) may be approved by the City.
      5.   Classifications:
         a.   Regional:
            (1)   The tread shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width.
            (2)   Shall be constructed to the City Pathways and Trails Design
and Construction Standards, unless otherwise approved by the City.
            (3)   Shall be maintained by the City, HOA, developer, or property
owner, as determined by the City.
            (4)   Tread surface shall be determined by the City.
            (5)   Shall include a twenty-five foot (25') wide public access
easement for City maintained Pathways. All Pathways not dedicated to the City
shall have an easement width of a minimum of the tread width plus four feet
(4') on each side unless the pathway is located within a public right-of-way,
then an easement is not required. The City may grant an exception to the
required easement width.
            (6)   Adequate lighting for bridges and tunnels may be required as
determined by the City.
            (7)   To mitigate congestion along roadways related to regional
pathways, off-street public parking may be required by the City.
         b.   Community:
            (1)   Shall be eight-foot (8') in width unless otherwise approved
by the City.
            (2)   Shall be constructed to the City Pathways and Trails Design
and Construction Standards, Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction
(ISPWC), or Ada County Highway District (ACHD) Sidewalk Standard as determined
by the City.
            (3)   Shall be maintained by the City, HOA, developer, or property
owner, as determined by City.
            (4)   Tread surface shall be determined by the City.
            (5)   Shall include a twenty-five foot (25') wide public access
easement for City maintained Pathways. All Pathways not dedicated to the City
shall have an easement width of a minimum of the tread width plus four feet
(4') on each side unless the pathway is located within a public right-of-way,
then an easement is not required. The City may grant an exception to the
required easement width.
         c.   Neighborhood:
            (1)   Shall be six feet (6') in width unless otherwise approved by
the City.
            (2)   Shall be constructed to the City Pathways and Trails Design
and Construction Standards, Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction
(ISPWC), or Ada County Highway District (ACHD) Sidewalk Standard as determined
by the City.
            (3)   Tread surface shall be determined by the City.
         d.   Special Use Pathways:
            (1)   Tread may vary in width depending on the location.
            (2)   No required maximum grade shall be implemented.
            (3)   Tread surface shall be determined by the City.
   E.   Trails:
      1.   Location:
         a.   While Trails do not require an approval by the City, whenever
possible they should facilitate connectivity to:
            (1)   Schools;
            (2)   Park areas and open space;
            (3)   Other pathway and trail facilities, including nearby
trailheads;
            (4)   Nearby residential areas;
            (5)   Public land;
            (6)   Public and private transit facilities; and
            (7)   Future subdivision phases.
      2.   Classifications:
         a.   Regional:
            (1)   Shall be constructed to the City Pathways and Trails Design
and Construction Standards, Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction
(ISPWC), or Ada County Highway District (ACHD) Sidewalk Standard, unless a
different standard has been approved by the City.
            (2)   The tread shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width.
            (3)   Shall be maintained by the entity described in the City
approved open space and trail planning/funding process.
            (4)   Shall have public access the width of the tread.
            (5)   The City may grant an exception to the required access width.
         b.   Special Use Trails:
            (1)   Tread may vary in width depending on the location.
            (2)   No required max grade shall be implemented.
   F.    Notwithstanding the above requirements, if a City-approved management
plan such as a wildlife management plan or wildfire management plan or similar
plan conflict(s) with any provisions of ECC Section 9-4-1-6, the approved
management plan shall take precedence.
   G.   Waiver: The council may waive or modify any of the standards or
requirements of this section upon the determination that the proposed
alternative will enhance the overall project; provided, however, that any such
waiver shall not be injurious to public health or safety.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019; Ord. 827, 10-22-2020; Ord.
858, 10-26-2021; Ord. 868, 8-8-2022; Ord. 897, 6-27-2023)
9-4-1-7: SIDEWALK DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Sidewalks, a minimum five feet (5') wide, shall be required on both
sides of the street; except, that where the average width of lots, as measured
at the street frontage line or at the building setback line, is over one
hundred feet (100'), and the street is designated a local street, sidewalks on
only one side of the street may be allowed. This sidewalk exception shall not
be permitted on collectors, arterials, or section line streets.
   B.   Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Ada County Highway
District.
   C.   Sidewalks shall be separated from the edge of the abutting roadway and/
or back of curb by a minimum eight foot (8') wide landscape strip. The
landscape strip shall be completed with sod, automatic irrigation, and planted
with two inch (2") minimum caliper shade class trees along all streets within
the subdivision. Installation of landscaping shall be in accordance with
section
8-2A-7 of this code. The area within the eight foot (8') wide landscape strip
may be counted toward the minimum required common area open space.
   D.   Trees shall be placed at the front of each lot generally located on
each side lot line. Minor variations to the location of a tree may be
considered by the design review board during the review of the subdivision
landscape plan.
   E.   If sidewalk is required on one side of each street only (as provided
for in subsection A of this section), then the trees on the side of the street
with no sidewalk shall be placed within five feet (5') of the edge of roadway.
   F.   In zoning districts which prohibit densities greater than one dwelling
unit per two (2) acres and at the council's discretion, a five foot (5') wide
striped path (with pedestrian designation markings such as diamonds or
pedestrian/bicycle symbols) on both edges of all internal roadways may be
permitted in lieu of constructing sidewalks. Trees shall be placed within five
feet (5') of the edge of roadway. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 868, 8-8-
2022)
9-4-1-8: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Underground utilities are required. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-1-9: WATER SUPPLY AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Construction; Extension: All public water supply or sewer systems
(serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be constructed in
accordance with any adopted local plans and specifications. All new public
water supply or sewer systems shall be an extension of an existing public
system whenever possible. In the event that the proposed public water supply or
sewer system is not an extension of an existing public system, there shall be a
showing by the subdivider that the extension is not feasible and not in the
best interest of the public.
   B.   Approval Of Plans: All water and sewer plans shall be submitted to the
Idaho department of health and welfare or its authorized agent for approval in
accordance with the provisions of section 50-1326, Idaho Code.
   C.   Pressurized Irrigation Facilities:
      1.   All residential dwelling units and subdivision common areas shall be
provided with a pressurized irrigation system to be served with irrigation
water from a surface water right unless a waiver, as outlined herein, is
approved by the city council.
The city has adopted supplemental standards and regulations (titled "Pressure
Irrigation Standards", incorporated herein by reference and available at Eagle
city hall) pertaining to the design, construction and maintenance of
pressurized irrigation systems. Plans and documents reflecting the required
standards and regulations shall be submitted with the application for a
preliminary plat.
The following design requirements and the requirements provided within the
supplemental "Pressure Irrigation Standards" shall apply to the pressurized
irrigation system. These standards shall supplement all other regulations, and
where at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the
more restrictive requirements shall apply. The council may determine that
revisions to the supplemental standards are warranted and make such revisions
by act of a resolution.
         a.   The pressurized irrigation system may have a backup connection to
a potable water system with the approval of the city, city engineer, and the
potable water purveyor, and the installation of a state approved reduced
pressure backflow prevention assembly or an air gap separating the irrigation
system and the potable water system. The operation, maintenance, associated
costs, and annual inspection of the backup connection and the backup system's
reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly shall be the responsibility of
the entities as determined in "Pressure Irrigation Standards" of this section.
Individual backup connections to individual lots by individual lot owners shall
be prohibited with the exception of the common area lots owned and maintained
by the homeowners' association.
         b.   The pressurized irrigation system shall be designed by a licensed
professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho, and the construction
plans for the system shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer.
      2.   The requirement for installation of a pressurized irrigation system
may be waived by the city council when the applicant has established that any
of the following situations exist (the sale or transfer of an existing water
right shall not be grounds for requesting a waiver pursuant to this provision):
         a.   Where a sufficient surface irrigation water right does not exist
for the property. The lack of surface irrigation water right shall be
documented in writing by the appropriate irrigation district or canal company
and the department of water resources and shall be submitted with the
subdivision preliminary plat. In this case a waiver shall only be granted for
that portion of the subdivision that cannot be served.
         b.   Where an existing surface water right cannot be delivered to the
property by an irrigation district or canal company due to current delivery
capacity or scheduling. In these situations the city council may still require
the installation of the pressure irrigation system, provided water rights can
be made available to the property and delivery system modifications can be made
so irrigation water can be supplied within two (2) years.
         c.   Where the applicant has provided for another means of delivery
such as flood irrigation, if approved by the city engineer. The applicant shall
present the proposed alternative delivery system to the city engineer at the
time the waiver is requested.
         d.   That due to the specific circumstances surrounding a new
subdivision, the cost of obtaining water rights, reestablishing water rights or
developing the system would impose an undue economic hardship on the developer.
For purposes of this section, an undue economic hardship shall consist of a
showing that the cost per lot to develop the pressurized irrigation system
would be twenty five percent (25%) higher than the cost per lot for providing a
pressurized irrigation system to subdivisions of similar size and density
constructed in the city within the previous two (2) years; or the cost per lot
of the pressurized irrigation system would exceed five percent (5%) of the
expected per lot market value of the subdivision.
The developer shall bear the burden of providing documentation, acceptable to
the city engineer and city council, demonstrating and supporting the estimated
costs of construction of the pressurized irrigation system, and the cost per
lot for irrigation systems in those subdivisions built in the last two (2)
years as noted above, and the expected market value of the subdivision lots.
For phased developments, costs will be analyzed over all phases of the
development rather than the first phase only.
      3.   Should installation of a pressurized irrigation system be waived by
the city engineer, as outlined herein, compliance to Idaho Code 31-3805 is
still required.
      4.   Requests for waivers shall be submitted to the city with the
preliminary plat application and shall be accompanied by an irrigation report,
prepared by a licensed Idaho registered professional engineer, stating the
location and availability of surface irrigation water and documenting the basis
for the waiver request. If applicable, the irrigation report shall be
accompanied by a letter from the irrigation district or canal company stating
that water rights and/or a delivery system are not available to the property.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
9-4-1-10: STORM DRAINAGE; FLOOD CONTROLS 1 :
   A.   Adequate Storm Drainage System: An adequate storm drainage system to
accommodate storm water runoff from the public rights of way shall be required
in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision shall be
established by the Ada County highway district and/or the Idaho transportation
department, and construction shall follow the specifications and procedures
established by said Ada County highway district or Idaho transportation
department.
   B.   Interceptor Ditches: Interceptor ditches shall be established above all
cut/fill slopes, and the intercepted water conveyed to a stable channel or
natural drainageway with adequate capacity.
   C.   Curb, Gutter And Pavement Design: Curb, gutter and pavement design
shall be such that water on roadways is prevented from flowing off the roadway.
   D.   Natural Drainageway Treatment: Natural drainageways shall be riprapped
or otherwise stabilized below drainage and culvert discharge points for a
distance sufficient to convey the discharge without channel erosion.
   E.   Runoff From Impervious Cover: Runoff from areas of concentrated
impervious cover (for example, roofs, driveways and roads) shall be collected
and transported to a natural drainageway with sufficient capacity to accept the
discharge without undue erosion.
   F.   Deposit Of Waste Material Prohibited: Waste material from construction,
including soil and other solid materials, shall not be deposited within the
100-year floodplain.
   G.   Drainageways Or Hydraulic Structures In Major Waterways: Drainageways
or hydraulic structures in major waterways (defined as draining a basin area of
10 acres or more) shall be designed for the 100-year flood or to accommodate
the runoff projected in the soil conservation service hydrology guide for
residential development of the Boise front, whichever is greater. In minor
waterways (defined as draining a basin area of less than 10 acres), such
structures shall be designed for the 50-year flood or to accommodate the runoff
projected in the soil conservation service hydrology guide for residential
development of the Boise front, whichever is greater.
   H.   Storm Drainage Retention Facilities: On site retention or partial on
site retention of storm drainage from new developments is required in any case
where, due to development activity, such drainage would be increased either in
peak flow rate or in total quantity from that previously discharged from the
land or property being developed. Complete retention is required in all cases
except those where: 1) runoff flows directly, without crossing intervening
property, into an existing drain ditch or other drainage facility that is
operated and maintained by a drainage receiver, and 2) such drainage receiver
agrees, as evidenced by valid and binding public document, to receive a certain
definite quantity of storm drainage from the development. Retention on site of
any drainage not so accepted by a drainage receiver or of any drainage in
excess of the quantity accepted by a drainage receiver is a duty of the current
property owner at any time.
Retention or partial retention facilities shall be provided as an essential
part of such development. Design and construction of such retention facilities
shall conform to standards, entitled "Design Standards For Storm Drainage
Retention Facilities", adopted by resolution of the city council, and which
standards may, from time to time, be amended by subsequent resolution of the
council. All facilities shall be maintained on an ongoing basis in order to
perform as designed. Should any of the provisions of the supplemental standards
conflict with the standards set forth herein, the higher standard shall apply.
   I.   Sediment Catchment Ponds: Sediment catchment ponds shall be constructed
and maintained downstream from each development, unless sediment retention
facilities are otherwise provided. Any facility used shall provide for the
removal of surface debris and contaminants, as well as sediment retention.
   J.   Completion And Operation Deadline: The overall drainage system shall be
completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during
construction.
   K.   Alterations Of Major Drainageways: Alterations of major drainageways
shall be prohibited except for approved road crossings and drainage structures.
   L.   Natural Or Improved Open Channel Drainageways: Natural or improved open
channel drainageways shall be preserved or provided for in major waterways;
except, that at road crossings, conduits may be permitted. Minor waterways
shall be permitted to be enclosed in conduits.
   M.   Reservation Of Right To Require: The city reserves the right to require
installation of hydrologic measuring devices in drainageways within any
development at public expense.
   N.   Drainage System Plans: Drainage system plans shall show how lots will
be graded so that all runoff runs either over the curb, or to a drainage
easement, and that no runoff shall cross any lot line onto another lot except
within a drainage easement. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10 of this code.
9-4-1-11: FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATER MAINS:
Adequate fire protection shall be required in accordance with the appropriate
fire district standards. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-1-12: LANDSCAPE BUFFER AREAS:
Landscape buffer areas, in accordance with section
8-2A-7 of this code, shall be required for the protection of residential
properties from streets classified as collectors, arterials, freeways/
expressways, waterways, railroad rights of way or other features. Subdivision
plats shall show the location of all buffer areas. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-2: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Required improvements. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-2-1: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision
to have prepared by a registered engineer a complete set of construction plans,
including profiles, cross section, specifications and other supporting data,
for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved
with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final
plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public
agencies and all construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
public agencies' standards or specifications. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-4-2-2: GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
In lieu of the actual installation of any of the improvements required by this
title, title 8, conditions of approval from the development agreement, design
review, conditional use permit, or any other required application prior to the
city clerk signing the final plat, the city council may permit the subdivider
to provide a surety/financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination
of the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond
the requirements of any other agency responsible for the administration,
operation and maintenance of the applicable required improvement:
   A.   Cash Deposit, Certified Check, Or Irrevocable Bank Letter Of Credit: A
cash deposit, certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit (issued
by a local bank in the Eagle/Boise area), in the amount equal to one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the estimated construction costs of the required
improvements shall be provided by the owner/developer and held by the city
until said construction is complete. Construction cost estimates shall be
reviewed and approved by the city zoning administrator prior to city acceptance
of said surety. The surety initiation and extension fees shall be established
by resolution of the city council.
   In the case of cash deposits or certified checks, an agreement between the
city council and the subdivider may provide for progressive payment out of the
cash deposit or reduction of the certified check, to the extent of the cost of
the completed portion of the public improvement, in accordance with a
previously entered into agreement.
   B.   Completion Time: All required improvements shall be completed within
one (1) year from the date of acceptance of the surety/financial guarantee of
performance by the city. The zoning administrator may authorize a delay in the
completion of the required improvements if at a minimum, the surety is
extended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no final occupancy permit will be
issued for any residence or business, whichever is applicable, until the
sidewalk, sod, automatic irrigation, and street trees required in section
9-4-1-6 of this chapter have been installed along the frontage of the lot that
said residence/business is located upon. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820,
12-10-2019)
9-4-2-3: INSPECTIONS:
Prior to the city clerk signing the final plat, the city shall inspect the
subdivision to assure compliance with the approved plans. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007;
amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
9-4-2-4: FAILURE TO COMPLETE PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION:
In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work
within the period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for
the completion of required improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the
city council to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish
this, the city council shall appropriate the cash deposit, certified check, or
irrevocable bank letter of credit, or may take such steps as may be necessary
to require performance by the surety company, and as may be included in a
written agreement between the city council and the subdivider. (Ord. 566, 5-15-
2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Purpose And Summary Of Provisions
9-5-2: Supplementary Provisions
9-5-3: Hillside Subdivisions
9-5-3-1: Preservation Of Natural Features
9-5-3-2: Development Evaluation
9-5-3-3: Engineering Plans
9-5-3-4: Grading Plans
9-5-3-5: Development Standards
9-5-3-6: Vegetation And Revegetation
9-5-3-7: Maintenance Required
9-5-3-8: Underground Utilities
9-5-3-9: Additional Plat Requirements
9-5-4: Planned Unit Development Subdivisions
9-5-4-1: Application Of Provisions
9-5-4-2: Site Development Plan
9-5-4-3: Site And Structure Requirements
9-5-4-4: Control During Development; Time Limit
9-5-5: Large Scale Development Subdivisions; Required Information
9-5-6: Cemetery Subdivisions
9-5-7: Subdivision Within A Floodplain
9-5-8: Subdivision Within An Area Of Critical Concern
9-5-9: Condominium Subdivisions
9-5-1: PURPOSE AND SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify various types of developments that
normally pose special concerns to the elected officials when reviewing and
acting upon subdivision requests. This chapter outlines the plan submittal
requirements and design standards that shall be taken into consideration when
acting on special developments. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-2: SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to the plan requirements, design
standards and improvement standards that are required by chapters 2, 3, and 4
of this title. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-3: HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS:
All hillside subdivisions shall be submitted as a Planned Unit Development.
(Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-5-3-1: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES:
In order to preserve, retain, enhance and promote the existing and future
appearance, natural topographic features, qualities and resources of hillsides,
special consideration shall be given to the following:
   A.   Skyline and ridge tops;
   B.   Rolling grassy landforms, including knolls, ridges and meadows;
   C.   Tree and shrub masses, grass, wildflowers and topsoil;
   D.   Rock outcroppings;
   E.   Streambeds, draws and drainage swales, especially where tree and plant
formations occur; and
   F.   Characteristic vistas and scenic panoramas. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-3-2: DEVELOPMENT EVALUATION:
   A.   All development proposals shall take into account and shall be judged
by the way in which land use planning, soil mechanics, engineering geology,
hydrology, civil engineering, environmental and civil design, and architectural
and landscape design are applied in hillside areas, including, but not limited
to:
      1.   Planning on development to fit the topography, soils, geology,
hydrology and other conditions existing on the proposed site;
      2.   Orientation of development on the site so that grading and other
site preparation is kept to an absolute minimum;
      3.   Shaping of essential grading to blend with natural landforms and to
minimize the necessity of padding and/or terracing of building sites;
      4.   Division of large tracts into smaller workable units on which
construction can be completed within one construction season so that large
areas are not left bare and exposed during the winter-spring runoff period;
      5.   Completion of paving as rapidly as possible after grading;
      6.   Allocation of areas not well suited for development because of soil,
geology or hydrology limitations for open space and recreation uses;
      7.   Minimizing and disruption of existing plant and animal life; and
      8.   Consideration of the view from and of the hills.
   B.   Areas having soil, geology or hydrology hazards shall not be developed
unless it is shown that:
      1.   Their limitations can be overcome;
      2.   Hazard to life or property will not exist;
      3.   The safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel is
not jeopardized; and
      4.   The natural environment is not subjected to undue impact. (Ord. 566,
5-15-2007)
9-5-3-3: ENGINEERING PLANS:
The developer shall retain a professional engineer(s) to obtain the following
information:
   A.   Soils Report: For any proposed hillside development, a soils
engineering report shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report
shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing
soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, design criteria
for corrective measures and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy
of sites to be developed.
   B.   Geology Report: For any proposed hillside development, a geology report
shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall include an
adequate description of site geology and an evaluation of the relationship
between the proposed development and the underlying geology and recommendations
for remedial remedies.
The investigation and subsequent report shall be completed by a professional
geologist registered in the state of Idaho.
   C.   Hydrology Report: For any proposed hillside development, a hydrology
report shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This report shall include
an adequate description of the hydrology, conclusions and recommendations
regarding the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, and
opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-3-4: GRADING PLANS:
The developer shall retain a professional engineer(s) to obtain the following
information:
   A.   Preliminary Grading Plan: A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted
with each hillside preliminary plat proposal and shall include the following
information:
      1.   Approximate limiting dimensions, evaluations or finish contours to
be achieved by the grading, including all cut and fill slopes, proposed
drainage channels and related construction;
      2.   Preliminary plans and approximate locations of all surface and
subsurface drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs
and other protective devices to be constructed; and
      3.   A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and
other material that is removed from the grading site, including the location of
the disposal site.
   B.   Final Grading Plan: A final grading plan shall be submitted with each
final plat and shall include the following information:
      1.   Limiting dimensions, evaluations or finish contours to be achieved
by the grading, including all proposed cut and fill slopes and proposed
drainage channels and related construction;
      2.   Detailed plans and locations of all surface and subsurface drainage
devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs and other protective
devices to be constructed; and
      3.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed,
including the total area of soil surface which is to be disturbed during each
stage together with estimated starting and completion dates. In no event shall
the existing natural vegetative ground cover be destroyed, removed or disturbed
more than fifteen (15) days prior to grading. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord.
858, 10-26-2021)
9-5-3-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Soils:
      1.   Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material such as
vegetation and rubbish, and any other material which is determined by the soils
engineer to be detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not conducive to
stability. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension
greater than eight inches (8") shall be used as fill material in fills that are
intended to provide structural strength.
      2.   Fills shall be compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) of
maximum density, as determined by AASHTO T99 and ASTM D698.
      3.   Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one
vertical. Subsurface drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability.
      4.   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one
vertical and shall not be located on natural slopes two to one (2:1) or
steeper, or where fill slopes toes out within twelve feet (12') horizontally of
the top of an existing or planned cut slope.
      5.   Tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property
boundaries a distance of three feet (3') plus one-fifth (1/5) of the height of
the cut or fill but need not exceed a horizontal distance of ten feet (10').
Tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures,
including pools and water features, a distance of six feet (6') plus one-fifth
(1/5) the height of the cut or fill, but need not exceed ten feet (10').
      6.   The maximum horizontal distance of disturbed soil surfaces shall not
exceed seventy five feet (75').
   B.   Roadways:
      1.   Road alignments should follow natural terrain and no unnecessary
cuts or fills shall be allowed in order to create additional lots or building
sites.
      2.   One-way streets shall be permitted and encouraged where appropriate
for the terrain and where public safety would not be jeopardized. Maximum width
shall be seventeen feet (17') between the backs and curbs.
      3.   The width of the graded section shall extend three feet (3') beyond
the curb back or edge of pavement on both the cut and fill sides of the
roadway. If sidewalk is to be installed parallel to the roadway, the graded
section shall be increased by the width of the sidewalk plus one foot (1')
beyond the curb back.
      4.   Standard six inch (6") vertical curb and gutter shall be installed
along both sides of all paved roadways.
   C.   Driveways And Parkings: Combinations of collective private driveways,
cluster parking areas and on street parallel parking bays shall be used to
attempt to optimize the objectives of minimum soil disturbance, minimum
impervious cover, excellence of design and aesthetic sensitivity. (Ord. 566, 5-
15-2007; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-5-3-6: VEGETATION AND REVEGETATION:
   A.   The developer shall submit a slope stabilization and revegetation plan
which shall include a complete description of the existing vegetation, the
vegetation to be removed and the method of disposal, the vegetation to be
planted and slope stabilization measures to be installed. The plan shall
include an analysis of the environmental effects of such operations, including
the effects on slope stability, soil erosion, water quality and fish and
wildlife.
   B.   Vegetation sufficient to stabilize the soil shall be established on all
disturbed areas as each stage of grading is completed. Areas not contained
within lot boundaries shall be protected with perennial vegetal cover after all
construction is completed. Efforts shall be made to plant those species that
tend to recover from fire damage and do not contribute to a rapid rate of fire
spread.
   C.   The developer shall be fully responsible for any destruction of native
vegetation proposed for retention. He shall carry the responsibility both for
his own employees and for all subcontractors from the first day of construction
until the notice of completion is filed. The developer shall be responsible for
replacing such destroyed vegetation. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-3-7: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
The owner of any private property on which grading or other work has been
performed pursuant to a grading plan approved or a building permit granted
under the provisions of this title shall continuously maintain and repair all
graded surfaces and erosion prevention devices, retaining walls, drainage
structures or means, and other protective devices, plantings and ground cover
installed or completed. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-3-8: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
All new service utilities shall be placed underground. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-3-9: ADDITIONAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All subdivision plats shall identify and designate the tops and toes of
cut and fill slopes and the associated structure setback line as required by
Section
9-5-3-5 (A)(5).
   B.   All subdivision plats shall contain note(s) that warn prospective
buyers of property that any modification(s) to the slopes will be required to
be permitted under the city of Eagle hillside ordinance.
   C.   All subdivision plats shall contain note(s) that refer to the required
Vegetation and Maintenance plans required under Section
9-5-3-6 and
9-5-3-7 of this code. (Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-5-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
A planned unit development is a mechanism by which the city may permit a
variety in type, design, and arrangement of structures; and enable the
coordination of project characteristics with features of a particular site in a
manner consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. A planned unit
development allows for innovations and special features in site development,
including the location of structures, conservation of natural land features,
conservation of energy and efficient utilization of open space. Large scale
developments as defined herein shall be submitted as planned unit developments.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, planned unit developments
shall also be subject to requirements set forth in title 8, "Zoning", title 10,
"Flood Control", and
title 8, chapter 2, article A, "Design Review Overlay District", of this code.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-4-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The developer shall provide a colored rendering to adequate scale to show the
completed development that will include at least the following:
   A.   Architectural style and building design;
   B.   Building materials and color;
   C.   Landscaping, including existing trees;
   D.   Screening;
   E.   Garbage areas;
   F.   Parking;
   G.   Open space; and
   H.   Open fencing. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-4-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Area: A planned unit development shall contain an area as
specified in title 8, "Zoning", of this code.
   B.   Private Streets: Private streets may be permitted pursuant to the
provisions of section
9-3-2-5 of this title.
   C.   Storage Areas: Storage areas may be provided for the anticipated needs
of boats, campers and trailers. For typical residential development, one
adequate space should be provided for every two (2) living units. This may be
reduced by the city council if there is a showing that the needs of a
particular development are less.
In lieu of providing an on site storage area, the subdivider shall include
provisions within the subdivision CC&Rs that prohibit the outdoor storage of
boats, campers, recreational vehicles, and trailers and otherwise direct that
all such items are to be stored off site.
   D.   Parking Spaces: One additional parking space beyond that which is
required by title 8, "Zoning", of this code, may be required for every three
(3) dwelling units to accommodate visitor parking.
   E.   Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided of such
size and in such location as is suitable for the service needs that are
necessary for the repair and maintenance of all common areas.
In lieu of providing an on site maintenance building, the subdivider shall
include provisions within the subdivision CC&Rs that require all subdivision
common area open space maintenance to be completed though the use of a
landscape maintenance firm with facilities located outside the boundaries of
the subdivision.
   F.   Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the
development and shall be of such shape and area to be usable and convenient to
the residents of the development. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-4-4: CONTROL DURING DEVELOPMENT; TIME LIMIT:
Single ownership or control during development shall be required and a time
limit may be imposed to guarantee the development is built and constructed as
planned. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-5-5: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS; REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Large scale development subdivisions shall be submitted as planned unit
developments. Due to the impact that a large scale development would have on
public utilities and services, the developer shall submit the following
information along with the preliminary plat:
   A.   Identification of all public services that would be provided to the
development including, but not limited to, fire protection, police protection,
central water, central sewer, road construction, parks and open space,
recreation, maintenance, schools and solid waste collection;
   B.   Estimate of the public service costs to provide adequate service to the
development;
   C.   Estimate of the tax revenue that will be generated from the
development; and
   D.   Suggested public means of financing the services for the development if
the cost for the public services would not be offset by tax revenue received
from the development. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
9-5-6: CEMETERY SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Submission Of Proposed Function: The developer of any cemetery
subdivision shall provide the commission with written documentation that will
sufficiently explain the functions of the proposed cemetery for either human or
animal remains.
   B.   Compliance With State Law: The developer of any cemetery subdivision
shall submit a written statement that has been prepared by an attorney that
adequately assures the compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural
management requirements that are outlined in title 27, Idaho Code. (Ord. 566,
5-15-2007)
9-5-7: SUBDIVISION WITHIN A FLOODPLAIN:
In addition to the provisions of this title, any subdivision within the
designated floodplain of the city shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the floodplain regulations of the city as now in effect or as may hereafter
be amended 1 . (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
9-5-8: SUBDIVISION WITHIN AN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
   A.   Designation Of Areas Of Critical Concern: Hazardous or unique areas may
be designated as areas of critical concern by the city council or by the state
of Idaho. Special consideration shall be given to any proposed development
within an area of critical concern to assure that the development is necessary
and desirable and in the public interest in view of the existing unique
conditions. Hazardous or unique areas that may be designated as areas of
critical concern are as follows:
      1.   Earthquake location;
      2.   Unstable soils;
      3.   Unique animal life;
      4.   Unique plant life;
      5.   Scenic areas;
      6.   Historical significance;
      7.   Floodplain;
      8.   Center city;
      9.   Areas within the area of city impact 1 , but outside city
boundaries; and
      10.   Other areas of critical concern.
   B.   Environmental Assessment Plan: The developer shall prepare and submit
an environmental assessment along with the preliminary plat application for any
development that is proposed within an area of critical concern.
The contents of the environmental assessment shall be prepared by an
interdisciplinary team of professionals that shall provide answers to the
following questions:
      1.   What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a
result of the proposed development?
      2.   What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur
so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
      3.   What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
      4.   What beneficial or detrimental effect would the development have on
the environment including, but not limited to, animal life, plant life, social
concerns, economic, noise, visual, available farmland and other?
   C.   Areas Of Critical Concern: The following areas are specifically
identified as areas of critical concern:
      1.   Boise River Floodplain: The Boise River floodplain and certain
intervening and immediately adjacent areas are designated as areas of critical
concern due to their ecological and scenic significance. This area comprises
the two (2) channels of the Boise River and intervening and immediately
adjacent areas, as depicted on the land use designation map of the most
recently adopted comprehensive plan, as a "special area", including that
portion in the Eagle impact area.
      2.   Dry Creek Floodplain: The Dry Creek floodplain is designated as an
area of critical concern due to its ecological and scenic significance. This
area comprises the "Dry Creek floodplain" as depicted on the land use
designation map of the most recently adopted comprehensive plan, including that
portion in the city of Eagle impact area.
      3.   North Foothills: The North Foothills area is designated as an area
of critical concern due to the topographic, ecological and scenic significance.
This area comprises all of the city of Eagle impact area north of Beacon Light
Road as depicted on the land use designation map of the most recently adopted
comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 566, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 820, 12-10-2019)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 8, chapter 8 of this code.
9-5-9: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
Any person desiring to create a condominium subdivision as herein defined and
in accordance with title 55, chapter 15, Idaho Code shall submit all necessary
applications to the administrator for review and approval. (Ord. 566, 5-15-
2007)
CHAPTER 6
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-6-1: Administration
9-6-2: Vacations And Dedications
9-6-3: Variances
9-6-4: Amendments
9-6-5: Enforcement And Penalties
9-6-6: Appeals
9-6-7: Application Deemed Null And Void
9-6-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The council shall appoint an administrator to carry out the provisions as
herein specified and to serve at the pleasure of the council. The administrator
shall receive and process all subdivision applications. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-6-2: VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Application For Vacation Or Dedication: Any property owner desiring to
vacate an existing subdivision, public right of way or easement shall complete
and file an application with the administrator. These provisions shall not
apply to the widening of any street which is shown in the comprehensive plan,
or the dedication of streets, rights of way or easements to be shown on a
recorded subdivision.
   B.   Administrative Action:
      1.   Action By Administrator: Upon receipt of the completed application,
the administrator shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon, shall
place the application on the agenda for consideration at the next regular
meeting of the commission which is held not less than fifteen (15) days after
the date of acceptance.
      2.   Recommendation By Commission: The commission shall review the
request and all agency responses and within thirty (30) days of the meeting at
which the issue was on the agenda, shall make a recommendation to the city
council for either approval, conditional approval or denial.
      3.   Action By Council:
         a.   Vacations: When considering an application for vacation
procedures, the city council shall establish a date for a public hearing and
give such public notice as required by law. The city council may approve, deny
or modify the application. Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated,
the city council shall provide adjacent property owners with a quitclaim deed
for the vacated rights of way in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
         b.   Dedications: When considering an application for dedication
procedures, the city council may approve, deny or modify the application. When
a dedication is approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed
or a bond furnished assuring the construction prior to acceptance of the
dedication. To complete the acceptance of any dedication of land, the owner
shall furnish to the city council a deed describing and conveying such lands to
be recorded with the county recorder.
         c.   Decision: The council shall review the request and all agency
responses and commission recommendation, and within thirty (30) days of the
meeting at which the issue was on the agenda either approve, conditionally
approve or deny the request.
   C.   Dedication Of Streets: Within a proposed subdivision, arterial and
collector streets, as shown on the comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to
the public in all cases. In general all other streets also shall be dedicated
to public use. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-6-3: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The commission may recommend to the city council a variance
from the provisions of this title on a finding that undue hardship results from
the strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements hereof or that
application of such provisions or requirements is impracticable.
   B.   Standards For Variances: No variance shall be favorably acted upon by
the city council unless there is a finding, upon recommendation by the
commission, as a result of a public hearing, that all of the following exist:
      1.   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property that the strict application of the provisions of this title would
clearly be impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases, the subdivider shall
first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provision or requirement
involved.
      2.   Strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result
in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography,
other physical conditions or other such conditions which are not self-
inflicted, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement
of the objectives of this title.
      3.   The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the
property is situated.
      4.   Such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code.
      5.   Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of this title and the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-6-4: AMENDMENTS:
The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this title upon recommendation from the
commission in the following manner:
   A.   The commission, prior to recommending an amendment, supplement, or
repeal of this title, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. The notice
requirements provided in section
8-7-8 of this code shall be followed. Following the commission hearing, if the
commission makes a material change in this title other than that published for
the present hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
commission forwards its recommendation to the council. A record of the
hearings, findings made and actions taken shall be maintained.
   B.   The city council, prior to adopting an amendment, supplement or repeal
of this title, shall conduct at least one public hearing using the same notice
and hearing procedures as the commission. The city council shall not hold a
public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing nor take action until
recommendations have been received from the commission. Following the hearing,
further notice and hearing shall be provided before the council adopts the
amendment, supplement or repeal. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-6-5: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement:
      1.   No subdivision plat required by this title or the Idaho Code shall
be admitted to the public land records of Ada County or recorded by the county
recorder until such subdivision plat has received final approval of the city
council.
      2.   No public board, agency, commission, official or other authority
shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the construction of any of
the public improvements required by this title until the final plat has
received the approval by the city council.
      3.   No permits for construction of any structure shall be issued on any
parcel or lot until it has been determined such parcel or lot meets the
requirements of this title.
      4.   The city attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal
action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this
title.
   B.   Violations And Penalties: Violations of any of the provisions of this
title or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
misdemeanor, and be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official
or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city council or any other public official or
private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or
prevent any violation of this title or of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 566, 5-15-2007)
9-6-6: APPEALS:
   A.   Final Decision Appeal: Any final decision by the zoning administrator
may be appealed to the city council. Within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the zoning administrator's written decision the appealing party shall
file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk before five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. or close of business, whichever occurs later, specifically identifying
which requirements are appealed to the city council including all reasons,
factual and legal, why the decision of the zoning administrator should be
overturned or modified.
   B.   Action By The City Council: Within twenty five (25) calendar days from
receipt of the written notice of appeal, the zoning administrator shall set a
hearing date for the appeal to be heard by the city council. The zoning
administrator and the city attorney shall provide the appellant and the city
council with a written response to the notice of appeal, including any other
documents filed by the appellant, at least three (3) calendar days prior to the
appeal hearing. After hearing the appeal, the city council may approve, approve
with supplementary conditions, or deny the appeal as presented. Within fourteen
(14) calendar days after a written decision has been rendered by the city
council, the zoning administrator shall provide the appellant with written
notice of the decision. (Ord. 647, 11-23-2010)
9-6-7: APPLICATION DEEMED NULL AND VOID:
Any application subject to this code for which the applicant does not provide
the submittal information as specified in writing by the Zoning Administrator
shall be deemed null and void 60 days after the request is made by the city if
the information is not provided. This deadline may be extended at the
discretion of the Zoning Administrator if it is determined that the applicant
is making a good faith effort to produce the requested information. Once deemed
null and void, the application fees shall not be refundable and a new
application and new fees will be required. (Ord. 858, 10-26-2021)
TITLE 10
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Findings Of Fact And Purpose
10-1-2: Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
10-1-3: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
10-1-4: Compliance With Provisions
10-1-5: Rules And Definitions
10-1-6: Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas
10-1-7: Development Permit Requirements
10-1-8: Flood Damage Reduction Provisions
10-1-8-1: Applicability
10-1-8-2: General Building Requirements
10-1-8-3: Anchoring
10-1-8-4: Water And Sewer Systems
10-1-8-5: Subdivisions
10-1-8-6: Specific Standards
10-1-8-7: Floodplain And Floodway Standards
10-1-9: Duties Of The Floodplain Administrator
10-1-10: Variances
10-1-11: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
10-1-12: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
10-1-13: Corrective Procedures
10-1-14: Violations And Penalties
10-1-15: Amendments
10-1-16: Legal Status Provisions
10-1-1: FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by structures which are inadequately
anchored, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by
the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood
heights and velocities.
      3.   Flooding is aggravated by the collection of debris upstream of the
many channel obstructions located in the floodplain areas. Such obstructions
include bridges, fences, houses, trees, etc. The accumulation of debris has
resulted in significantly higher water surface elevations upstream from the
obstructions than would otherwise be expected. Obstructions can and tend to
cause flooding to extend beyond anticipated FEMA 100-year flood boundaries at
points of debris accumulation which cannot be predicted.
      4.   All structures located roughly within the limits of the 500-year
floodplain are subject to inundation, if not directly impacted by the channel
itself, during floods of return frequencies of ten (10) to twenty (20) years.
This is due to the tendency of the channel to change abruptly, often cutting a
totally new channel in a few hours, during high water periods, because the
Boise River is wide, flat and has relatively shallow channel in many areas.
      5.   The levees built by private property owners may be considered by
FEMA to be inadequately designed or deteriorated such that they cannot be
classified as permanent structures capable of withstanding a 100-year flood;
and, therefore, may result in higher risk and be included in the area of
special flood hazard.
      6.   Encroachments (i.e., houses, fill, etc.) on floodplains reduce the
flood carrying capacity and increase flood heights, thus increasing flood
hazards beyond the encroachment. With every new structure or other development
since the FEMA 100-year flood boundary was determined, the ability of the
floodplain to function changes.
      7.   The Boise River and its tributaries and floodplains in Eagle are
essential to the well being of its citizens as a source of recreation, fish and
wildlife habitat, aesthetic beauty, and a source of irrigation water as well as
other economic and lifestyle values.
      8.   Development adjacent to waterways has had a direct effect on the
natural stream by destroying or greatly altering fish and wildlife habitat and
by unnaturally armoring the banks of the waterways to prevent erosion and
damage riparian areas thus resulting in increased risk to manmade structures.
      9.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management.
   B.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this title to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
      1.   To protect human life, health, and property;
      2.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special
flood hazard;
      6.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      7.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard, warn that city review and approval is not going
to prevent flooding and that flooding may occur, and advise of information
available to the city regarding flood hazards, studies and available options;
      8.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;
      9.   To provide a formal procedure for evaluation of floodplain
development permit applications;
      10.   To restrict or prohibit uses which are injurious to health, safety
or property in times of flood, which result in environmental damage, or that
cause increased flood heights or velocities;
      11.   To minimize the impact of development adjacent to waterways on
adjacent properties upstream, downstream and across waterways;
      12.   To review development plans for property adjacent to waterways to
minimize the obstruction of the conveyance of floodwaters, review drainage/
obstructions to flood carrying capacity, and guide development adjacent to
waterways toward the most appropriate building envelope for its particular
site;
      13.   To carry out the provisions of the comprehensive plan as well as
health, safety and welfare with regard to properties adjacent to waterways;
      14.   To review landscaping and access for flood carrying capacity and
preservation or enhancement of riparian vegetation;
      15.   To allow the river and creeks and their adjacent lands to convey
floodwaters to minimize property damage;
      16.   To regulate uses in the floodplain for the purpose of preserving,
protecting, and enhancing the abundance and diversity of fish, wildlife and
riparian resources; and
      17.   To protect, preserve and enhance the waterways and floodplains as a
recreation resource.
(Ord. 115, 5-12-1987; amd. Ord. 485, 7-24-2007; Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-2: OBJECTIVES AND METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
   B.   Requiring that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels and natural
protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion; and
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas. (Ord. 82, 12-14-1982; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho, pursuant to
Idaho Code sections 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local governments to
adopt floodplain management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum
floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human
life, health, and property.
   B.   Jurisdiction And Interpretation: This title shall apply to all special
flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city. In the interpretation
and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the city; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
provisions of the Idaho Code.
   C.   Conflicting Laws: This title does not in any way repeal, abrogate,
impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any other laws, ordinances,
regulations, easements, covenants or deed restrictions, and the like. However,
where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. 815, 7-
23-2019)
10-1-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, developed, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 82, 12-14-1982; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-5: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below or in section
8-1-2 of this code, certain words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted as set forth in said section
8-1-2 of this code. Any other terms or words not defined below or in section
8-1-2 of this code shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they
have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE): A structure on the same lot or
parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate
to the principal structure.
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING): An extension or increase in the floor area
or height of a building or structure.
APPEAL: A request to the city council for a review of the floodplain
administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOOD HAZARD: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone on a
community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three feet
(3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): A determination by the federal insurance
admininstrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area,
it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or
other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation,
when combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRAWL SPACE: The area of a house or structure between the lowest finish floor
and the bottom of the foundation excavation enclosed by continuous foundation
walls.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or
critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a
flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation,
police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the
flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials
facility, power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment
plant.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
was the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum
currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring heights is
the north american vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or other
structures, mining dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit; such as: the construction of
buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial
improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and
pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of
materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The digital official map of a
community, issued by the federal emergency management agency, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has
its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The elevation certificate is an important administrative
tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood insurance premium
rate; it is used to document elevation information necessary to ensure
compliance with community floodplain management regulations; and it may be used
to support a request for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map
revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
ENCLOSURE: An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed
when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or
partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below
the BFE/FPE is not considered an enclosure.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings,
structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the
flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A
manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the original floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community, November 20, 1974.
EXISTING STRUCTURES: See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility of administering the national flood insurance program (NFIP).
FINISHED FLOOR: The finished floor is the first habitable walking surface
referenced in the elevation certificate (FEMA form 81-31 sections C2a and C2b)
as the top of the next highest floor or the top of a slab on grade floor.
FLOOD or FLOODING:
   A.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
      1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; or
      3.   Mudslides (mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as
defined in division A2 of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and
flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is
carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
   B.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents
of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in division A1 of this definition.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by
floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administrator which delineates both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM
that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate
map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (mudflow) and/or
flood-related hazards.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The base flood elevation plus the freeboard.
   A.   In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have
been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet (2') of
freeboard; and
   B.   In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this
elevation shall be at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade.
FLOOD ZONE: A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or type of flooding
in the area.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA: The land that has been or may be covered by
floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the
occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the
floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator, or an individual designated
by the zoning administrator, to administer and implement this chapter in
accordance with its provisions.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic
effects of urbanization in a watershed. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus the
freeboard established the flood protection elevation (FPE). FREEBOARD shall be
two feet (2').
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDANT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the FEMA elevation certificate for HAG related to building elevation
information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following
categories:
   A.   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to an
effective national flood insurance program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a
property's or structure's location in relation to the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property or structure has been
inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high
ground above the base flood elevation.
   B.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or a flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) or
both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that
affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or
flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), and sometimes the flood insurance study
(FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the
modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the
affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
   C.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of
the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
The LOMR-F does not change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
   D.   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A formal review and comment
as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies
with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood insurance study (FIS). Upon
submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map
revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building
permits and/or flood development permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR,
because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the FEMA elevation certificate for LAG related to building
elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement
or crawl space). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR Part 60.3 and this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does
not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE: The building value, not including the land value and that of any
accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
MEAN HIGH WATER MARK: A water level corresponding to the natural or ordinary
high water mark and is the line which the water impresses on the soil by
covering it for sufficient periods of time to deprive the soil of its
terrestrial vegetation and destroy its value for commonly accepted agricultural
purposes. The current mean high water mark is at a flow of six thousand five
hundred (6,500) cubic feet per second (cfs) along the Boise River. Tributary
waters within the city of Eagle will reference specific data establishing the
water level. The mean high water mark is established by the U.S. army corps of
engineers.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT: Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities.
MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (mudflow) damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control
works, and floodplain management regulations.
MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): The NFIP is a federal program created
by congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide through sound,
community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to
affordable, federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after November 20, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
NO ADVERSE IMPACT: Floodplain management where the action of one property owner
does not adversely impact public property or other private property, as
measured by increased flood peaks, flood stage, flood velocity, and erosion and
sedimentation. No adverse impact floodplain management is a policy which
provides a means to promote the use of retention/detention or other techniques
to mitigate increased runoff from urban areas.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A building other than a residential structure. The
term includes, but it is limited to: buildings used for places of assembly,
education, childcare, business, maintenance, storage, manufacturing,
government, hospitals, sanatoriums, and nursing homes.
POST-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) or after November 20, 1974.
PRE-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before December 14, 1982, the effective date of the
initial flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING: Base floodwaters will not inundate the land or
damage structures to be removed from the area of special flood hazard in areas
previously included in base flood delineations on the current flood insurance
rate map, which shall be certified as reasonably safe from flooding by an
applicant's registered professional engineer according to the criteria in FEMA
technical bulletin 10-01.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
         A. Built on a single chassis;
         B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
         C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a vehicle;
and
         D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: See FLOODWAY.
REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into compliance
with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not
possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be
reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE: An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least two
(2) paid flood losses of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each in any
ten (10) year period since 1978.
RIPARIAN ZONE: That area along the banks of any waterway twenty five feet (25')
in width measured landward from the mean high water mark.
RIVERVINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
For purposes of these regulations, the term SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure or site, such as the pouring
of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns; or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of a building.
STREAM ALTERATION: To obstruct, diminish, destroy, alter, modify, relocate, or
change the natural existing shape of the channel or to change the direction of
flow of water of any stream channel within or below the mean high water mark.
It includes removal of material from the stream channel and emplacement of
material or structures in the stream channel.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a building whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed forty percent (40%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained
by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds forty percent (40%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure" and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this
chapter.
TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS:
   A.   FEMA publications that provide guidance concerning the building
performance standards of the NFIP, which are contained in 44 CFR Part 60.3. The
bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by state and local
officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by
members of the development community, such as design professionals and
builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing bulletins, are issued
periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create regulations. Rather they
provide specific guidance for complying with the minimum requirements of
existing NFIP regulations.
   B.   It should be noted that TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS
provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design
professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more
restrictive state or local regulations apply to the building or site in
question. All applicable standards of the state or local building code must
also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
UNNUMBERED "A ZONE": An area shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) as an
"A zone" in which base flood depths and a clearly defined channel are not
shown.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this title which permits
construction of a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the finished construction elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR Parts
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the north american vertical datum (NAVD) of
1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. WATERCOURSE
includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may
occur.
(Ord. 115, 5-12-1987; amd. Ord. 485, 7-24-2007; Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; Ord. 815,
7-23-2019)
10-1-6: BASIS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The Special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, in its flood insurance study (FIS) “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Ada County, Idaho And Incorporated Areas”, dated June 19, 2020, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), or digital flood insurance rate
maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this chapter. A copy of the FIS and FIRM shall be maintained on
file at the Office of the Planning and Zoning Department located within Eagle
City Hall, 660 East Civic Lane, Eagle, Idaho. (Ord. 485, 7-24-2007; amd. Ord.
815, 7-23-2019; Ord. 828, 5-26-2020)
10-1-7: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit shall be required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of
any development within any special flood hazard area established in section
10-1-6 of this chapter. The floodplain development permit shall be for all
structures, including manufactured homes, and for all other development,
including fill and other activities, as each are defined in section 10-1-5 of
this chapter. A floodplain development permit shall also be required for any
development that could possibly increase or alter the flood hazard.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      1.   Completion of the city of Eagle floodplain development checklist by
a registered professional engineer.
      2.   Any additional information required by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         a.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         b.   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
10-1-6, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         c.   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
10-1-6;
         d.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as
determined in section
10-1-6;
         e.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
section
10-1-6;
         f.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         g.   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      4.   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         a.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
         c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      5.   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      6.   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (for example,
fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open
foundation, or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with section
10-1-8-6A3a through
10-1-8-6A3f when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in zones A, AE, AH,
AO, and A1-30.
         c.   Foundation plans stamped by a registered professional engineer.
      7.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      8.   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      9.   Certification that all other local, state, and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      10.   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of
sectionS
10-1-8-6D through
10-1-8-6E of this chapter are met.
      11.   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   C.   Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      1.   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (for example, house, garage, pool, septic,
bulkhead, cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials, and the like).
      2.   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in section
10-1-8-6.
      3.   The flood protection elevation required for the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities.
      4.   The flood protection elevation required for the protection of all
public utilities.
      5.   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      6   A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach
into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as applicable.
      7.   The flood openings requirements, if in zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-
30.
      8.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
start of construction of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A
floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance unless the permitted activity has commenced as per the start of
construction definition.
      9.   A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if
applicable (for example, parking, building access and limited storage only).
      10.   A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood
resistant materials.
   D.   Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, and any other improvement of or work
on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination
with the building official, shall:
      1.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      4.   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho
Building Code and this chapter is required.
   E.   Conditions Of Approval: Conditions of approval may include, but not be
limited to:
      1.   Riparian vegetation and other landscaping is maintained in
perpetuity as shown on approved plans.
      2.   As built certification shall be required to be submitted prior to
occupancy of structure or upon completion of the proposed work.
      3.   Other permits (for example, Idaho department of water resources and
U.S. army corps of engineers) shall be obtained by the applicant prior to
commencement of construction.
      4.   Restoration of damaged riparian vegetation within riparian zone
shall be required prior to completion of the proposed project. A bond to assure
such restoration may be required prior to commencement of such work.
      5.   Landscaping and driveway plans to accommodate the function of the
floodplain to allow for sheet flooding. Floodwater carrying capacity is not
diminished by the proposal. Surface drainage is controlled and shall not
adversely impact adjacent properties including driveways drained away from
paved roadways. Culvert(s) under driveways may be required. Landscaping berms
shall be designed to not dam or otherwise obstruct floodwaters or divert same
onto roads or other public pathways.
      6.   Impacts of the development on aquatic life, recreation, or water
quality upstream, downstream or across the stream are not adverse.
      7.   Building setback in excess of minimum required along waterways is
encouraged.
      8.   The bottom of the lowest floor (crawl space) in the floodplain shall
be a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
      9.   The backfill used around the foundation in the floodplain shall
provide a reasonable transition to existing grade, but shall not be used to
fill the parcel to any greater extent.
      10.   Driveways shall comply with effective street standards; access for
emergency vehicles has been adequately provided for.
      11.   Landscaping or revegetation shall conceal cuts and fills required
for driveways and other elements of the development.
      12.   Wetlands shall not be diminished.
   F.   Notice To Applicant, Issuance Of Permit: After rendering a decision,
the floodplain administrator shall return one copy of the application and
decision, together with those items required by subsection B of this section,
to the applicant, after having marked such copy either as approved or
disapproved and attested to the same by signing such copy. One copy of the
complete application and decision, similarly marked, shall be retained by the
floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall issue a placard to
be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question, attesting to the
fact that the use or alteration is in conformance with the provisions of this
title.
   G.   Construction Stage:
      1.   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification
of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation
or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential
structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
      2.   Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work
proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections
shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop work order for
the project.
   H.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the floodplain
administrator in the grant or denial of a floodplain development permit may
appeal such decision to the city council, by filing a notice of appeal stating
the nature of the appeal with the city council, within twenty (20) days of the
return of the floodplain administrator's decision to the applicant. The city
council, within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of a notice of
appeal, shall schedule and hold a public hearing in accordance with the hearing
provisions of section 67-6509, Idaho Code, to further consider the application.
Following the public hearing, the city council shall, within fifteen (15)
business days of the hearing affirm, affirm with modification or reverse the
decision of the floodplain administrator. The decision of the city council
shall be in writing and accompanied by a statement in the form of findings of
fact and conclusions of law that explain the criteria and standards considered
relevant, state the facts relied upon, and explain the justification for the
decision based upon the criteria, standards, and facts as set forth. In
accordance with the provisions of section 67-5215, Idaho Code, a person
aggrieved by a decision of the city council in its grant or denial of a
floodplain development permit may appeal the city council's decision to the
district court.
   I.   Expiration And Revocation Of Floodplain Development Permit: If the work
described in the development permit has not begun within one year from the date
of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and shall be revoked by the
floodplain administrator and written notice thereof shall be given to the
persons affected.
(Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-8: FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION PROVISIONS:
In all areas of special flood hazards, the standards, as set forth in this
section, shall be required.
(Ord. 332, 2-23-1999; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-8-1: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The requirements of subsection
10-1-8-7C5 of this chapter, regarding the floodway setback in effect at the
time of receipt by the city of a preliminary plat application shall apply for
subsequent development of those lots.
   B.   All other provisions of this section
10-1-8 shall apply to any development application received subsequent to the
effective date. (Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-8-2: GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available,
either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source,
applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed
construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness
is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks,
photographs of past flooding, and any other relevant factors, where applicable.
Failure to elevate at least two feet (2') above grade in these zones may result
in higher insurance rates.
   B.   Construction Materials And Methods: All new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage and using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage in accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, “Flood
Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements”, and available from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or in conformance with this chapter, whichever is
more stringent.
   C.   Design, Location Of Certain Equipment: Electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities, shall be located at a minimum of the flood protection level, as
defined in section 10-1-5, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. On-site waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid functional impairment, or
contamination from them, during flooding.
   D.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   E.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as defined in section 10-1-5.
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building (within the original footprint) or structure existing
on the effective date of this chapter and located totally or partially within
the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, provided there is no
additional encroachment below the flood protection elevation in the floodway,
flood fringe area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, construction within the original
building footprint and in conformance with the substantial improvement
criteria.
   G.   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in section 10-1-10. A structure
or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the
operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be
located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either
elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood protection elevation and
certified in accordance with the provisions of section 10-1-8-2K.
   H.   When a structure is partially located within an area of special flood
hazard, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction
and substantial improvements.
   I.   When a structure is located within multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
   J.   Certification Requirements:
      1.   Elevation Certificates:
         a.   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction for all structures included within or
removed from the special flood hazard area (SFHA). It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the
elevation of the lowest floor, in relation to mean sea level. The floodplain
administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         b.   The floodplain administrator may require an elevation certificate
(FEMA Form 86-0-33) after the lowest floor is established. If required, within
seven (7) calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor elevation, it
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain
administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation
to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and
prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         c.   (1)   A final as-built finished construction elevation
certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required for all structures included within
or removed from the special flood hazard area (SFHA) after construction is
completed and prior to certificate of occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification
of final as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of occupancy issuance. In
some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-
built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
            (2)   The finished construction elevation certificate certifier
shall provide at least two (2) photographs showing the front and rear of the
building taken within ninety (90) days from the date of certification. The
photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description and
diagram number provided in divison A. To the extent possible, these photographs
should show the entire building including foundation. If the building has
split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two (2) additional
photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when applicable,
provide a photograph of the foundation showing a representative example of the
flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and measure at least
three inches (3") by three inches (3"). Digital photographs are acceptable.
      2.   Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan,
and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start
of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the lowest floor and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean
sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      3.   If a manufactured home is placed within zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30
and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty six inches (36") in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance
with the provisions of section
10-1-8-6C.
      4.   Certification Exemptions: The following structures, if located
within zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/
floodproofing certification requirements specified in this division:
         a.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of section
10-1-8-7D;
         b.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of section
10-1-8-6E;
         c.   Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square feet
meeting requirements of section
10-1-8-6F.
         d.   Approved letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F),
reflecting the lowest lot elevation (LLE) to be a minimum of one and one half
feet (1.5') of fill above base flood elevation.
(Ord. 332, 2-23-1999; amd. Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-8-3: ANCHORING:
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydraulic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   B.   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are
not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference
FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for
additional techniques).
(Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-8-4: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   All new and replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems; and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
   B.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment of
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
   C.   All sewer and water systems shall be approved by the district health
department or the Idaho department of environmental quality.
(Ord. 332, 2-23-1999; amd. Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-8-5: SUBDIVISIONS 1 :
   A.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
   B.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   C.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
   D.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development located within any area of special flood hazard.
   E.   All subdivision plats shall identify and designate the 100-year
floodplain boundary and the floodway boundary including a certification by a
registered surveyor that the boundaries were established consistent with the
FIRM map (in effect at the time of approval of the plat) for the city of Eagle.
All subdivision plats shall contain a note or notes that warn prospective
buyers of property that sheet flooding can and will occur and that floods of
greater magnitude may inundate areas outside identified floodway and floodplain
boundary lines.
   F.   All subdivision plats shall contain note(s) that refer to the required
twenty five foot (25') setback from all waterways, called the riparian zone, in
which no improvement is permitted and require that riparian vegetation shall be
maintained in its natural state for the protection and stabilization of the
riverbank and that removal of trees or other vegetation is regulated.
   G.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state statute, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC § 1334.
(Ord. 332, 2-23-1999; amd. Ord. 485, 7-24-2007; amd. Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; Ord.
815, 7-23-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9 of this code.
10-1-8-6: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all cases of special flood hazards where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided as set forth in section
10-1-6 of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall be required:
   A.   Residential Construction:
      1.   Connection to a central sewage treatment system shall be required.
This requirement may be waived by the city council if the Central district
health department recommends approval of an alternate method of sewage
treatment and disposal. Residential development within the floodplain may be
clustered (through approval of a PUD) to facilitate the economics of the sewage
infrastructure.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest finished floor
elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in section
10-1-5, and the lowest floor, including basement and crawl space, shall be
elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
      3.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings on different sides having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         b.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1)
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
         c.   If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit.
         d.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than
one foot (1') above the interior or exterior adjacent grade.
         e.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
         f.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      4.   Additions/Improvements:
         a.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            (1)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more non-conforming than the existing structure; or
            (2)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         b.   Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial
improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a
standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with
the standards for new construction.
         c.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            (1)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
            (2)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         d.   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a ten
(10) year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds forty percent
(40%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building
or structure, the ten (10) year period begins on the date of the first
improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any
repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
            (1)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
            (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
      5.   Mechanical and Other Service Equipment:
         a.   All mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and other service equipment
servicing residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
elevated to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation (BFE).
This includes, but is not limited to, HVAC systems, furnaces, hot water
heaters, and electrical panels.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor elevated to no lower than the flood
protection elevation, as defined in section
10-1-5; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
      1.   Be floodproofed to a point two feet (2') above the base flood
elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
      2.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection
10-1-9B of this chapter.
      4.   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection A of this section.
      5.   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified
that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1')
below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood
level will be rated as 1 foot below that level).
   C.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   New, substantially damaged, substantially improved, and replacement
manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home, including the basement, and all mechanical, electrical,
plumbing, and other service equipment, are no lower than the flood protection
elevation, as defined in section
10-1-5.
      2.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the Idaho division of building safety's "Idaho Manufactured
      Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code, section 44-
2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the
chassis thirty six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis
shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the
elevation of the chassis is above thirty six (36) inches in height, an
engineering certification is required.
      3.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of section
10-1-8-6A3.
      4.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents
of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured home
parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be
filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the local emergency
management coordinator.
   D.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be either: In all
areas of special flood hazard (ASFH), recreational vehicles must be either:
      1.   Temporary Placement: Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and
has no permanently attached additions); or
      2.   Permanent Placement: Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction, as set forth in section
10-1-8-2.
   E.   Temporary Non-Residential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain
administrator for review and written approval:
      1.   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one
(1) year;
      2.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      3.   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (for example, immediately upon flood warning notification);
      4.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      5.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the
special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   F.   Accessory Structures: When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, and the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area,
elevation or
      floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures
(except as exempted below) in accordance with section
10-1-8-2B and/or J2 and the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
      2.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      3.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      4.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      5.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-1-8-3 of this chapter;
      6.   All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-8-2C of this chapter; and
      7.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in conformance
with the provisions of section
10-1-8-6A3 of this chapter.
      An accessory structure with a footprint less than two hundred (200)
square feet and is a minimal investment of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00)
or less and satisfies the criteria outlined in divisions a. through g. above is
not required to meet the certification requirements of elevation or
floodproofing standards section
10-1-8-6B of this chapter.
   G.   Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of
buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
      2.   Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be attached
to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
      3.   Not elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation
requirements of section
10-1-8-6B shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are
anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during
conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the
tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
      4.   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
         a.   At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
         b.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
   H.   Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
      1.   The interior grade of a crawlspace shall be one-foot (1') above the
base flood elevation (BFE) and must not be more than two (2) feet below the
exterior lowest adjacent grade (LAG).
      2.   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point.
   I.   Other Development In Regulated Floodways:
      1.   Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters,
such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated floodways and flood
fringe shall meet the limitations of section
10-1-8-7C.
      2.   Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve
the placement of fill in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the
limitations of section
10-1-8-7C.
      3.   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts,
low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel
from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated
floodways and flood fringe, shall meet the limitations of section
10-1-8-7C.
      4.   Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks,
apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways
and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of section
10-1-8-7C and M.
      5.   Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking
facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that
encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations
of section 10-1-8-7C. (Ord. 332, 2-23-1999; amd. Ord. 485, 7-24-2007; Ord.
700A, 3-11-2014; Ord. 815, 7-23-2019; Ord. 949, 7-22-2025)
10-1-8-7: FLOODPLAIN AND FLOODWAY STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations
(BFE):
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as zone A (also known as
unnumbered A zones) and established in section 10-1-6, where no base flood
elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in
addition to the provisions of section 10-1-8-2 and section 10-1-8-6, shall
apply.
   The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be
based on the following criteria:
      1.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in section
10-1-8-6.
      2.   When floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of sections
10-1-8-2 and
10-1-8-6.
      3.   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home
sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in
accordance with section
10-1-6 and utilized in implementing this chapter. The applicant/developer shall
submit an application for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) prior to
preliminary plat approval and have obtained a letter of map revision (LOMR)
prior to any building permits for structures being issued.
      4.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor shall be
elevated or floodproofed (non- residential) to two feet (2') above the highest
adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the flood protection elevation
(FPE) whichever is higher, as defined in section
10-1-5. All other applicable provisions of section
10-1-8-6 shall also apply.
   B.   Standards For Rivervine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But
Without Established Floodways:
Along rivers and streams where base flood elevations (BFE) data is provided by
FEMA or is available from another source but floodway areas are not identified
for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or is in the FIS report, the
following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
      1.   Standards of section
10-1-8-6.
      2.   Until a regulatory floodway or flood fringe area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other developments shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
   C.   Standards For Floodways And Flood Fringe Areas: Areas designated as
floodways are located within special flood hazard areas established in section
10-1-6. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectile and erosion potential. The
following provisions apply:
      1.   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, are prohibited unless an approved
floodplain development permit is issued demonstrating that encroachments shall
not result in any adverse impacts during the occurrence of the base flood.
      2.   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development are prohibited unless certification by a
registered professional hydraulic engineer is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and uses within the floodway shall be
restricted to those which are required by public necessity (for example,
bridges, water pumps); recreational use (for example, paths); wildlife habitat
improvements (for example, vegetation, nesting structures, pool/riffle
improvements); and gravel extraction; provided that the use/encroachment meets
the approval of the federal emergency management agency and national flood
insurance program and does not jeopardize the city's participation in the
national flood insurance program.
      3.   Division C1 of this section shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this section
10-1-8.
      4.   The placement of any mobile homes, as defined in section
8-1-2 of this code, is prohibited.
      5.   All buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
from the floodway line. Except that when the special flood hazard area boundary
is one hundred feet (100') or less from the floodway line, the boundary line
shall be the setback line.
      6.   No development is permitted within the twenty five foot (25')
setback from all waterways called the riparian zone and riparian vegetation
shall be maintained in its natural state for the protection and stabilization
of the riverbank, and removal of trees or other vegetation is regulated in
accordance with this chapter.
      7.   For all subdivisions along the Boise River or Dry Creek, prior to
approval of the final plat written approval from flood control district 10 is
required to protect access to the river for maintenance.
      8.   Compensating excavation in accordance with an engineered plan for
orderly conveyance of floodwater, or equivalent mitigating measures may be
performed in the floodway when certified by a registered professional engineer.
Mitigation design shall include provisions to prevent relocation or diversion
of flow paths from causing increased jeopardy to any off site property at any
level of flooding from the one (1) year flood up to the base flood. Maintenance
provisions for excavated areas prone to fill from sediment and other debris
shall follow the requirements of section
9-3-2-5C of this code for private streets.
      9.   In the design of public and private parks and open space areas,
fixed structures or equipment that would impede floodwaters shall not be
permitted within the floodway.
      10.   Any non-floodway area surrounded by the floodway shall be subject
to the conditions of divisions C1 through C9 of this section, unless such area
is accessed by at least one (1) road with suitable structures or culverts to
pass floodwaters. If a bridge is required, it shall be elevated one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation, have scour resistant footings extending to five
feet (5') below the bottom of the channel and be capable of supporting an H-15
load as defined by the american association of state highway and transportation
officials (AASHTO).
      11.   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six (6)
months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
   D.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH):
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 10-1-6,
are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to sections 10-1-8-2 and 10-1-8-6,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following
requirements:
      1.   The lowest floor shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two feet (2'), above the highest adjacent grade; or at least three
feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
      2.   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in section
10-1-8-7D1 so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with sections
10-1-8-2K and
10-1-8-6B.
      3.   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   E.   Riparian Areas: Located within areas of special flood hazard,
established in section
10-1-6, are areas designated as riparian areas. Since riparian areas provide
critical flood management and fish and wildlife habitat, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   Preservation or restoration of the inherent natural characteristics
of the river and creeks within the floodplain;
      2.   Preservation of riparian vegetation and wildlife habitat, if any,
along the stream bank and within the required minimum twenty five foot (25')
setback or riparian zone;
      3.   No development or other than development by the city of Eagle or
required for emergency access shall occur within the twenty five foot (25')
riparian zone with the exception of approved stream stabilization work. The
city council may approve access to property where no other primary access is
available. Private pathways and staircases shall not lead into or through the
riparian zone unless deemed necessary by the Eagle city council;
      4.   Plan and time frame shall be provided for restoration of riparian
vegetation damaged as a result of the work done;
      5.   New or replacement planting and vegetation shall include plantings
that are low growing and have dense root systems for the purpose of stabilizing
stream banks and repairing damage previously done to riparian vegetation.
Examples of such plantings include: red osier dogwood, common chokecherry,
serviceberry, elderberry, river birch, skunk bush sumac, Bebb's willow,
Drummond's willow, little wild rose, gooseberry, and honeysuckle.
   F.   Map And Narrative Required: All subdivision proposals and development
permit applications shall provide a map and detailed narrative describing any
abutting or on site manmade topographic features, current or proposed, that
increase flood damage potential above the natural level, including road fills
and other manmade embankments, prior stream channelization, existing and/or
proposed landscaping features, and evident agricultural land leveling that has
altered the floodplain from its original topography.
   G.   Fill Requirements: For fill placed in the floodplain:
      1.   Development within the area of special flood hazard shall result in
no net loss in natural storage. Grading plans shall show that existing natural
storage volume in the floodplain, as bounded by the existing surface topography
and the base flood elevation surface, shall not be reduced from the current
quantity. Postdevelopment storage volumes will be calculated from the
postdevelopment flood elevation for the base flood event. Depressions which
will be filled with groundwater and sections of the floodplain which are
restricted from floodwater conveyance due to roads built above the base flood
elevation shall not be considered when determining storage volumes. Development
within the DDA, TDA or CEDA design review overlay areas shall not be subject to
the provisions of this subsection.
      2.   The slope of fill adjacent to the floodway line, hereinafter called
the floodway boundary slope, shall not be steeper than five horizontal to one
vertical (5:1). Where a five to one (5:1) slope is not feasible due to lot
dimensions, compensating measures to protect against floodway encroachment
through erosion shall be constructed as designed and certified by a
professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect.
      3.   The floodway boundary slope shall be maintained in groomed perennial
turf or equivalent low ground cover vegetation not taller than twelve inches
(12") to provide protection from erosion. Porous stonework or other durable
surfacing may be used in lieu of ground cover vegetation for design enhancement
on floodway boundary slopes.
   H.   Roadways And Manholes: Roadways and manholes within the floodplain
shall be a minimum of one half foot (0.5') above base flood elevation at
centerline and manhole ring respectively.
   I.   Flow Paths And Natural Storage Areas Maintained: New roads built above
the base flood elevation shall not restrict conveyance of floodwater into
sections of the floodplain that may be cut off by the proposed road. Culverts
or bridges shall be provided under roads to maintain existing natural storage
areas in the watershed to reduce flood damage.
   J.   Open Areas: Except for required berms, open areas such as parks, golf
courses, greenbelt areas, parking lots, and the like, within the area of
special flood hazard shall be designed and operated so that they may flood and
maintain existing natural storage capacity for waters during the base flood
event. Levees or berms shall not be used for flood control.
   K.   Approval Of Plans: Plans for development within the floodplain showing
construction and postconstruction best management practices (BMPs) conforming
to the catalog of stormwater best management practices for Idaho cities and
counties shall be submitted for approval before any grading or other
construction activities commence.
   L.   Flood Study: When a new flood study is provided by the developer:
      1.   The study shall be performed using the U.S. army corps of engineers
hydrologic engineering center's HEC-2, HEC-RAS (river analysis system), or
equivalent programs to calculate water surface elevations.
      2.   The study report shall include field survey data and relevant bench
marks used as bases of calculations as cross sections, stream profile and plan
showing cross section locations.
      3.   The study report shall attach HEC-2, HEC-RAS, or equivalent input
and output reports as appendices.
      4.   Any floodway or floodplain modification shall not be effective until
approved by FEMA.
      5.   The study shall include a reach of stream extending beyond the
property boundaries of the development upstream and downstream not less than
twice the average width of floodway on or adjacent to the development property,
or as approved by the zoning administrator.
   M.   Critical Facilities: Critical facilities shall not be allowed within
any SFHA, special flood hazard area, including areas designated zone shaded X:
.2% chance of flooding in any given year.
   N.   Alteration Of Watercourses:
      1.   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall
all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit:
         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water
Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to FEMA;
         b.   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation;
         c.   A professional engineer's certified report that assures the
flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse is maintained and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream;
         d.   A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration
or relocation;
         e.   The proposal is shown to be a permanent solution and creates a
stable situation;
         f.   No increase to the one hundred (100) year floodplain upstream or
downstream requires certification by a registered Idaho engineer;
         g.   The recreational use of the stream, including access along any
and all public pedestrian/fisher's easements and the aesthetic beauty, shall
not be obstructed or interfered with by the proposed work;
         h.   Fish habitat shall be maintained or improved as a result of the
work proposed;
         i.   The proposed work shall not be in conflict with the local public
interest, including, but not limited to, property values, fish and wildlife
habitat, aquatic life, recreation and access to public lands and waters,
aesthetic beauty of the stream and water quality;
         j.   The work proposed is for the protection of the public health,
safety and/or welfare such as public schools, sewage treatment plant, water and
sewer distribution lines and bridges providing particularly limited or sole
access to areas of habitation;
         k.   An Idaho stream channel alteration permit approval from the Idaho
department of water resources shall be provided by the applicant to the
floodplain administrator.
(Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-9: DUTIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   The zoning administrator, or a designated individual, hereinafter
referred to as the floodplain administrator, is hereby appointed to administer
and implement the provisions of this title.
   B.   The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been received,
including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 USC § 1334.
      3.   In the event the base flood elevations may increase or decrease
resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as
practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information
becomes available, the federal insurance administrator shall be notified of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with this
part. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those
physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
      4.   Upon occurrence, notify the federal insurance administrator in
writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that all FHBM's and FIRM's accurately represent the community's
boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the community
suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new
area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
      5.   Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood fringe areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of section
10-1-8-6 are met.
      6.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-8-2K.
      7.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-8-2K.
      8.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-8-2K.
      9.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of sections 10-1-8-2K and 10-1-8-6B.
      10   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or flood fringe areas
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
      11.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to section 10-1-8-7, in order
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
      12.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of section 10-1-6,
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or flood fringe area
data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer
the provisions of this chapter.
      13.   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure
or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area
(SFHA) is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of
the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a
copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
      14.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration
of this chapter and make these records available for public inspection subject
to Idaho Code title 74, chapter 1, Public Records Act.
      15.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant
to a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator
shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that
the work is being done according to the provisions of this chapter and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
      16.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
      17.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The floodplain
administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
      18.   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
      19.   Follow through with corrective procedures of section
10-1-13A.
      20.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.
      21.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-6 of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including letters of
map change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP state coordinator and FEMA of your
community's mapping needs.
      22.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
      23.   Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
         a.   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study, or required as in the preceding division, obtain and record
the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement.
         b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
            (1)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level).
            (2)   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in section
10-1-8-6B3 of this chapter.
            (3)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 700A, 3-11-2014; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-10: VARIANCES:
   A.   Application For Variance: A variance from the terms of this chapter
shall not be considered until a written application for a variance containing
the data required by subsection
8-7-4-2B of this code and a narrative statement, demonstrating the requested
variance has mitigated items contained in subsection B of this section, is
filed with the zoning administrator for submission to the city planning and
zoning commission and the city council.
   B.   Procedure For Approval Of Variance:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete variance application from the zoning
administrator, the city planning and zoning commission and the city council
shall follow the notice and hearing procedures outlined in subsection
8-7-4-4A of this code and action requirements outlined in subsection
8-7-4-4B of this code.
      2.   The city planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city
council that the city council approve, disapprove, or approve conditionally a
requested variance. After receipt of the commission's recommendation and
compliance with subsection
8-7-4-4A of this code, the city council may approve, disapprove or approve
conditionally, by attaching such conditions to the granting of a variance as is
deemed necessary to further the purposes of this chapter, a requested variance.
In making a decision, the city planning and zoning commission and the city
council shall consider all technical evaluations and all relevant factors and
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other land to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its content to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed uses
which are not subject to flooding and erosion damage;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and the floodplain management program for that area;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         k.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      3.   The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the
above factors in division B2a through B2k with their application for a
variance.
      4.   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
      5.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
      6.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management
agency and the state of Idaho upon request.
   C.   Standards And Conditions Of Variance:
      1.   Variances may be issued for:
         a.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure on the national
register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places to
preserve the character and design of the structure.
         b.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half (1/2) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the procedures of
division B;
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variances would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in items contained in section 10-1-7, of this chapter, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      5.   Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are
based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece
of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      6.   Variances may be issued for non-residential buildings in very
limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight
or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low
damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria, and otherwise
complies with the general standards.
      7.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification of
the issuance.
   D.   Records And Reports:
      1.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA and the state of Idaho upon
request.
      2.   The floodplain administrator will notify the state NFIP coordinator
of the Idaho department of water resources of its intention to grant a variance
at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting a variance.
(Ord. 127, 1-12-1988; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-11: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The city council, by resolution, shall establish a schedule of fees, charges
and expenses and a collection procedure for development permits, amendments,
appeals, variances, plan approvals and other matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this chapter requiring investigation,
inspection, legal advertising, postage and other expenses 1 . The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning administrator and may be
altered or amended only by the city council. Until all applicable fees, charges
and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
(Ord. 82, 12-14-1982; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-7-4A of this code.
10-1-12: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased
by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the
special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(Ord. 82, 12-14-1982; amd. Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-13: CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Violations To Be Corrected: When the floodplain administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   B.   Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      1.   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      2.   What is required to bring the building or property into conformnce
with this chapter; and
      3.   If the owner fails to correct the violation the floodplain
administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or
to remove fill as applicable.
   C.   Order To Take Corrective Action: If the owner fails to take action to
bring the building or property into compliance the floodplain administrator
shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood
control ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not
less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one hundred twenty (120)
calendar days. Where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent
danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be
taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   D.   Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the zoning administrator within twenty (20) days following
issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the
floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an
appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke
the order.
   E.   Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be subject to the provisions of section
10-1-14D.
(Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure To Obtain A Development Permit: Failure to obtain a development
permit shall be a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Failure To Comply With Permit: Development permits issued on the basis
of plans and applications approved by the zoning administrator authorize only
the use and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications, or
amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use,
arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
   C.   Complaints Regarding Violations: Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be
filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall properly
record such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as
provided by this chapter.
   D.   Penalties: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. The city attorney shall, in addition to
taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin
any violation of this title. Penalties for failure to comply with or violations
of the provisions of this title shall be as follows:
   Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor, and be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official
or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the council or any other public official or private citizen from
taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation
of this title or of the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 82, 12-14-1982; amd. Ord. 697, 5-14-2013; Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-15: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, or general
welfare require, the city council may, by ordinance after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the planning and zoning commission and subject to
procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations
of this title.
   B.   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments to this title may be initiated in
one of the following ways:
      1.   On application by a citizen of the city;
      2.   On recommendation by the floodplain administrator;
      3.   On recommendation of the commission; or
      4.   Required by the council.
   C.   Application For Amendment: Applications for amendments to this title
shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the council;
      3.   A fee as established by resolution of the council; and
      4.   Additional information as may be required by the administrator to
aid in review of the amendment.
   D.   General Procedure For Amendments:
      1.   Request for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
commission which shall review and evaluate the request to determine the extent
and nature of the amendment requested.
      2.   The commission may recommend approval and the council may adopt or
reject the amendment under the notice and hearing procedures as herein
provided.
   E.   Public Hearing Notice: The commission shall hold a public hearing and
make recommendations on the proposed amendment.
      1.   The commission, prior to recommending an amendment to the council,
shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. The commission shall follow the following
notice requirements:
         a.   Published Notice: At least fifteen (15) days prior to each
hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing and a summary of the
proposed amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of
general circulation within the city. Notice shall also be made available to
other papers, radio, and television stations serving the city for use as a
public service announcement.
   F.   Action By The Commission:
      1.   Recommendation By The Commission: Within forty five (45) days from
the receipt of the proposed amendment, the commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the council. The commission may recommend that the amendment
be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment
requested, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied.
   G.   Action By The Council:
      1.   The council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment
to this title as recommended by the commission, shall conduct at least one (1)
public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission.
Following the council hearing, if the council makes a material change from what
was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the council adopts the amendment.
   H.   Effect Of Amendment Approved: In the event the council shall approve an
amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made part of this title upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
10-1-16: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance: This chapter, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of
some of the provisions of the flood control ordinance enacted July 18, 1974, as
amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood control ordinance
enacted on July 18, 1974, as amended, which are not re-enacted herein are
repealed.
   B.   Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits: Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain
development permit has been granted by the floodplain administrator or his or
her authorized agents before the time of passage of this chapter. Provided,
however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit
within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Severability: This chapter is hereby declared to be severable. Should
any portion of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect
and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the chapter before the
declaration of partial invalidity.
   D.   This chapter, or a summary thereof in compliance with section 50-901A,
Idaho Code, shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city, and
shall take effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
(Ord. 815, 7-23-2019)
 
