CITY CODE
of
FAIRFIELD, IDAHO
2015
Code current through:
Ord. 308, passed 9-18-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Fairfield, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 308, passed September 18, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
FAIRFIELD CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of Fairfield. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the FAIRFIELD CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2015 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2015 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2015 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code books,
while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be
and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the
city clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances; Exceptions
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; EXCEPTIONS:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances.
   B.   Appropriation ordinances.
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations.
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants.
   F.   Salary ordinances.
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places.
   H.   Improvement ordinances.
   I.   Bond ordinances.
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections.
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city.
   L.   Zoning or rezoning of specific land areas.
   M.   All special ordinances. (2015 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2015 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2015 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The city council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding shall be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Fairfield".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2015 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
CITY: The city of Fairfield, county of Camas, state of Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Fairfield.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Fairfield.
COUNTY: The county of Camas, state of Idaho.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability
partnership, trust, association, limited liability company, organization,
government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
STATE: The state of Idaho. (2015 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Except in cases where a different punishment is hereafter
prescribed by city ordinance, every offense declared to be a misdemeanor is
punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both, together with such
costs as may be required by law. These punishments shall comply with Idaho Code
section 18-113, as amended. (Ord. 129, 10-8-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Infraction:
      1.   When the offense is designated as an infraction by any section or
provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a penalty not
exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) and no incarceration may be imposed.
(2015 Code)
      2.   All fine amounts as set forth in this code or city ordinances that
are to be imposed upon conviction of a crime that is determined to be an
infraction shall be imposed in addition to the court costs imposed pursuant to
Idaho Code section 31-3201A. Court costs shall not be included as a portion of
the established infraction penalty amount. (Ord. 230, 1-16-2008)
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months, or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses. (2015 Code)
   D.   Rendering Judgment: Whenever any person pleads guilty, or is convicted
by the court or by a jury of a violation of any provision of this code or of
the ordinances of the city, the court must render judgment therefor of fine or
imprisonment as the case may be. (Ord. 7, 1-31-1916)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2015 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Council Election; Terms; Duties
1-5-2: Mayor Election; Term; Duties
1-5-3: Council President
1-5-4: Vacancy In Office
1-5-5: Council Meetings
1-5-6: Salaries
1-5-1: COUNCIL ELECTION; TERMS; DUTIES:
   A.   Election And Terms Of Office: The corporate powers and duties shall be
vested in four (4) council members who shall be elected to serve four (4) year
terms. Two (2) council members shall be elected biennially during the general
city election.
   B.   Administrative Powers And General Duties: The city council shall be the
administrative and legislative power in the control of the city. The council
shall ensure that records are kept accurately and shall authorize the
collection and distribution of all monies. 1
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-701.
1-5-2: MAYOR ELECTION; TERM; DUTIES:
   A.   Election; Term: The mayor shall be elected for a period of four (4)
years, and shall take office at the time and in the manner provided for
installation of council members, and shall have the qualifications as
prescribed by the laws of the state of Idaho.
   B.   General Powers And Duties: The mayor shall be the chief administrative
official of the city, preside over the meetings of the city council and
determine the order of business subject to such rules as the council may
prescribe, have a vote only when the council is equally divided, have the
superintending control of all the officers and affairs of the city, preserve
order and take care that the provisions of this code are complied with and
enforced 1 . (2015 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. IC § 50-602.
1-5-3: COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
   A.   Elected From Members: The council members shall elect one of their
members to act as president of the council.
   B.   Duties: The president of the council shall preside at all meetings of
the council and perform the duties of the mayor in the absence of the mayor.
(2015 Code)
1-5-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In the event of a vacancy occurring on the city council, it shall be filled by
appointment by the mayor, with the consent of the council, until the next
general city election, at which time the vacancy shall be filled for the
remainder of the term by the electors 1 . (2015 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-704.
1-5-5: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council shall hold regular meetings at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the second and third Thursdays of each month. The place
of meetings of the council is hereby fixed at the city office building, 407
Soldier Road, Fairfield, Idaho. (Ord. 245, 2-10-2011; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Special Meetings: A special meeting of the council may be called by
one-half (1/2) plus one of the council or the mayor at any time. Notice of, and
a list of agenda items for, the special meeting shall be given, unless the
cause for the meeting is deemed an emergency 1  .
   C.   Open Meetings: Meetings of the city council shall be open to the
public, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-2341 et seq. (2015 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. IC § 67-2343(2).
1-5-6: SALARIES:
Commencing January 1, 2022, the salaries of the mayor and of the members of the
Fairfield city council shall be as follows:
   A.   The Mayor shall receive an annual salary in the sum of nine thousand
six hundred dollars ($9,600.00); and
   B.   Each member of the Council shall receive an annual salary in the sum of
four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00). (Ord. 264, 6-11-2015, eff. 1-1-
2016; amd. Ord. 273, 8-10-2017; Ord. 286, 8-12-2021)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Oath And Bonds
1-6-2: Salaries Of Appointive Officers
1-6-3: Succession In Office
1-6-4: City Clerk
1-6-5: City Treasurer
1-6-6: City Attorney
1-6-1: OATH AND BONDS:
   A.   Oath Of Office: Every elective officer of the city, and such other
appointive officers as are appointed by the mayor and city council, shall,
before entering in and upon their respective duties, subscribe and take the
oath of office as required by state law.
   B.   Bonds: The city clerk and city treasurer and any other officers of the
city, as required, shall give bonds to the city, as approved by the city
council.
   C.   Filing Of Oath And Bond: The oath of office and the bond, when
required, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, except that the bond
of the city clerk shall be filed with the mayor. (2015 Code)
1-6-2: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The salaries of the appointive officers shall be as designated by the city
council. (2015 Code)
1-6-3: SUCCESSION IN OFFICE:
Upon the qualification of all elected or appointive officers, all books,
papers, records, money and property of the city shall be delivered to the
successor in office as provided by law. Any person failing to comply with this
section shall be guilty of an offense and punishable, upon conviction thereof,
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (2015 Code)
1-6-4: CITY CLERK:
   A.   Appointment; Term: The city clerk shall be appointed by the mayor with
the consent of the city council pursuant to Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2; and
shall serve until he resigns or is removed according to Idaho Code section 50-
206.
   B.   General Duties: The duties of the city clerk shall be to keep a correct
journal of the proceedings of the council and to fulfill other responsibilities
as designated in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2. He shall attend all meetings
of the city council, collect all funds due to the city, keep proper records of
all transactions, issue licenses and collect for the same, draw warrants on the
city treasury, and perform all and every duty that is required of him either by
ordinance, resolution or order of the city council or of the laws of the state.
(2015 Code)
1-6-5: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment; Term: The city treasurer shall be appointed by the mayor
with the consent of the city council pursuant to Idaho Code title 50, chapter
2; and shall serve until he resigns or is removed according to Idaho Code
section 50-206.
   B.   General Duties: The duties of the city treasurer shall be to serve as
custodian of all monies belonging to the city and to fulfill all other
responsibilities as designated in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2. He shall keep
a record of all outstanding bonds against the city showing the number, amount
of each and to whom said bonds were issued; and when any bonds are purchased,
paid or canceled, said record shall show that fact. In his annual report he
shall describe particularly the bonds issued and sold during the year, and the
term of the sale, with each and every item of expense thereof. (2015 Code)
1-6-6: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment; Qualifications: The mayor, with the consent of the city
council, shall appoint a city attorney to hold office at the discretion of the
city council. The city attorney shall be a duly licensed attorney with the
right to practice in all courts of the state.
   B.   General Duties: It shall be the duty of the city attorney, and he
shall:
      1.   Appear in magistrate court when required and prosecute all actions
for offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city.
      2.   Attend to all legal business of the city and prosecute or defend all
actions in which the city is a party thereto.
      3.   Draw and examine all ordinances, documents and legal papers
submitted to him.
      4.   Attend meetings of the city council, upon council request.
      5.   Give written opinions and legal advice when requested by any
official of the city upon the approval of the city council.
      6.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council.
(2015 Code)
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Official Newspaper
1-7-2: Elections; Polling Hours
1-7-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The "Camas Courier", a weekly newspaper printed and published at and for
general circulation in the city, is further designated as the official
newspaper of the city. (Ord. 245, 2-10-2011)
1-7-2: ELECTIONS; POLLING HOURS:
The polls for all general and special city elections shall be open from eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. Mountain time and remain open until eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. Mountain time. (Ord. 206, 10-16-2003; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Claims Presentation And Payment
1-8-2: Fees And Charges Set By Resolution
1-8-1: CLAIMS PRESENTATION AND PAYMENT:
   A.   Presentation Of Claims: All claims against the city shall be approved
by the city council prior to the payment of such claims and the city council
shall establish and maintain an adequate and reasonable system of internal
accounting controls. No costs shall be recovered against the city in any action
brought against it for any unliquidated claim which has not been presented to
the city council for payment, nor upon claims allowed in part, unless the
recovery shall be for a greater sum than the amount allowed with interest due.
   B.   Payment Of Claims: Upon approval of claims by the council, payment may
be ordered by warrant or by electronic means, signed by or authorized by the
mayor and city clerk or by check or by electronic means signed by or authorized
by the mayor and city treasurer. The order for their payment shall specify the
particular fund or appropriation out of which they are payable, as specified in
the annual appropriation bill. (2015 Code)
1-8-2: FEES AND CHARGES SET BY RESOLUTION:
   A.   All fees charged by the city shall be adopted by resolution, rather
than by ordinance.
   B.   A fee schedule shall be maintained at the office of the city clerk, and
shall be made available for inspection by the public or for copying for a fee
to be determined by resolution as set by the council.
   C.   In the event a fee is not provided by resolution, but is provided by
ordinance, the ordinance fee will still be applicable. In the event the fee is
set both by ordinance and resolution, the latest adopted fee shall apply. (Ord.
181, 8-7-1997)
CHAPTER 9
CAMAS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
SECTION:
1-9-1: Public Corporation Created; Name
1-9-2: Powers
1-9-3: Charter Of Corporation
1-9-4: Board Of Directors
1-9-5: Conflict Of Interest
1-9-6: Lending Money
1-9-7: Net Earnings
1-9-1: PUBLIC CORPORATION CREATED; NAME:
   A.   Corporation Created: The city of Fairfield, jointly and in cooperation
with the county of Camas, does hereby create a public corporation to carry out
the purposes of Idaho Code title 50, chapter 27, hereinafter referred to as
"the act". This chapter shall not be construed to limit or restrict the
purposes of the act, but shall be liberally construed to effect such purposes.
   B.   Name: The name of the public corporation shall be Camas Economic
Development Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the corporation. (Ord. 134,
10-4-1983)
1-9-2: POWERS:
The corporation shall have all the powers granted by the act and be subject to
all the limitations and provisions contained in the act. Such powers shall
include, without limitation, all powers set forth in the charter. (Ord. 134,
10-4-1983)
1-9-3: CHARTER OF CORPORATION:
A charter, hereinafter referred to as the charter, is hereby issued by the city
of Fairfield and Camas County to the corporation. The charter grants to the
corporation all powers authorized by the act. The charter is hereby approved
pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-2703(1) of the act. The charter may be
amended from time to time by the city council and mayor of the city of
Fairfield and the Camas County commissioners acting jointly. The existence of
the corporation commences at such time as the enactment of this chapter and a
like ordinance being enacted by the county of Camas both become effective.
(Ord. 134, 10-4-1983)
1-9-4: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
   A.   Selection Of Members; Term; Quorum:
      1.   Selection; Qualifications: The board of directors of the
corporation, hereinafter referred to as the board, shall be comprised of three
(3) members. One member shall be selected by the board of county commissioners
of Camas County, one member shall be selected by the mayor with approval of the
city council of the city of Fairfield, and the third member will be selected
jointly by the board of county commissioners and the mayor and city council.
Members of the board shall be residents of the county of Camas and may be a
member of the board of county commissioners or the mayor or the city council of
the city of Fairfield.
      2.   Term: Board members shall serve for a term of one year and the terms
shall begin and end October 2 of each year.
      3.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the board in office shall
constitute a quorum, and the approval of a majority of a quorum shall be
necessary for the board to take any action.
   B.   Officers; Bylaws; Compensation:
      1.   Conduct Of Affairs: The affairs of the corporation shall be
conducted and carried out by the board.
      2.   Officers: The board shall elect officers from among its own members.
Such officers shall be elected at the initial meeting of the board in each
calendar year, shall serve until their successors have been duly elected and
qualified, and shall include a president and a secretary, and may include a
vice president and an assistant secretary (provided that, in the event the
board shall be comprised of only 3 members, the offices of vice president and
assistant secretary may be simultaneously held by the same person, and provided
further that, in the event the offices of the vice president and assistant
secretary shall be simultaneously held by the same person, such person shall
not execute and attest any resolution document, certificate, deed, mortgage,
deed of trust, note, bond, contract, or other document or instrument). The
board may elect such other officers as it shall from time to time determine to
be necessary or desirable.
      3.   Bylaws: The board shall adopt bylaws and/or rules and regulations
governing the election of officers, the powers and duties of such officers, the
filling of vacancies in offices, the scheduling, giving notice of, and conduct
of meetings, and the conduct of the corporation. Such bylaws, rules and
regulations may be amended from time to time by the board; provided, that any
such amendments shall be consistent with the provisions hereof.
      4.   Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation
but with reimbursement of expenses as may be provided in the bylaws, rules and
regulations of the board. (Ord. 134, 10-4-1983)
1-9-5: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No director, officer, agent, employee or official of the corporation shall have
a direct or indirect financial interest in any property to be included in or
any contract for property, service or materials to be furnished or used in
connection with any industrial development facility financed through the
corporation. (Ord. 134, 10-4-1983)
1-9-6: LENDING MONEY:
Neither the city of Fairfield nor the county of Camas may give or lend any
money or property in aid of the corporation except as expressly authorized by
the act. This provision shall not preclude either the city of Fairfield nor the
county of Camas from dealing with the corporation on an arms length basis.
(Ord. 134, 10-4-1983)
1-9-7: NET EARNINGS:
Any net earnings of the corporation beyond those necessary for retirement of
indebtedness incurred by it shall inure to the city of Fairfield and the county
of Camas on a per capita basis; in computing the per capita basis of Camas
County, the population of the city of Fairfield shall be deducted. In no event
shall net earnings accrue to the benefit of any other person. Alteration of the
charter of or dissolution of or audits of the corporation shall be as provided
in the act and by subsequent ordinances of the city of Fairfield and the county
of Camas acting jointly. Upon dissolution of the corporation, title to all
property owned by the corporation shall vest in the city of Fairfield and the
county of Camas. (Ord. 134, 10-4-1983)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Applications
2-1-2: Persons Subject To License Or Permit
2-1-3: Forms
2-1-4: Signatures
2-1-5: Inspections Or Investigations
2-1-6: Term Of License
2-1-7: Building And Premises
2-1-8: Change Of Location
2-1-9: Nuisances
2-1-10: Posting Of License
2-1-11: Revocation Of License Or Permit
2-1-12: Appeal Procedure
2-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made
in writing to the city clerk or designee, unless otherwise specifically
provided by law. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered
and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional
information as may be required by the issuing official. (2015 Code)
2-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to this
requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the city. (2015 Code)
2-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the city clerk or designee. (2015 Code)
2-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the city clerk or
designee in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (2015 Code)
2-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where laws of the
city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the city clerk or designee shall refer such application to
the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours
of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. (2015 Code)
2-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31, where no provision to the
contrary is made. (2015 Code)
2-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the city. (2015 Code)
2-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk or designee; and further
provided, that such new location is in compliance with the building
requirements of this code. (2015 Code)
2-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2015 Code)
2-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business. (2015 Code)
2-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   Authority To Revoke: Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be
revoked by the mayor and city council during the life of such license or permit
for the apparent violation by the licensee or permittee of any provision
relating to the license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the
premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. The
mayor and city council shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of
business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any business
license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   B.   Hearing; Notice And Procedure:
      1.   Within ten (10) days after the city officials have so acted, the
mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
license or permit should be revoked.
      2.   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the licensee or
permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally served at
least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
      3.   At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel
and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The
mayor shall preside and shall render the decision and recommendation.
   C.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the city, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the mayor
and city council after notice and hearing as provided in subsection B of this
section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city;
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this code. (2015 Code)
2-1-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the city's decision to the city council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the mayor within five (5)
days of the action of the city which is appealed.
   B.   Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be
entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The council shall act on
the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the city or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which
the city has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the city had
revoked. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
2-2-1: License Required
2-2-2: Application For License; Investigation
2-2-3: Conditions Of License; Fees
2-2-4: Record Of Proceedings
2-2-5: Compliance With State Law
2-2-6: License Revocation, Suspension Or Denial
2-2-7: Penalty
2-2-8: Catering Permits
2-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell liquor by the drink, beer or wine
for consumption on or off the licensed premises within the corporate limits of
the city without first having procured a license therefor. (2015 Code)
2-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Forms; Time Of Granting: Each applicant shall make application to the
city clerk on an application form provided therefor. The city council shall
grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time such
application is filed and accepted as complete by the clerk.
   B.   Council Consideration: Upon due consideration, the council shall either
issue the license or deny issuance. Upon denial of such license, the council
shall state in writing the following:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (2015 Code)
2-2-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE; FEES:
   A.   State License Required: No license shall be granted to any person who
has not received a license therefor approved by the state of Idaho.
   B.   Term: All licenses granted by the mayor and city council shall be
granted for a period of one year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
each year.
   C.   License Fees: The annual license fees imposed and collected shall be as
set by resolution of the city council.
   D.   License Transfers And Renewals: Licenses granted under the provisions
of this chapter may be renewed or transferred once the license holder has
filled out an application provided by the clerk, and the renewal or transfer
has been approved by the city council. The procedure for granting or denying an
application for renewal or transfer of a license shall be the same as for
issuing or denying a license. (2015 Code)
2-2-4: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
In all cases where the city council is considering applications for licenses,
transfers or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of the
proceeding shall be made. If the application for a license, transfer or renewal
is denied, a transcribable verbatim record of the proceedings shall be kept for
a period of not less than six (6) months after the final decision on the
matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for retention
of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his expense. The
city council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of the
proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by
law. (2015 Code)
2-2-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell liquor by the drink, beer
or wine to fail to comply with the laws of the state regarding such sales.
(2015 Code)
2-2-6: LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL:
Prior to any revocation or suspension of a license granted hereunder, the
licensee shall be afforded a hearing before the city council. Any person denied
a license shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council by
submitting in writing to the clerk a request to have the denial of a license
reheard on appeal by the city council. Such written request must be received by
the clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the decision of the
city council to deny the license. The hearing date shall be set by the city
council and written notice of the date and time set for the hearing shall be
sent to the applicant no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. At the
hearing, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to present evidence and
testimony in support of the issuance of the license. Whenever the mayor and
city council revoke or suspend a license granted hereunder or deny an
application, they shall specify in writing the following:
   A.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
   B.   The reason for the denial; and
   C.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (2015 Code)
2-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(2015 Code)
2-2-8: CATERING PERMITS:
Pursuant to the provisions of ldaho Code §§ 23-934A and 23-934B, the Mayor and
City Clerk are designated as approval authorities for catering permits. The
Mayor or City Clerk may issue alcoholic beverage catering permits upon approval
of a complete application within the time limits and under the conditions
specified herein:
   A.   Applications for Catering permits must be turned in to the Mayor or
City Clerk not later than five (5) days prior to the event. The sheriff or
chief of police or their designees shall be afforded the opportunity to render
advice and a recommendation to the Mayor or Clerk regarding the application.
   B.   Applications must be made by and signed by the holder of the
appropriate beer, wine or liquor (or combination thereof) license and the
application shall contain the number of the state beer, wine or liquor license.
   C.   Catering permits fees and their duration shall be as governed by Idaho
Code § 23-934A.
   D.   Premises for catering permits where liquor by the drink will be served
shall have a fenced area with a monitored entry point and no persons under the
legal drinking age may be admitted and shall be identified by a wristband.
(Ord. 308, 9-18-2025)
CHAPTER 3
FIREWORKS SALES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Permit Required
2-3-2: Application For Permit
2-3-3: Penalty
2-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for
sale or have on display for sale within the city any fireworks of any nature,
without first obtaining written permission to do so from the city council.
(Ord. 65, 7-1-1947; amd. 2015 Code)
2-3-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person, firm or corporation wishing to sell, offer for sale or have on
display for sale within the city any fireworks shall first make written
application to the city showing the special occasion for the same, that is to
say the Fourth Of July or some other special holiday occasion when such
fireworks are generally sold. (Ord. 65, 7-1-1947; amd. 2015 Code)
2-3-3: PENALTY:
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 65, 7-1-1947; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIAL OUTDOOR EVENTS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Definitions
2-4-2: License Required; Application
2-4-3: License Fee
2-4-4: Proof Of Insurance
2-4-5: Issuance Of License; Term
2-4-6: Restrictions
2-4-7: Outdoor Vendors
2-4-8: Penalty
2-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
OUTDOOR VENDOR: Means and includes any person, either principal or agent, who,
in any public street or public place, on foot or from an animal or vehicle
standing in the street, sells or barters, offers for sale or barters or carries
or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise during and at any
special event. The term "outdoor vendor" shall not include the activities of a
religious, charitable or nonprofit organization exempt from taxation under 26
USC section 501.
SPECIAL EVENT: Means and includes any public outdoor event, spectacle or show
staged or intended to take place partly or entirely within the corporate limits
of the city of Fairfield and which is intended to take place entirely or partly
upon city property, a city sidewalk, a city street or right of way and which is
intended to draw participants, spectators or the general public.
SPECIAL EVENT POLICY OR POLICY: The written policy adopted by the city council,
as amended from time to time, regarding special events. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004)
2-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   License Required: No person shall stage a special event in the city
without first having obtained and paid for, and having in full force and
effect, an event license therefor as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Application For License:
      1.   Every applicant for a special event license is required to submit to
the city clerk a written application on a form provided by the city. The
application shall include, but not be limited to:
         a.   Information regarding the nature, time and duration of the
special event;
         b.   The geographic location of the special event;
         c.   The agenda or program offered;
         d.   The names and addresses of all persons and organizations
sponsoring or staging the event;
         e.   Whether or not the event will require the temporary closing of
public streets;
         f.   Whether or not police protection or other security is required;
and
         g.   Whether or not the organizers have obtained general liability
insurance naming the city as a coinsured.
      2.   Upon receipt, the city clerk shall forward the application to the
mayor and city council. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004)
2-4-3: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   The fee to organizers or persons staging a special event shall be
determined by the city council by resolution.
   B.   Additionally, any organizer issuing permits to outdoor vendors, as
provided in section
2-4-7 of this chapter, shall pay to the city a fee to be determined by the city
council by resolution for each food vendor and nonfood vendor. (Ord. 207, 6-10-
2004)
2-4-4: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
No application for an event license shall be issued unless there is proof by
the organizers of the special event of an insurance policy naming the city as a
coinsured. The amount of said insurance shall be set by the city council by
resolution. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004)
2-4-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; TERM:
   A.   Issuance: Upon receipt of the application, fee and proof of insurance,
and upon approval by the city council, the mayor may grant an event license
authorizing the applicant to stage a special event in the city in accordance
with the description set forth in the application.
   B.   Term: The event license shall expire at the earliest of the following
times:
      1.   The conclusion of the event;
      2.   The time set forth in the application; or
      3.   Upon revocation of the license by the city. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004)
2-4-6: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The event license is intended to be a temporary license and is
nontransferable.
   B.   The mayor may, in his or her discretion, deny such license for good
cause and may revoke any license granted should any terms and conditions of the
license be violated or should it be determined by the city council that the
applicant made a misrepresentation on its application. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004)
2-4-7: OUTDOOR VENDORS:
   A.   Permission From Organizer: No person shall hereinafter act as an
outdoor vendor or carry on the business of vending outdoors within three (3)
city blocks of a special event without the express permission of the organizers
of said event.
   B.   Permit From License Holder: Each outdoor vendor shall obtain a permit
from the license holder and shall produce said permit upon request by the
license holder or any law enforcement official enforcing this chapter. (Ord.
207, 6-10-2004)
   C.   Permit Fee: The license holder may collect a fee for the issuance of a
food vendor and/or nonfood vendor permit as set by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004; amd. 2015 Code)
2-4-8: PENALTY:
Any owner, possessor or person violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction or entry of a guilty plea, or found guilty of an infraction, be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day is a separate violation. (Ord. 207, 6-10-2004;
amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 3
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Nuisance Defined Generally
3-1-2: Public Nuisances Enumerated
3-1-3: Determination Of Nuisance
3-1-4: Peddlers Entering Private Property Without Invitation
3-1-5: Dilapidated Buildings; Destruction; Special Assessment
3-1-6: Violation A Misdemeanor; Duty To Abate
3-1-7: Abatement By City
3-1-8: Abatement Procedure; Hearings; Disposition Of Property
3-1-9: Other Remedies; Violation And Penalty
3-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED GENERALLY:
Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or indecent or offensive
to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance. (2015 Code)
3-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Public nuisances representing a serious hazard to the public health, safety and
welfare shall include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Offensive Or Injurious Substances On Public Or Private Property: The
depositing of any filth or foul, offensive, unwholesome, nauseous or injurious
substances upon any public thoroughfare or other public place or upon any
private property.
   B.   Sweeping Or Depositing Rubbish Into Drains Or On Public Thoroughfares:
Sweeping or depositing of any paper, trash, ashes, rubbish or debris into any
drain or gutter, or onto any public thoroughfare.
   C.   Burning Substances Causing Odor Or Smoke: The burning of any hair,
leather, rags or other substances of any kind which may cause or produce an
offensive smell, smoke or odor which annoys or is offensive to persons living
in the vicinity or to persons passing by on any public thoroughfare.
   D.   Cellars, Cesspools Or Privies: All cellars, vaults, drains, pools,
cesspools, privies, sewers, yards, grounds or premises which for any cause have
become foul, nauseous or injurious to health or menace to health or which give
forth odors which are offensive.
   E.   Carcasses, Unwholesome Or Offensive Substances: All carcasses, decaying
flesh, fish, fowl or vegetables and all deposits of manure or other unwholesome
substances and all filthy or offensive water or slops in any private yard or
premises or when thrown or conducted into or upon any street, alley, public
ground or any enclosure so as to be unwholesome or offensive or liable to
become unwholesome or offensive.
   F.   Weeds: Accumulations of weeds, grass and other vegetable growth, which
are unsightly or injurious to the public or to neighboring residents or owners
of property within the city with such growths to be removed or mowed.
   G.   Junk; Used Merchandise: Accumulations of junk of any kind, including
used merchandise, building materials and automobile parts in any area unfenced
and unscreened from public view. (2015 Code)
3-1-3: DETERMINATION OF NUISANCE:
The city council shall determine whether a condition or conditions existing on
any property or at any place within the city constitute a nuisance as defined
or designated in this chapter. When the city council has determined that a
nuisance exists, the council shall direct the city attorney to contact persons
in violation, or abate the nuisance. Such notices shall be signed by the mayor,
city clerk or city attorney and shall be given to the person responsible for
creating, maintaining, or refusing to abate the nuisance in the manner provided
in this chapter. (2015 Code)
3-1-4: PEDDLERS ENTERING PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT INVITATION:
   A.   Prohibition: The practice of going in and upon private residences in
the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient
vendors of merchandise not having been requested or invited so to do by the
owners or occupants of said private residences for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or disposing of and/or
peddling or hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as
such nuisance as a misdemeanor.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale,
or soliciting of order for the sale, of milk, dairy products, vegetables,
poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the
commodities named herein is now authorized by law. (Ord. 73, 12-12-1951)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 73, 12-12-1951; amd. 2015 Code)
3-1-5: DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS; DESTRUCTION; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Declaration Of Nuisance: The city council has authority to declare any
building to be a nuisance which is so dilapidated or in such condition as to be
a menace to the public health or safety of persons or property; and to cause
the destruction or removal of the same at the expense of the parties creating,
causing, committing or maintaining the buildings or property.
   B.   Special Assessment: A special assessment may be levied on the land or
property whereon the nuisance is situated to defray the cost or to reimburse
the city for the cost of abating the same. (2015 Code)
3-1-6: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR; DUTY TO ABATE:
   A.   Violation: Any person who creates or maintains any nuisance, or who
causes a nuisance to exist, or any person who knowingly permits a nuisance to
be created or maintained or to exist on any property or at any place within the
city owned by him or under his control, and who refuses to abate the nuisance,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   B.   Duty To Abate: The owner, lessee, manager, or person who controls or is
in charge of any property, lot, building, premises or any place within the city
whereon or at which a nuisance has been determined to exist shall, jointly and
severally, remove, abate, or destroy the nuisance without delay, after having
been given a notice of violation or notice to abate as provided in this
chapter. (2015 Code)
3-1-7: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Whenever the city, by proper resolution, determines a nuisance exists for the
abatement, creating or removal of which no person can be found who is
responsible therefor, the city may direct, by an appropriate employee or
contractor, to remove, abate or destroy the same or cause the same to be done.
(2015 Code)
3-1-8: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE; HEARINGS; DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Notice To Remove: Whenever it comes to the attention of the city that
any nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists in the city, a notice in
writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance
exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the
property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and
requesting its removal in the time specified in this chapter.
   B.   Responsibility For Removal: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be
heard, the owner of any property where a nuisance exists or is deemed to exist,
and the owner or occupant of the private property in which the same is located,
either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of
removal and disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the private
property where the same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
   C.   Notice Procedure: The city clerk shall give notice of removal to the
owner or occupant of the private property where any nuisance is located, at
least thirty (30) days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute
sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the
private property on which the nuisance is located and duplicate copies are sent
by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his last
known address.
   D.   Content Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal of
the nuisance within the time specified in this chapter; and the notice shall
advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its
employees or contractor shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal
to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property.
   E.   Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are directed or
their duly authorized agents may file a written request for hearing before the
city council within the thirty (30) day period of compliance, for the purpose
of defending the charges by the city.
   F.   Procedure For Hearing: The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable
after the filing of the request, and the persons to whom the notices are
directed shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least five
(5) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to
whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence
as either party deems necessary.
   G.   Notice Of Removal: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such
nuisance, or other property having some value but by which a nuisance exists,
the city shall give notice to the owner or occupant of the property or
nuisance, if known, and also the owner or occupant of the private property from
which the nuisance or other property was removed, that the nuisance or property
by which a nuisance existed, has been removed for violation of this chapter.
The notice shall give the location of where the nuisance or property is stored
or disposed and the costs incurred by the city for its removal.
   H.   Disposition Of Property: Upon removal of the property by which a
nuisance has existed, under the provision of this chapter, the city shall,
after ten (10) days, cause it to be appraised. If the property is appraised at
seventy five dollars ($75.00) or less, the city clerk shall execute an
affidavit so attesting and describing the property and stating the location and
appraised value of the property. The city clerk, after complying with this
subsection, may summarily dispose of the nuisance or property and execute a
certificate of sale. If the property is appraised over seventy five dollars
($75.00), the law enforcement agency for the city shall give the date of the
proposed sale.
   I.   Contents Of Public Sale Notice: The notice of public sale shall state:
      1.   The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the city.
      2.   A description of the property, including any and all pertinent
information which will accurately identify the property.
      3.   The terms of the sale.
      4.   The date, time and place of sale.
   J.   Public Sale: The property shall be sold to the highest and best bidder.
At the time of payment of the purchase price, the law enforcement agency shall
execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which is to be
given to the purchaser, and the copy thereof, to be filed with the city clerk.
Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the city's liability shall be
limited to the return of the purchase price.
   K.   Redemption Of Impounded Property: The owner of any property seized
under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such property at any time after
its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of
ownership and payment to the appointed city official of such sum as he may
determine and fix for the actual and reasonable expense of removal and any
preliminary sale advertising expenses not to exceed seventy five dollars
($75.00) plus cost, for storage of the property redeemed. (2015 Code)
3-1-9: OTHER REMEDIES; VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   Additional Provisions: This chapter shall not be deemed to be the
exclusive method of abating public nuisances, but shall be supplemental to and
be in addition to other ordinances and resolutions of the city council and
statutes of the state.
   B.   Violation And Penalty:
      1.   Any person violating any regulation of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction and subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      2.   Any person violating any regulation of this chapter within one year
of a conviction of any regulation of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   Any person violating any regulation of this chapter within one year
of a second conviction of any regulation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
      4.   Each and every day during which the violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES, MACHINERY OR APPLIANCES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Nuisance Declared
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Unlawful Placement; Exception
3-2-4: Abatement
3-2-5: Interference With City Officials
3-2-6: Violation Deemed Misdemeanor
3-2-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, major
household furnishings or appliances or machinery, or parts thereof, on public
or private property within the city are found to create a condition tending to
reduce the value of property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute attractive nuisances creating
a hazard to health and safety of minors, to be injurious to the health, safety
and general welfare; and the presence of such items on public or private
property within the city, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is
declared to constitute and be a public nuisance which may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 151, 9-6-1988)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ABANDONED, WRECKED AND JUNKED: With reference to vehicles, an unsightly motor
vehicle which meets any one of the following qualifications:
   A. The vehicle does not carry a current valid state registration and license
plate;
   B. The vehicle cannot be safely operated under its own power.
MACHINERY: All articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or equipment
and any and all metal or wooden machinery, motors, equipment or tools.
MAJOR HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES: All articles usually referred to as
major household furnishings and appliances used in housekeeping, including, but
not limited to: chairs, tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators, stoves,
washers, dryers, furnaces; and grease, oil and paint containers of five (5)
gallon or over capacity.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power designed to travel on the ground by wheels, treads, runners, or slides
and to transport person or property or pull machinery including, but not
limited to: automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles and tractors.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation or partnership. (Ord. 151, 9-6-1988)
3-2-3: UNLAWFUL PLACEMENT; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Streets: It is unlawful for any person to place, allow, discard,
maintain, park or store any abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major
household furnishing or appliance on an alley, sidewalk, or other public
property within the city.
   B.   Open View On Private Property: It is unlawful for any person, whether
the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise of any private property or
premises, to place, allow, discard, maintain, park, store or permit to be
placed, allowed, discarded, maintained, parked or stored upon such property or
premises for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) days any abandoned, wrecked
or junked vehicle, major household furnishing or appliance or "machinery", or
parts thereof, as defined in section
3-2-2 of this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to any property or premises where the vehicle, furnishing,
appliance or machinery, or part thereof, is housed within a building or fence
so as to not be visible from the street or other public or private property, or
stored or parked in a lawful manner in connection with or incidental to a
business or commercial enterprise which is the primary or principal use of such
property or premises. (Ord. 151, 9-6-1988)
3-2-4: ABATEMENT:
   A.   Order Removal: By the order of the mayor or any member of the city
council, any law enforcement officer may order any abandoned, wrecked, or
junked vehicle, a major household furnishing or appliance or machinery, or
parts thereof, removed from the premises from which they reside within ten (10)
days.
   B.   Notice Of Order:
      1.   Notice of the order shall be placed by the law enforcement officer
upon the vehicle, furnishing, appliance, machinery, or parts thereof, and a
copy of the notice shall additionally be served upon any adult person occupying
the premises upon which same item is located and upon the owner of the item, if
said person is known.
      2.   If there be no occupant or owner of the premises, any notice affixed
to any building or upon any other prominent object upon the premises shall
constitute notice to such owner or occupant of the premises of the owner of the
item involved; provided, however, that if such owner or occupant is only
temporarily absent, such notice shall be by certified mail.
   C.   Procedure Upon Failure To Remove: If removal is not accomplished within
the time and in the manner prescribed by the order and notice, the law
enforcement officer, by the direction of the mayor and city council, may seek
an order from the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction, directed to the
owner or occupant to show cause why the item of abandoned, wrecked or junked
vehicle, major household furnishing or appliance, or machinery, or part
thereof, should not be removed.
   D.   Removal By City; Disposition Of Items Removed: Upon obtaining a proper
order, the law enforcement officer may cause such item of abandoned, wrecked,
or junked vehicle, a major household furnishing or appliance, or machinery, or
parts thereof, to be removed at the expense of the owner and placed in an
impounding yard where it shall be offered for sale to the highest and best
bidder at a public auction after two (2) publications in any newspaper
published or of general circulation within the city, only in full accordance
with such laws and regulations as may govern such dispositions of abandoned or
junked vehicles as established by the proper agency of the state.
   E.   Disposition Of Proceeds From Sale: The proceeds of such a sale shall be
used to pay expenses of removal, impounding and sale, and, if the proceeds are
not sufficient therefor, the balance shall immediately become due alone from
the owner or occupant of the premises if not paid by such owner. (Ord. 151, 9-
6-1988; amd. 2015 Code)
3-2-5: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICIALS:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow any
authorized city officer or employee to enter upon private or public property
during usual business hours to enforce any provision of this chapter. (Ord.
151, 9-6-1988)
3-2-6: VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 151, 9-6-1988)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
LAW ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Law Enforcement Contracted With County
4-1-1: LAW ENFORCEMENT CONTRACTED WITH COUNTY:
Pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, the city has contracted with the
Camas County sheriff's department to enforce state statutes and county and city
ordinances, including, but not limited to, traffic enforcement and criminal and
civil enforcement. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-2-1: Department Created; Officers And Personnel
4-2-2: Fire Chief
4-2-3: Duties Of Officers And Members
4-2-4: Meetings Of Officers And Members
4-2-5: Special Police
4-2-6: Equipment
4-2-7: Enforcement Of Fire Code; Penalty
4-2-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL:
   A.   Department Established: There is hereby organized a fire department of
the city to deliver the services appropriate to prevent and/or minimize the
loss of life and property threatened by the hazards of fires, medical and
rescue emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and disaster situations in
our community. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
   B.   Officers And Personnel: The officers and employees/volunteers of the
fire department shall consist of a fire chief, an assistant chief, and such
other officers and members as shall be authorized by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Appointment: The fire chief and the assistant chief shall be appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. All other
officers and employees of the department shall be appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the city council upon the recommendation of the fire
chief. Volunteers shall be appointed by the fire chief or assistant fire chief
without advice or consent of the mayor or city council. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
4-2-2: FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Functions, Powers And Duties: In addition to those general functions,
powers and duties given to the department head by other city ordinances,
resolutions or policies, the fire chief shall:
      1.   At all times, except in case of absence or inability to act, have
full charge of the entire fire department and shall at all times be subject to
such rules as the mayor and council shall prescribe. It shall be his/her duty
to see that all officers and employees of the fire department perform the
necessary services and that the department is in continuous efficient working
service.
      2.   Administer all programs and joint exercise of power agreements with
other jurisdictions providing fire and life protection services and enforce all
ordinances related to fire prevention, fire suppression, and the elimination of
fire hazards and the administration of life safety codes related thereto by
inspecting, or causing to be inspected by his/her designee, buildings, premises
and public thoroughfares, within the corporate city limits for the purpose of
enforcing the international fire code and other appropriate city ordinances,
and make such notes as necessary to detail the conditions found in such
inspection which will be filed in the office of the department head.
      3.   Administer all programs related to prevention and control of
hazardous materials releases.
      4.   Enforce laws and ordinances relating to the prevention, elimination,
control and extinguishing of fire hazards and fires, the keeping and handling
of potentially dangerous combustibles, explosives and hazardous materials.
      5.   Perform services or functions relating to fire prevention, the
control and extinguishment of fires, the prevention and control of hazardous
materials releases, other fire, hazardous materials and the enforcement of laws
and ordinances related thereto.
      6.   Investigate, or cause to be investigated by his/her designee, any
extinguished fire promptly and thoroughly for the cause of the fire, amount of
loss and any other information deemed pertinent for purposes of recordkeeping.
      7.   In the event of an emergency, to blockade any street, avenue, alley,
sidewalk or other place if necessary to ensure proper operation and protection
of fire department equipment from damage. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
      8.   Solicit or cause to be solicited by his/her designee, law
enforcement officers to assist in directing traffic, and blockading streets in
order to keep the streets and highways in the vicinity of the emergency, free
from vehicles. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010; amd. 2015 Code)
      9.   Propose to the mayor and city council, and administer, the fire
department budget.
      10.   Recommend to the mayor and city council the staffing and equipment
needs of the department necessary to carry out the responsibilities provided
for herein.
      11.   Perform all functions, powers and duties consistent with the laws
of the state of Idaho and the ordinances, policies and directives of the city
council, and the mayor, given to or required of the fire chief.
      12.   Perform such other programs or functions, related to fires,
hazardous materials and explosives that the city council or the mayor may, from
time to time, authorize or request.
   B.   Reports: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to make out and submit
annual reports relating to the condition of the department and all matters of
interest relating thereto to the mayor and city council. He/she shall also
report the number of fires that have taken place during the past year, giving
the location of, date of, and other particulars of such fires or incidents. He/
she shall incorporate in said reports such suggestions in regard to the
government of the department and the efficiency thereof as may in his judgment
seem proper and necessary. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
4-2-3: DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of all officers and members of the department to attend to
the duties of their respective positions under the orders of the chief of the
department or, in case of his absence or inability to serve, under the
assistant chief of the department. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
4-2-4: MEETINGS OF OFFICERS AND MEMBERS:
   A.   The fire chief, at his/her discretion, is hereby authorized to call the
officers and members of said department together at least once a week. The
first meeting of each month shall be a business meeting of the officers and
members of the department. Other meetings shall be for the purposes designated
by the fire chief, or for fire drills.
   B.   Members of the department who are not full time employees shall receive
an amount to be fixed by the city council for each meeting or drill attended.
(Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
4-2-5: SPECIAL POLICE:
During the performance of their duties in fighting fire, or in protecting
property either during or after any fire, the members of said department shall
be special police officers of the city and shall have all the powers and
authority conferred by law on police officers. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
4-2-6: EQUIPMENT:
The equipment of the department shall consist of the apparatus now owned by the
city and that which may hereafter be purchased by the city, and all other
things that are now used and have been used in connection with the department.
(Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
4-2-7: ENFORCEMENT OF FIRE CODE; PENALTY:
   A.   Enforcement: Pursuant to subsection
7-1-1A of this code, the international fire code shall be enforced by the
department which is hereby established.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of the
international fire code as adopted and amended by the city or fails to comply
therewith shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both. These punishments shall
comply with Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended. (Ord. 242, 8-12-2010)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Disorderly Conduct; Discharging Firearms
4-3-2: Public Intoxication; Vulgar Language
4-3-3: Disturbing Public Assemblages
4-3-4: Discharging Fireworks
4-3-5: Public Urination Or Defecation
4-3-6: Vagrancy
4-3-7: Injuring Trees, Plants Or Property
4-3-8: Animal Related Offenses
4-3-9: Penalty
4-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT; DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of any noisy, riotous, or
disorderly conduct; or in any way to commit a breach of the peace, or to do
anything that shall be offensive or dangerous to the city inhabitants or
officers; or to discharge within the city limits, unless in defense of person,
life or property, any firearms. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916; amd. 2015 Code)
4-3-2: PUBLIC INTOXICATION; VULGAR LANGUAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any of the streets or alleys or
any public place within the city in a state of intoxication; or to, in any
public place within the city in a loud, angry or threatening manner, use any
vulgar or threatening language, or language of an insulting character, whereby
the peace or quiet of the inhabitants of the city may be disturbed. (Ord. 5, 1-
31-1916; amd. 2015 Code)
4-3-3: DISTURBING PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to excite disturbance or contention at a
public house, assemblage or any lawful meeting of citizens, or for any person
to disturb a public assembly congregated for religious or other purpose within
the limits of the city by undue noise or by any offensive, unbecoming or
indecent behavior. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916)
4-3-4: DISCHARGING FIREWORKS:
No person shall discharge or set off any rocket, cracker, roman candle, fire
wheel, cannon, anvil, bomb, giant powder or any other explosive or other
fireworks within the limits of the city, except by the written permission of
the mayor, who is hereby authorized to designate a time and place when and
where the same may be done. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916; amd. 2015 Code)
4-3-5: PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to excrete human
waste, including urine or feces, upon the ground, into a body of water, or upon
anything attached or setting upon said surfaces within the city, except for
toilet facilities used as receptacles for human waste.
   B.   Penalties And Judgments:
      1.   Infraction Penalty For A First Offense: Notwithstanding any
municipal penalty provision adopted prior to the effective date hereof, any
person in violation of subsection A of this section for a first offense shall
be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      2.   Misdemeanor Penalty For Second Or Subsequent Offenses: A second or
subsequent violation of subsection A of this section is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by both. These punishments shall comply with Idaho Code section
18-113, as amended.
      3.   Failure To Appear; Default Judgment: If the defendant fails to
appear at the time stated in an infraction citation, summons, trial date
notice, or other such notice served on the defendant as provided by law, the
court shall enter default judgment against the defendant for the infraction
without giving further notice to the defendant. If a default judgment is
entered against a defendant for an infraction pursuant to law, the clerk shall
mail a notice of judgment to the defendant at the address stated in the
citation advising that the defendant must pay the judgment within fourteen (14)
days after the date of the notice.
      4.   Failure To Obey Citation; Separate Misdemeanor Offense: It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court at the time prescribed on an
infraction citation or summons served upon the defendant, regardless of the
disposition of the charge upon which such citation or summons was originally
issued. The duty to appear in court at the time indicated may be complied with
by an appearance by counsel in the manner prescribed by Idaho law. Violation of
the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
      5.   Failure To Satisfy Judgment: Failure to satisfy judgment as ordered
by the court pursuant to this section for infraction penalties, by default
judgment or otherwise shall be deemed in contempt of court punishable as a
misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-1801. (Ord. 241, 7-22-2010)
4-3-6: VAGRANCY:
   A.   Any person within the limits of the city, without any visible means of
support, who has the physical ability to work, and who does not for the space
of one day seek employment, nor labor when employment is offered to him; any
healthy beggar who solicits alms as a business; any person who roams about from
place to place without any lawful business; any common drunkard; any person who
wanders about the streets at night, or who lodges in any barn, shed, shop,
boxcar, outhouse, or place other than is kept for lodging purposes, without the
permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof, is hereby
declared to be a vagrant. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to be guilty of vagrancy. (Ord. 5, 1-31-
1916; amd. 2015 Code)
4-3-7: INJURING TREES, PLANTS OR PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch or fasten any animal to,
or otherwise destroy or injure, any growing or living shade tree, ornamental or
fruit tree, or any box or case around such tree. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, unlawfully and
maliciously break, destroy or injure any gate, fence, railing, post, enclosure
or statuary, or any part thereof, or to in any manner deface the same; or to
cut down, lop, girdle or otherwise injure or destroy any tree, shrub or plant,
the same being the property of another, or upon the streets, alleys, parks or
public grounds within the city limits. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916; amd. 2015 Code)
4-3-8: ANIMAL RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Encouraging Dog Or Cock Fights: It shall be unlawful for any person to
participate in, or to aid or abet, any dog or cock fight within the city
limits. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916)
   B.   Cruelty To Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly
beat, torture, misuse, or to deprive of food and water for twelve (12) hours,
or otherwise mistreat any animal or animals. (Ord. 5, 1-31-1916; amd. 2015
Code)
   C.   Livestock Running At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit or suffer any chickens, ducks, turkeys or geese, or any other fowl owned
by such person to run at large upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the
city, or upon the private property of any person within the city limits without
the consent of the owner thereof.
   D.   Poisoning: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully kill or to
administer poison to any domestic animal without the consent of the owner
thereof, or to expose any poisonous substance within the limits of the city
with the intention that it shall be taken by any domestic animals. (Ord. 5, 1-
31-1916)
4-3-9: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
4-4-1: School Functions; Liquor And Drugs Prohibited
4-4-2: Curfew
4-4-1: SCHOOL FUNCTIONS; LIQUOR AND DRUGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definition: "School function" is defined as any activity that is
sponsored by and carried out under the authority and guidance of the school
board of trustees, or through any of their representatives that involves any
elementary or secondary students or other nonstudent children under the age of
eighteen (18), regardless of the location of the school or its origin.
   B.   Prohibition: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to consume,
possess, or be under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or nonprescription
drug or hallucinogenic substance while present at, or within three hundred feet
(300') in a straight line to the nearest entrance if the activity be held in a
building, of any public or private school function either of the elementary or
secondary level that is taking place at a location in Camas County. (Ord. 160,
11-1-1990)
4-4-2: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain, and it shall be unlawful for
any parent, guardian or adult person having the care and custody of any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years, to allow or permit such person to be or
remain, in or upon any street, alley or public place or ground within the city
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
during the months of September through May, or between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. during the months of June,
July, and August.
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply to any person who is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of such person, nor to any person who is in
the performance of an errand or duty directed by such person, parent, guardian
or other adult person having the care and custody of such person (which
direction must be in writing, signed and bear the date of such errand or duty),
nor to any person who is actually at the time engaged in legitimate employment
for profit, or from any school, church or other community function.
   C.   Penalty A Misdemeanor: Any such person under the age of eighteen (18)
years who shall violate this section, and any parent, guardian or other person
who has care or custody of such minor, who shall permit such minor under his or
her care, custody or control to violate this section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 205, 9-11-2003)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. DOGS
SECTION:
4-5A-1: Definitions
4-5A-2: Dog License
4-5A-3: Kennel Permit
4-5A-4: Dogs Running At Large
4-5A-5: Public Nuisance
4-5A-6: Authority To Impound Or Kill
4-5A-7: Right Of Entry Upon Private Property
4-5A-8: Redemption Or Disposition Of Impounded Dogs
4-5A-9: Obstructing Animal Control Officer
4-5A-10: Penalties
4-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED DOG: Any dog left without proper food and water for a period of over
twenty four (24) hours, or any barking dogs without supervision for a period of
over twenty four (24) hours.
BARKING DOG: A dog which persistently barks or howls and thereby unreasonably
deprives a person of peace and quiet.
OWNER: Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, or provides food or shelter for any
dog shall be deemed to be the owner of that animal.
RUNNING AT LARGE: A dog shall be deemed to be running at large when off or away
from the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog and not under the immediate
control of such owner, keeper or their agents. This provision shall not apply
to dogs working with livestock. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003)
4-5A-2: DOG LICENSE:
   A.   License Required; Tag:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or harbor any dog within
the city limits without obtaining a license for the animal from the City clerk.
      2.   The owner or responsible party shall apply for a license at City
Hall and provide the owner’s name and address, the name, breed, color, age, sex
of the dog or cat, and proof of whether or not the dog has been neutered or
spayed.
      3.   A veterinarian’s certificate documenting the current rabies
immunization of said dog is required to be presented at the time of
application, along with the required licensing fee. No license shall be issued
without valid proof of rabies immunization.
      4.   Any owner or harborer of any dog within the city limits is required
to secure a license tag about the neck of the dog or be implanted with an
individual identification microchip. The license tag or microchip shall be
obtained from the city office or such other place as designated by the city. If
the dog has been implanted with an identity microchip, the microchip number and
owner identity information shall also be provided to the Clerk at the time of
license application.
   B.   Fee: The fee schedule for the licenses, permits and delinquent license
penalties shall be determined, and reviewed by the city council at least
annually, by resolution.
   C.   Renewal: All licenses shall be paid within fifteen (15) days of April 1
of every year.
   D.   Duplicate License: If a license tag is lost, the owner may secure a
duplicate license tag upon satisfactory proof of loss and payment of the sum as
provided in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003; amd. Ord. 302,
2-8-2024)
4-5A-3: KENNEL PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to
harbor more than three (3) dogs upon his premises within the city prior to
obtaining a kennel permit from the city clerk and paying the necessary fees as
set by the city council in subsection
4-5A-2B of this article; provided, however, that no kennel permit shall be
required for: 1) a litter of puppies until such time as the puppies reach three
(3) months of age; 2) harboring dogs for no longer than thirty (30) days until
owners or new owners can be found. All dogs must be licensed when they are
three (3) months of age. There will be allowed only four (4) dogs ages three
(3) months and up permitted on a kennel permit.
   B.   Requirements: The requirements for obtaining this permit will be: 1) to
have signed permission of all surrounding neighbors; and 2) the kennel area
shall be totally enclosed by a solid six foot (6') privacy fence and be located
more than fifty feet (50') from the front property line, and only in the rear
yard. Said area shall be no closer than thirty feet (30') from any dwelling
other than the dwelling of the owner of the lot and operator of the kennel.
Said fence shall be no closer than twenty five feet (25') from any side or rear
property line. The lot and kennel area shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   C.   Revocation: A kennel permit may be revoked upon failure to comply with
the conditions imposed at the time of the original approval. Such permit may
also be revoked for good cause, such as:
      1.   Negative impact on the health, safety and welfare concerns of the
residents of the city.
      2.   Complaints of noise, odor, failure to keep the dog under proper care
and/or control.
      3.   Creation and existence of a public or private nuisance.
      4.   Four (4) or more legitimate complaints received by the sheriff,
animal control officer, city of Fairfield, or other authorized persons.
   D.   Renewal: All kennel permits must be renewed and approved every year
within fifteen (15) days of April 1. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003)
4-5A-4: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of any dog to permit the
dog to run at large upon the street, alleys, sidewalks, highways, school
grounds or other public places or upon the private premises of others within
the city.
   B.   Violation of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and a menace to the public health and safety, and said dog or dogs
shall be taken up and impounded as provided in this article.
   C.   Any dog owner of a dog running at large shall be punished as set forth
in Section
4-5A-10 of this Code. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003; amd. Ord. 302, 2-8-2024)
4-5A-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or other keeper of a dog or dogs to
fail to exercise proper care and control of such dog to prevent such dog from
becoming a public nuisance.
   B.   Any dog displaying the following behaviors or acts shall be deemed a
public nuisance:
      1.   Damaging public or private property.
      2.   Frequent, continuous or untimely barking, so as to disturb the peace
of a reasonable person.
      3.   Biting, molesting or injuring any person.
      4.   Scattering of garbage.
      5.   Chasing vehicles.
      6.   Attacking or killing other domestic animals.
      7.   Trespassing upon public or private property.
      8.   Not wearing a city dog license tag. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003; amd. Ord.
302, 2-8-2024)
4-5A-6: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND OR KILL:
   A.   Any law enforcement officer, animal control officer or any person
authorized by the city may seize and impound all dogs without collars bearing
licenses as required by this article, or any dog found running at large, or any
dog deemed to be a nuisance as set forth in this article.
   B.   Any dog that cannot be seized without injury resulting to the person
attempting to seize the animal may be slain by any law enforcement officer,
animal control officer or such person authorized by the city. (Ord. 203, 10-16-
2003)
4-5A-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
In the enforcement of any provision of this article, any law enforcement
officer, deputy sheriff, animal control officer or his/her assistant are
authorized to enter the private property of any person to take possession of
licensed or unlicensed, fierce, dangerous, or vicious dogs when in fresh
pursuit of such dog at the time the dog goes onto private property. (Ord. 203,
10-16-2003; amd. 2015 Code)
4-5A-8: REDEMPTION OR DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS:
   A.   Any dog impounded may be taken from the pound by the owner or any
authorized person upon exhibiting to the animal control officer or authorized
person having charge of said pound a receipt showing that the license fee has
been paid for such dog, and upon paying the person in charge of the pound an
impounding fee as set forth in subsection
4-5A-2B of this article.
   B.   All impounded dogs not redeemed within seventy two (72) hours shall be
offered for sale by the city for a minimum sum to be set by resolution of the
city council or any additional sum determined to be reasonable by the city,
plus any required license fee.
   C.   All dogs that are not sold or redeemed within five (5) days may be
destroyed in a humane manner. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003; amd. Ord. 302, 2-8-2024)
4-5A-9: OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
Any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct the animal
control officer or any peace officer engaged in the capturing, securing or
taking of an animal to the pound, or who shall open or in any manner directly
or indirectly aid, counsel or advise the opening of any animal pound cage,
wagon or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of animals to the
animal pound shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003;
amd. 2015 Code)
4-5A-10: PENALTIES:
Any owner, possessor or person violating any provision of this article, upon
conviction or entry of a guilty plea, shall be punished as follows:
   A.   Infractions: Unless otherwise specified below:
      1.   First offense violations of the provisions of this Article shall be
an infraction, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), inclusive of
court costs.
      2.   Second offense violations of the provisions of this Article shall be
an infraction, punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), inclusive
of court costs.
   B.   Misdemeanors:
      1.   A violation of Section
4-5A-5-B, subsections 1, 3, or 6 that result in damage to property, or injury
to or death of an animal or person, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000), up to three months in the county jail,
or both, plus any court costs and restitution to the victim of such offense as
the court may order.
      2.   Except as provided in Section
4-5A-10-B-1 above, third and subsequent violations of this Article shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) plus
court costs, but no jail may be imposed. (Ord. 203, 10-16-2003; amd. Ord. 302,
2-8-2024)
 
ARTICLE B. LIVESTOCK
SECTION:
4-5B-1: Livestock Defined
4-5B-2: Keeping Livestock
4-5B-3: Running At Large Prohibited
4-5B-4: Penalty
4-5B-1: LIVESTOCK DEFINED:
For the purpose of this article, "livestock" shall be defined as cows, sheep,
horses, goats, poultry, rabbits, pigs, hogs, ducks, and geese. (2015 Code)
4-5B-2: KEEPING LIVESTOCK:
It is hereby deemed unlawful to keep livestock within the city limits, except
as hereinafter provided. (2015 Code)
4-5B-3: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any livestock to allow the same to run at
large. Any livestock shall be kept on the owner's property by means of an
adequate fence to hold said livestock on said owner's premises or by means of a
cord, chain, or rope of such length to restrict the animal to the owner's
property. The provisions as to fencing contained herein shall apply to fowl
which traditionally are not and cannot be collared and leashed. (2015 Code)
4-5B-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2015 Code)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS; GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Motor Vehicle Laws Adopted; Penalty For Violation
5-1-2: Speed Limit
5-1-3: Travel Restrictions
5-1-1: MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   State Laws Adopted: The city council does hereby adopt by reference the
following Idaho Code provisions as they now exist or as they may hereinafter be
amended:
      Idaho Code sections 49-101 through 49-127, which constitutes various
definitions; Idaho Code sections 49-601 through 49-674, 49-701 through 49-724,
49-801 through 49-811, 49-902 through 49-967, 49-1221 through 49-1234, 49-1301
through 49-1315, 49-1401 through 49-1430, 49-1501 through 49-1506, 49-1801
through 49-1818, 49-2202. (Ord. 153, 4-4-1989; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Violations: It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor or
infraction, as the case may be, for any person to violate any of the provisions
of the Idaho Code sections herein adopted by the city as a traffic and vehicle
code for the city. (Ord. 153, 4-4-1989)
   C.   Penalty Imposed: For any of the Idaho Code sections indicated in
subsection A of this section which are hereby adopted for which a penalty is
not prescribed by the Idaho Code herein adopted, the penalty shall be as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 153, 4-4-1989; amd. 2015 Code)
5-1-2: SPEED LIMIT:
The speed limit on all streets within the city shall be twenty five (25) miles
per hour unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 235, 12-18-2008)
5-1-3: TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Authority To Set Restrictions:
      1.   Definition: Travel restrictions shall include, but not be limited
to: the weight of the vehicle, speed limit and closures of streets.
      2.   Authority: The city, through its city superintendent, or such other
individuals as appointed by the city council, will have the authority to set
travel restrictions on the streets of the city.
      3.   Restrictions Temporary; Posting: All travel restrictions shall be
temporary in nature and shall not take effect until the posting of the
appropriate signs or traffic control devices by the city.
   B.   Damage To Streets: The owner and the operator, driver or mover of any
vehicle, object or contrivance over a street shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all damages which the street may sustain as the result of
illegally operating or driving or moving any vehicle, object or contrivance, or
as the result of driving or moving any vehicle, object or contrivance weighing
in violation of any restrictions in place by the city.
   C.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Any individual or entity violating any travel
restriction set by this section shall be guilty of a general misdemeanor. (Ord.
194, 9-13-2001)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING LIMITATIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Time Limit
5-2-2: Removal Of Vehicle; Notice; Disposition
5-2-3: Proceeds Of Sale
5-2-4: Parking Along Soldier Road
5-2-1: TIME LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person having custody and control of any motor
vehicle to leave the same standing or parked on a public street for a period
longer than ten (10) consecutive days. (Ord. 147, 6-2-1987)
5-2-2: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE; NOTICE; DISPOSITION:
   A.   Notice To Remove: In the event any motor vehicle is left parked or
standing by the owner or person having custody and control thereof on a public
street for more than ten (10) consecutive days, then the law enforcement
officer shall endeavor to locate the owner or person having custody and control
of such vehicle, and notify such person in writing to remove such vehicle
within twenty four (24) hours.
   B.   Failure To Remove; Removal By City: If the owner or person having
custody and control of such vehicle does not remove such vehicle within twenty
four (24) hours thereof, or if the owner or person having custody and control
of said vehicle cannot be ascertained or found, then in either event, the law
enforcement officer shall remove such vehicle from the public streets, store
the same in a safe place and give written notice to the owner or person
entitled to the custody and control of such vehicle to claim the same within
ten (10) days by paying the costs of removal of the vehicle, together with any
storage charges or other proper expenses.
   C.   Unclaimed Vehicles; Sale: If such vehicle is not claimed and such
charges paid within said ten (10) day period, then the law enforcement officer
shall offer such vehicle for sale at public auction, after giving five (5)
days' notice of such sale by publishing notice in the official newspaper of the
City in at least one issue of said paper. In the event such vehicle is
purchased at such sale, then the law enforcement officer shall issue the
purchaser such statement as will assist the purchaser in having such vehicle
registered in the purchaser's name and the State. (Ord. 147, 6-2-1987; amd.
2015 Code)
5-2-3: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
All proceeds derived from the sale of any such vehicles shall be applied first
to the costs of such removal, storage and sale. The balance shall be retained
in a Special Fund of the City for a period of thirty (30) days. If the owner of
such vehicle claims such fund and proves he was the owner of such vehicle
within such thirty (30) day period, the same shall be paid to such claimant. In
the absence of claim being made within said thirty (30) day period, the balance
of said money shall be transferred to the General Fund of the City and
thereupon the former owner of said vehicle shall have no claim thereto. (Ord.
147, 6-2-1987)
5-2-4: PARKING ALONG SOLDIER ROAD:
The purpose of this section is to define types of parking along Soldier Road.
   A.   Parallel Parking Along Soldier Road: Parallel parking shall be
permitted only in the following areas:
      1.   On the east side of Soldier Road from Ponderosa Avenue north to Sage
Avenue.
(Ord. 276, 10-11-2018)
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Operation And Location Restrictions
5-3-2: Equipment
5-3-3: Owner Responsibility; Exceptions
5-3-4: Violation A Misdemeanor
5-3-1: OPERATION AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Operation On City Roads: Persons shall operate a snowmobile to the far
right side, shoulder, or inner slope of the ditch with the traffic on a city
road that is plowed, maintained, and named in the city, and only as an avenue
for entering and exiting out of the city limits. (Ord. 214, 12-9-2004; amd.
2015 Code)
   B.   Operation On City Property: No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV
on city property including, but not limited to: city hall, city parks, fire
department or police department property or on school property. Permits may be
granted to facilitate snowmobile and ATV training classes.
   C.   Places Where Riding Allowed:
      1.   In the bottom or outside slope of a ditch or on the far right side
of city roads in the same direction as highway traffic.
      2.   On state and local trails, if designated as such.
      3.   On ice covered water to which an operator has legal access.
      4.   On the operator's own land.
      5.   On land other than that belonging to such operator, with written
permission of the landowner, occupant, or lessee.
   D.   Crossing Of Streets Or Roadways: When making a direct crossing of a
street or roadway, the following is required:
      1.   Bring the snowmobile or ATV to a complete stop before crossing.
      2.   Yield to all oncoming traffic.
      3.   Have both front and rear lights on when crossing city roads.
      4.   Cross at a ninety degree (90°) angle with respect to the road.
   E.   Personal Operation: No person shall operate his/her snowmobile or ATV
in a careless, reckless, or heedless manner which endangers other persons or
their property. Persons operating snowmobiles or ATVs are subject to applicable
state and local traffic laws pertaining to vehicles.
   F.   Youthful Operation:
      1.   No person under the age of thirteen (13) may drive snowmobiles or
ATVs across or on city roads unless accompanied by an adult with a valid
license.
      2.   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile or ATV to permit the
snowmobile or ATV to be operated contrary to the provisions of this subsection
F.
      3.   All persons under the age of eighteen (18) are required to wear a
CSA, Snell or DOT approved safety helmet while operating or riding a
snowmobile.
   G.   Speed Limits: No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV on any city
road at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour or the posted
speed limit, whichever is less. Any snowmobile or ATV that is within one
hundred feet (100') of any pedestrian must reduce its speed to ten (10) miles
per hour or under. Between ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., snowmobiles and ATVs must reduce their speed to ten (10) miles per
hour or less within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any dwelling. (Ord. 214,
12-9-2004)
5-3-2: EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Headlamp: No person shall operate a snowmobile or ATV on any city road
unless at the time of such operation the headlamp of such snowmobile or ATV is
on.
   B.   Whip Flag: A brightly colored "whip flag" located a minimum of five
feet (5') above the snow machine only is recommended. (Ord. 214, 12-9-2004)
5-3-3: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Fine For Illegal Operation; Exceptions: A person registered as owner of
a snowmobile or ATV may be fined not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00)
if a snowmobile or ATV bearing his registration number is operated contrary to
the provisions of this chapter. The registered owner may not be so fined if:
      1.   The snowmobile or ATV was reported as stolen to the Camas County
sheriff's department at the time of the alleged unlawful act; or if
      2.   The registered owner demonstrates that the snowmobile or ATV either
was stolen or was not in use at the time of the alleged unlawful act; or if
      3.   The registered owner furnishes to law enforcement officers, upon
request, the identity of the person in actual physical control of the
snowmobile or ATV at the time of such violation.
   B.   Persons Renting Or Leasing Exempted:
      1.   The provisions of this section do not apply to any person who rents
or leases a snowmobile or ATV, if such person keeps a record of the name and
address of the person or persons renting or leasing such snowmobiles or ATVs,
the registration number thereof, the departure date and time, and the expected
time of return thereof. Such record shall be preserved for at least six (6)
months, and shall be prima facie evidence that the person named therein was the
operator thereof at the time it was operated contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   The provisions of this section do not prohibit or limit the
prosecution of a snowmobile or ATV operator for violating any of the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 214, 12-9-2004)
5-3-4: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 214, 12-9-2004)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Obstructing Streets And Sidewalks
6-1-2: Riding Bicycles On Sidewalks
6-1-3: Public Right-Of-Way Construction
6-1-1: OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivation shall ha the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular mandatory and not merely
directory.
 
ENCROACH:    The use, intrusion , enclosure or occupation of a street,
             sidewalk, parkway or the unused portion of a street.
             Any obstacle or thing impeding, or inconveniencing or rendering
OBSTRUCTION: dangerous, public travel upon and along a street, alley or
             sidewalk.
             That portion of public right-of-way situated between the curb line
             of any street and the property line of property abutting and
PARKWAY:     adjoining any street. In the absence of a curb, the curb line of a
             street shall be deemed to be the edge of that portion of public
             right-of-way maintained and open to the use of the public for
             purposes of vehicular travel.
PERSON:      Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
             or organization of any kind.
SIDEWALK:    The portion of the parkway of a street set aside and intended for
             the use of pedestrians.
             Highways, roads, alleys, and bridges dedicated, purchased or
STREET:      otherwise acquired for the public, including the unimproved or
             unused portion thereof, maintained and open to use by the public.
 
   B.   Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided
by this section:
      1.   To cause, create or maintain any encroachment, or obstruction, upon
or within any street.
      2.   To place, install or maintain any object, substance or matter in
lieu of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation upon or within any street.
      3.   To erect maintain poles, wires, pipes or structures upon or below
the surface of any street.
      4.   To drive any vehicle or ride an animal upon any sidewalk or parkway.
      5.   To erect a mailbox upon or within any street, sidewalk or parkway.
   C.   Property Abutting Street: Any owner or occupant of property abutting
and adjoining any street may upon and within the parkway of such street:
      1.   Improve, adorn, or plant trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation;
and
      2.   Place, install and maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu
of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation.
   D.   Illegal Obstructions: If any encroachment or obstruction has been
placed, installed, erected, and maintained, or a use made and maintained for
private or business purposes, upon a street, sidewalk or parkway without prior
permission and consent, the Director of the Department of Public Works shall in
writing require immediate removal thereof. If such encroachment or obstruction
or use has not been removed, or commenced to be removed, and diligently
prosecuted, prior to the expiration often (10) days form such notification, by
the person who caused or owns or controls the encroachment, or obstruction, or
use, the Director shall commence proper action to abate the same as a nuisance,
and if judgment is recovered in favor of the City, the owner, occupant or
person maintaining such nuisance may, in addition to having the same abated, be
charged ten dollars ($10.00) for every day such nuisance remained after notice,
as well as all costs.
   E.   Application To Be Filed: A person seeking to encroach, obstruct or use
a street, sidewalk or parkway, including the unused or unimproved portion of a
street, must file an application with the Director of Public Works, who shall
present the same for the approval or disapproval of the City Council. The
application shall include plans and specifications of sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the proposed obstruction, encroachment, or
use of the street, sidewalk or parkway by which to demonstrate the relevant
provisions of the Fairfield City Code and other relevant laws, ordinances,
rules, regulations and orders will be complied with, the legal description o
the property abutting the street, sidewalk or parkway upon or within such
encroachment, obstruction or the use shall be or is intended to be performed,
and any other additional information necessary to make a fair determination of
whether to allow or permit the encroachment, obstruction or use.
   F.   Conditions Of Permit Granted: A permit granted pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The person to whom a permit is given or granted shall acquire no
property or contractual right in and to the street, sidewalk or parkway and
such permit may be revoked whenever the Council deems it necessary as a proper
police measure.
      2.   The person to whom a permit is issued shall comply with all laws,
orders and regulations of the City and with any direction of any public
officer, pursuant to law, which shall impose any duty upon such person, and
such person shall at his sole expense obtain all licenses or permits which may
be required.
      3.   The person to whom a permit is issued shall indemnify and save and
hold harmless the City from and for any and all losses, claims, actions and
judgments for damages or injuries to persons or property and losses and
expenses caused or incurred by the permittee, its servants, agents, employees,
guests and business invitees. In addition, the permittee shall maintain and
keep in full force and effect liability insurance in which the City shall be
named as a named insured in amounts established by the Council. The limits of
insurance shall not be deemed a limitation on the permittee’s covenant to
indemnify and save and hold harmless the City.
      4.   Upon revocation of any permit given or granted, or in case of any
disturbance or damage to pavement, sidewalk or other surface or structure,
permittee shall, at its own expense, and the manner required by the City,
replace and restore such in a condition acceptable to the City. (Ord. 297, 4-
13-2023)
6-1-2: RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Prohibition: The riding of bicycles on any and all of the sidewalks
within the city is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not
less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00), to be assessed
by any court having jurisdiction within the city. (Ord. 35, 8-7-1934)
6-1-3: PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person controlling, directing or otherwise
engaging in public right-of-way construction within the City of Fairfield shall
first obtain a permit. For the purposes of this Section, "public right-of-way
construction" shall mean any construction activity, including excavation,
conducted within, upon, or into, any city street, alley, or sidewalk within the
city limits.
      1.   Exceptions: Permits are not required for the following:
         a.   City employees engaged in performing work for the city.
         b.   State of Idaho employees engaged in performing work for the
State.
         c.   Utility company employees engaged in repair and maintenance,
provided the utility company possesses an active franchise agreement with the
City of Fairfield.
         d.   Work contracted by the city or the state to replaces highway
guard rails, posts, signposts, delineative posts, culverts, electric poles,
telephone poles, traffic control signs or device supports, or other similar
publicly owned fixtures, in the same approximate location and depth within a
public right-of-way.
         e.   Emergency repairs of water or sewer lines if approved by the
city's Director of Public Works.
      2.   All applications for a Public Right-of-Way Construction Permit shall
provide such information as the City Council deems necessary to determine the
applicant's capability to perform and complete work within any public right-of-
way. Application forms shall also include a list of duties and responsibilities
for public right-of-way contractors.
      3.   Permit applications shall be accompanied by payment of a permit fee
in an amount set from time to time by Resolution of the Council. Neither the
permit fee nor any portion thereof shall be refunded once a permit has been
issued. No portion of the permit fee shall be prorated. Permits issued shall
not be transferable.
      4.   Upon receipt of a fully completed application, the application shall
be transmitted to the City Council for approval or rejection. City Council
shall take action on a fully completed application within sixty (60) days of
receipt by the council.
   B.   Acceptance of Permit: Any person accepting a Public Right-of-Way
Construction Permit from the City of Fairfield shall agree to hold the City
harmless from any and all liability on account of the installation,
construction, maintenance, or operation of the facilities located under this
permit.
   C.   Insurance, Bonding, and Licensing: Prior to the commencement of any
work, persons granted a Right-of-Way Construction Permit shall obtain and
provide proof of the following, and maintain the same throughout any Public
Right-of-Way project:
      1.   Insurance:
         a.   Comprehensive general liability coverage in an amount not less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) single limit liability for
personal injury, death, and property damage.
         b.   Additional coverage shall be required for any work utilizing
explosives or work that may endanger or cause the collapse of adjacent
buildings or facilities. Such coverage shall be a minimum limit of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000) single limit liability for personal injury, death,
and property damage. This coverage may be carried on an individual "project"
basis where the need for such coverage is applicable.
         c.   All required policies shall carry an endorsement naming the City
as "additional insured." All policies shall contain a clause giving the City
Engineer a minimum of thirty (30) days advance written notice in the event of
anticipated cancellation of a policy or any coverage.
         d.   Contractors with employees shall cany statutory worker's
compensation insurance with at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000)
employer's liability per occurrence. A certificate of insurance evidencing such
worker's compensation coverage shall be filed with the City.
      2.   Bonding:
         a.   All contractors shall execute and deposit with the City either a
bond in favor of the City or an equal amount in cash to ensure proper and
adequate performance of all work within a public right-of-way.
         b.   Bond amount shall be in an amount commensurate to the entirety of
the proposed project costs.
         c.   Future liability under any bond furnished hereunder may be
cancelled by giving the City thirty (30) days advance written notice of the
intention to cancel. Cancellation shall not affect any liability which may have
accrued under the terms of the bond prior to cancellation. Permits shall be
subject to revocation whenever a bond is canceled unless a comparable bond is
furnished at the time of cancellation of the original bond.
      3.   Licensing: Every contractor must possess an Idaho Public Works
License commensurate to the value of the proposed project and adhere to all
regulations stipulated therein.
   D.   Inspections: The city shall inspect all work conducted under a Right-
of-Way Construction Permit to ensure it is completed in accordance with the
permit, design, and applicable regulations. No sureties shall be released until
Final Approval is received from the City Engineer.
   E.   Revocation of Permit: If at any time, the City determines the permit
holder has violated any provision of the permit or fails to comply with any
applicable regulations or permit conditions, the city may revoke the permit.
(Ord. 300, 11-9-2023)
 
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
6-2-1: Sidewalk Construction Or Repair
6-2-1: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR:
   A.   Council Determination: Whenever the city council, in its judgment,
deems it necessary to require property owners within the city to construct or
repair sidewalks, the council shall take recorded action in an official council
meeting, naming the owner and location of property upon which such sidewalk is
abutting, and in such meeting, determining sidewalks which shall be constructed
or repaired.
   B.   Notice To Property Owner:
      1.   Notice, Opportunity To Attend Council Meeting: Whenever it has been
determined by the city council that construction or repair of a sidewalk is
needed, the owners of said property shall be notified of the proposed
construction or repair and given the opportunity to attend the council meeting
where a decision shall be made.
      2.   Affidavit Of Notice: Upon service of notice to a property owner to
construct or repair a sidewalk, the proper city official shall file an
affidavit with the city clerk setting forth the names of the property owners
upon whom the notice was served, the location of the property where the
sidewalk was ordered constructed or repaired, and the date of service of such
notice.
   C.   City Supervision: It shall be the duty of the proper city official to
furnish specifications for and supervise the construction or repairs of all
sidewalks within the city.
   D.   Failure To Construct Or Repair; Lien For Costs: If an owner of property
fails to construct or repair sidewalks abutting his property within the time
specified by the notice served upon him by the proper city official, said city
official shall arrange for such construction or repair and the cost thereof
shall be assessed against said property and become a lien thereon, and at the
time provided by law for the certification to the county tax collector of the
general and special taxes of the city by the city clerk, be certified to the
county tax collector to be placed on the proper tax roll to be collected as
other taxes are collected, and shall be in addition to all other taxes assessed
against such property. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SNOW REMOVAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Removal By Private Persons; Cost Assessment
6-3-3: Depositing On Public Places Prohibited
6-3-4: Accumulated Snow And Ice A Nuisance
6-3-5: Parking Restrictions
6-3-6: Ticketing Of Vehicles; Fines
6-3-7: Removal Of Vehicles; Towing; Storage
6-3-8: Penalty
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivation shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Fairfield, Idaho.
DIRECTOR: The city public works director or his or her designee.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every self-propelled vehicle designed for carrying persons or
property upon a public street or highway, including motorcycles, regardless of
whether the motor vehicle is in operable condition.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, partnership, association, firm,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SIDEWALK: The portion of the parkway of a street set aside and intended for the
use of pedestrians.
STREET: Highways, roads, alleys and bridges dedicated, purchased or otherwise
acquired for the public, including the unimproved or unused portion thereof,
maintained and open to use by the public.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE: Every device designed for or in which persons or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, including bicycles. (Ord.
236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-2: REMOVAL BY PRIVATE PERSONS; COST ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Removal In Certain Area Required; Time Limit: Every person, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, in possession or control of any
building or lot of land within the city fronting or abutting a sidewalk
adjacent to Soldier Road between Garnet Avenue and Ponderosa Avenue, shall
remove and clear away, or cause to be removed or cleared away, snow and ice
from the entire width of such sidewalk which is in front of or abuts on such
building or lot of land. Such snow and ice shall be removed from such sidewalk
areas within twenty four (24) hours after the occurrence of said condition.
   B.   Use Of Sand Or Abrasive: In the event snow and ice on the sidewalk has
become so hard that it cannot be removed, the person or entity charged with
removal shall put sand or other abrasive on the sidewalk to make pedestrian
travel reasonably safe.
   C.   Removal By City; Cost Assessment To County: In the event of failure of
such owner, tenant or occupant to remove snow or ice from any such sidewalk
within twenty four (24) hours of the occurrence of such condition, then the
city may remove or have removed such snow or ice and assess the cost thereof
against the premises abutting the sidewalks. In such event, the city clerk
shall certify such assessment to the assessor of Camas County and such
assessment shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the same
manner as other municipal taxes are collected. (Ord. 236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-3: DEPOSITING ON PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or against
a public street, public alley, fire lane, fire hydrant or on any sidewalk.
(Ord. 236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-4: ACCUMULATED SNOW AND ICE A NUISANCE:
It is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance for any person to permit
or suffer the accumulation of ice and snow upon any sidewalk, sidewalk area,
street, alley or public way in such manner as to impede normal vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or emergency access. (Ord. 236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-5: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Seasonal Restrictions:
      1.   No person shall stand, stop or park a motor vehicle, trailer or
other vehicle on any streets or within existing public easements for such
streets, or on any designated street within the city between the hours of three
o'clock (3:00) A.M. to six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M., between November 1 and
April 30 of any year; provided, however, that persons without sufficient space
to park such motor vehicles, trailers or other vehicles on their property may
park as far as possible to the edge of the street, but must relocate such motor
vehicle, trailer or other vehicle every twenty four (24) hours to accommodate
snow removal of city streets.
      2.   Any person who fails to relocate such motor vehicle, trailer or
other vehicle as required in this section will be given one written warning to
remove said motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle within twelve (12) hours of
such warning, after which said motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle may be
towed as provided in section 6-3-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Designated Streets: Soldier Road between Garnet Street and Ponderosa
Street is subject to the parking restrictions set forth in subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Enforcement Of Other Restrictions: In the event any other ordinance,
statute, law or proclamation provides for parking restrictions more restrictive
than those set forth in this chapter, then such other parking restrictions
shall be controlling and may be enforced in accordance with the terms of this
chapter or in accordance with the terms of such other ordinance, statute, law
or proclamation. (Ord. 236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-6: TICKETING OF VEHICLES; FINES:
   A.   Issuance Of Ticket: Any motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle found
parked along a street or alley in violation of the parking restrictions imposed
by this chapter may be issued a uniform traffic citation in the same manner as
uniform traffic citations for other violations are issued within the city.
   B.   Fines: The fine for such violation shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00); provided, that any person who violates the parking restrictions
imposed by this chapter a second time within a twelve (12) month period shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned for a
period not exceeding six (6) months, or be both so fined and imprisoned. (Ord.
236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-7: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; TOWING; STORAGE:
   A.   Towing; Storage:
      1.   In addition to the issuance of a uniform traffic citation as
provided in the preceding section, any motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle
found parked along a street or alley in violation of the parking restrictions
imposed by this chapter may be removed at any time at the direction of the
director, and may be towed to and stored in any public or private storage area
designated by the city, without notice to the owner of the motor vehicle,
trailer or other vehicle.
      2.   The towing may be done by any private licensed towing service or by
city personnel, except as otherwise provided in subsection 6-3-5A of this
chapter. All towing and impound or storage fees shall be paid by the owner or
operator of the motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle directly to the private
towing service operator before the motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle is
released.
      3.   If the motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle is removed by city
personnel, the towing charge and storage fees shall be paid directly to the
city before the motor vehicle, trailer or other vehicle is released. The towing
and impound or storage fees paid to the city shall be deposited into the city
general fund.
   B.   Fees Established: The city council is authorized to establish by
resolution the towing and storage fees for motor vehicles, trailers and other
vehicles towed or stored in accordance with this chapter. A current list of the
towing and storage fees shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. (Ord.
236, 1-15-2009)
6-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates section
6-3-2 or
6-3-5 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 236, 1-15-2009; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Connection And Obtaining Service From Systems
6-4-2: Installation Of Water And Sewer Service Facilities
6-4-3: Operation Of Water And Sewer Systems
6-4-4: Service Charges And Accounting Procedures
6-4-5: Use Of Public And Private Sewers
6-4-6: Prohibited Conduct
6-4-7: Enforcement
6-4-8: Ratification
6-4-1: CONNECTION AND OBTAINING SERVICE FROM SYSTEMS:
   A.   Mandatory Hookup Of Improved Lots: For all lots being improved after
the effective date hereof, all owners of lots, properties, buildings or
residences within the city shall construct or cause to be constructed adequate
private service lines to connect said lots, properties, buildings or residences
to the nearest accessible mainlines of the municipal water and sewer systems
within ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof.
   B.   Application For Hookup And Service: No connection to the municipal
water or sewer system shall be established until the owner of the lot,
property, building or residence in question has submitted to the city clerk an
application for water hookup or sewer hookup and service, and until such owner
has demonstrated compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
      1.   All applications for water hookup and sewer hookup and service shall
be made at the office of the city clerk; and the applications shall set forth
the name of the owner, building permit number if service is sought to a new or
enlarged structure and such permit is required by law, size of connection
requested, description of the property to be served, and signature of the owner
agreeing to conform to the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city,
including responsibility for payment.
      2.   An application containing the above information shall be required
for any change in the size, location or number of water or sewer hookups made
at the request of the property owner, and the cost of such change shall be
borne exclusively by said owner. (Ord. 239, 2-18-2010)
      3.   If application is made for a connection that required extension of
water or sewer mains, either within or without the city, such application shall
be referred to the city council. The city council shall determine whether the
application shall be granted, and if granted, the terms and conditions upon
which the extension shall be made. Provided, one such condition of the
authorization of an extension shall be that the extended water or sewer main
become and remain at all times the sole and exclusive property of the city,
regardless of whether or not the cost of such extension was assumed and paid by
the city.
      4.   If the application does not require extension of water and sewer
mains, either within or without the city, the application shall be examined by
the city clerk for completeness, and, if the application appears to be
complete, the city clerk shall refer the same to the mayor who shall approve
the application, provided there are no apparent conflicts with this chapter or
other action by the city council. In the event the mayor does perceive
conflicts with this or other actions of the city council, the mayor shall refer
the same to the city council for approval.
   C.   Temporary Hookup And Water Service: Contractors and others who desire
to use municipal water temporarily shall make the same application, pay the
same charges, fees and deposits, and be subject to the same rules and
regulations as other users and consumers of water from the water system. (Ord.
122, 8-5-1980)
   D.   Notice Of Temporary Shutoff: Should it be desired to discontinue the
use of water or sewer services supplying the premises for a period of not less
than one month, notice in writing must be given to the city clerk and payment
in full for all outstanding charges and fees made at the office of the city
clerk. The water or sewer shall then be turned off, and turned on again upon
application, as provided in subsection E of this section, and payment of the
hookup fee for new services, as established by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Hookup Application Fee: An application for water or sewer hookup and
service shall be accompanied by payment in cash, certified check or money order
of the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), as the hookup fee for water
hookup, and the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as the hookup fee for
sewer hookup. The hookup application fee shall be retained by the city to
defray the cost of reviewing the application, conducting such inspections as
this chapter or the circumstances of the proposed connection may require,
opening the service account and other administrative actions.
   F.   Approval Of Application: If an application is approved, notation of
such approval shall be made and signed by the city clerk upon a copy of the
application returned to the applicant. Provided, however, the city clerk shall
not note such approval until the application has been endorsed as in proper
form by the mayor after appropriate action by the mayor or city council. (Ord.
239, 2-18-2010)
6-4-2: INSTALLATION OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE FACILITIES:
   A.   Cost And Standards: All installations of connections with the municipal
water or sewer system shall be made at the owner's expense and shall comply
with the requirements set forth in applicable national plumbing codes and such
other standards as are prescribed by Idaho Code or city ordinance or
resolution. The size of private service lines shall be reasonably prescribed by
the city. (Ord. 239, 2-18-2010)
   B.   Compliance With Standards: The city may, through its employees or
persons or firms under contract to the city, inspect connections made to the
municipal water or sewer systems, and, if the city gives notice to an applicant
that such inspection will be made, the applicant shall not cover any pipeline
or connection until the inspection is made and the work approved.
Notwithstanding the provision in this subsection for inspections, any
applicant, or his successor, who installs any pipeline or connection in a
manner violative of the codes and standards specified herein shall cause
corrections to be made at his own expense promptly following demand by the
city.
   C.   Separate Service: Each lot, property, building or residence using or
consuming water through the water system or disposing of sewage in the sewer
system shall be served by a separate private water or sewer service line.
   D.   Freezing, Leaks And Blockages: All private service lines shall be
placed at whatever depth is necessary in order to avoid all reasonable
likelihood of freezing and at the direction of the city. The city shall be
responsible for all freezing, leaks, and blockages in water and sewer mains.
(Ord. 122, 8-5-1980)
   E.   Responsibility Of Owner: The property owner shall be responsible for
all maintenance of private service lines from the point where the service line
connects with the city water or sewer mains; and shall also be responsible for
the initial installation of such service lines within the city rights of way,
at the owner's cost, from the property boundary to the point of connection with
the city main water or sewer line. (Ord. 239, 2-18-2010)
6-4-3: OPERATION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Ownership Of Facilities: Ownership of all water and sewer mains,
extensions, and appurtenant equipment maintained by the city shall be vested in
the city, and in no case shall the owner of any property or premises have the
right to claim or reclaim, remove or damage any part thereof. (Ord. 239, 2-18-
2010)
   B.   Interruption Of Services: The city reserves the right at any time, upon
reasonable notice when circumstances permit, or without notice when notice
cannot feasibly be given, to interrupt or terminate the water supply when
necessary for repairs, extensions, other work on the system, or nonpayment of
fees or charges; and the city shall not be responsible for any damages
resulting from such interruption or termination.
   C.   Access To Premises: Employees of the city and persons under contract
with the city, properly identified, shall have free access at reasonable hours
to all property or premises receiving services from the water or sewer systems
of the city for the purpose of inspecting the connections of the mainlines,
service lines, fixtures, other system facilities, or the manner in which water
is used within the water system.
   D.   Hydrants: The city shall install, maintain and keep in repair all city
fire hydrants and shall control such hydrants. No person other than a duly
authorized employee of the city, or individual serving under contract to the
city shall change or interfere in any manner with the adjustment of fire
hydrants or the valves connected therewith. (Ord. 122, 8-5-1980)
6-4-4: SERVICE CHARGES AND ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Water And Sewer Service Charges And Fees; Deposits:
      1.   There is hereby established a system of periodic service charges and
fees for the use of, and for service available and rendered by, the sewer
system and sewage disposal facilities of the city, and by the water system of
the city. All owners who receive or have the right to receive the benefit of
the municipal sewer and water systems shall, in return for said benefit, pay
monthly user fees as established by resolution of the city council. All
"improved property" in the city, defined as any lot with a structure of not
more than three hundred (300) square feet and/or used as a dwelling, whether
vacant or not, to which the municipal sewer system and municipal water system
is available, but is not used by the owner or occupier of said parcel of land,
is still subject to monthly minimum user charges to cover the costs of
providing and maintaining the system. The base fee shall be established by
resolution of the city council and shall be based on the costs and expenses of
operation, maintenance and repair of the municipal water system and municipal
sewer system.
      2.   No owner shall have water delivered or turned on, or be connected to
the city sewer disposal facilities until he has deposited with the city
treasurer a sum established by the city council through resolution for each
single-family dwelling, mobile home, water and sewer user and for each unit of
a multiple- family dwelling or apartment. This deposit shall be refunded, or
applied to any outstanding charges for the owner's use of water or sewer, at
the time he orders the water or sewer turned off.
      3.   If the owner has made prompt payments for a period of two (2) years,
meaning that the owner has not been placed on the city's shutoff list, the
owner may make a written request for a refund of his or her water deposit,
provided said remaining deposit is in a nondeminimus amount of five dollars
($5.00) or more. Any refund of the water and sewer deposit will be attributed
to the balance due and owing on the owner's account.
      4.   All contracts heretofore entered into between the city and
nonresident users or potential users are hereby ratified and confirmed.
   B.   General Duties Of City Clerk: The city clerk shall collect and receive
all connection fees, water service charges, sewer service charges and other
funds payable by law to the city with respect to the municipal water system or
sewer system. The city clerk shall keep accurate and complete records of all
funds received, dates and amounts received, names of payors and accounts
credited, together with accurate and complete accounts of all disbursements,
showing the dates and amounts thereof, payees, and accounts debited. All funds
received or held shall be deposited by the city clerk in a bank duly authorized
to accept such deposits, pursuant to the Idaho Code.
   C.   Billings: With the approval of the city council, the city clerk shall
establish a date or series of dates on which water service and sewer service
charge bills are sent to owners of property or premises using or consuming
water from the municipal water system or using the municipal sewer system.
Billings shall be rendered according to this schedule, and shall be paid within
thirty (30) days from date of billing. If the owner does not pay the amount
owed within thirty (30) days after the billing is rendered, the city clerk
shall cause a notice to be issued to such owner, stating that the account is
delinquent, and that, if the amount of the delinquency is not paid within
twenty (20) further days, water service will be discontinued and water service
will not be reinstated except upon payment of the delinquent amount, plus a
twenty dollar ($20.00) resumption of service fee. The notice shall also advise
the owner that, if he contests the amount of the delinquency or seeks relief
from shutting off water service, he must apply in writing at the city clerk's
office for a hearing before the city council, prior to expiration of the twenty
(20) day period. If such written application is received, water service will
not be shut off until the city council has conducted a hearing and has made its
determination of the case.
   D.   Lien And Collection Of Delinquencies: Any delinquency in payment of
water or sewer fees shall become a lien against the real property to which
water and sewer services were furnished, upon recording, at the office of the
Camas County recorder, of the city clerk's sworn certification of the
delinquency. Provided, however, the city shall not initially deny or
discontinue water or sewer service to any water consumer or sewer user because
of any delinquent bill on that premises that is attributable to the prior water
or sewer user of another water consumer or sewer user. The city may collect
such delinquency by commencement of a civil action, and, if such action
prevails, the city shall be entitled to award of its costs and reasonable
attorney fees. When a delinquency has been recovered following recording of a
lien, satisfaction of the lien shall be recorded. In the alternative to
collecting by commencement of a civil action, the city may certify under oath
the amount of the delinquency to the treasurer of Camas County who shall, upon
receiving such certification, include the amount of the delinquency in the next
assessment of real property taxes against the premises in question, to the
extent that such action is authorized by applicable provisions of the Idaho
Code.
   E.   Adjustment To Water Billings: In cases where adjustments are required,
upon written application by the owner, the city council may make adjustments to
unfair or inequitable water billings, including, without limitation,
adjustments to compensate for leaking pipes or fixtures for which the city is
responsible. The power of adjustment shall not be used by the city council to
confer a discriminatory benefit, or to impose a discriminatory burden upon any
owner of a property or premises using or consuming water from the municipal
water system.
(Ord. 122, 8-5-1980; amd. Ord. 239, 2-18-2010; 2015 Code; Ord. 280, 3-19-2020)
6-4-5: USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS:
   A.   Connection To City Sewage System: All owners of property, tenants and
other occupants of real property within the jurisdiction of the city where
there is now located or may in the future be located any structure or building
requiring the discharge of sewage, is hereby required to connect to the city
sewage system at their own expense. Said connection shall take place
immediately after the effective date hereof.
   B.   Septic Tank Or Cesspool Use, Permission Required: No person shall
construct or maintain any septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage unless specifically authorized by the city
council.
   C.   Prohibited Discharges: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
any substance or waste into the city sewage system which is in violation of any
state or federal regulation or law. (Ord. 175, 5-25-1995)
   D.   Connection And Service Rates: The city council, by resolution, shall
from time to time set the rate to charge for connection to the sewage system
and a rate for the users of the city sewage system. For new construction, the
sewer user charge is to begin when the service connection has been inspected
and approved or when the building being served is substantially completed,
whichever is the latest date. The monthly sewage user charge is established to
cover operation and maintenance costs of the treatment system, and to provide a
fund to pay replacement costs. All charges for connections and for sewerage
service provided for in this section shall be a lien upon the property with
which such connection is made or sewerage service rendered, superior to all
other liens and encumbrances, except as otherwise provide by law. (Ord. 175, 5-
25-1995; amd. 2015 Code)
   E.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Violation of any part of this section shall be
a misdemeanor. (Ord. 175, 5-25-1995)
6-4-6: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   Waste: No owner, agent, or other person shall waste water or allow
water to be wasted by imperfect or leaking stops, valves, pipes, closets,
faucets, or other fixtures, or use water closets without self-closing valves,
or use water in violation of any city ordinance regulating the use of water.
   B.   Work On City Streets, Property Or Rights Of Way: No owner, agent,
contractor or other person shall perform any work in relation to the municipal
water or sewer systems in or upon any city street, property or right of way
without furnishing the city a plan of work contemplated and securing from the
city approval for the work to be performed. The city may prescribe such terms
and conditions, including the provision of an appropriate bond or other
reasonable security as the circumstances may warrant.
   C.   Tampering With Systems: No person, unless duly authorized by the city,
shall disturb, interfere with, or damage any water main, water pipe, sewer
main, sewer pipe, machinery, tool, hydrant, appurtenance, appliance, building,
improvement or other facility belonging to, or connected with, said water or
sewer systems of the city.
   D.   Foreign Substances: No person, unless duly authorized by the city,
shall place, or cause to be placed, any substance of any kind into the water
stored or transmitted in the municipal water system.
   E.   Connections Or Resumptions: No owner, agent, contractor or other person
shall cause any property or premises to be connected to the municipal water or
sewer systems except in compliance with this chapter, nor turn on or resume
without permission of the city any water service that has been interrupted or
terminated for any reason.
   F.   Obstruction Of Access: No person shall obstruct, or cause or allow any
obstruction to, the access to any fire hydrant, water main, water pipe, sewer
main, sewer pipe, machinery, tool, appliance, building improvement or other
facility of the municipal water or sewer systems. (Ord. 122, 8-5-1980)
6-4-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Deprivation Of Water Or Sewer Services: If the city determines that any
owner of property or premises that are or could be served by the municipal
water or sewer systems or any contractor or other person acting at the
direction of the owner has engaged in any of the prohibited conduct enumerated
in section
6-4-6 of this chapter, or has otherwise violated the provisions of this
chapter, the city may give notice in writing to such owner that water and/or
sewer service will be withheld or terminated, unless the owner applies in
writing within twenty (20) days for a hearing before the city council, and
during that hearing shows cause why he should not be deprived of water and/or
sewer services. In making its determination, following such a hearing, the city
council may direct that water or sewer services be withheld or terminated, that
water or sewer services be furnished, or that water or sewer services be
furnished upon such terms and conditions as the council finds reasonably
necessary to protect the municipal water and sewer systems. (Ord. 239, 2-18-
2010; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Criminal Penalties: It shall be unlawful and punishable as a
misdemeanor for any person knowingly to engage in any prohibited conduct
enumerated in section 6-4-6 of this chapter, or otherwise knowingly to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that such prohibited conduct or
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In the event
of such prohibited conduct or violation, the city, in addition to or in lieu of
such criminal prosecution, may bring an action for damages and/or injunctive
relief; and, if the city prevails in such action, it shall be entitled to an
award of its costs and a reasonable attorney fee. (Ord. 122, 8-5-1980)
6-4-8: RATIFICATION:
All water or sewer services furnished, fees, revenues collected, and all other
action taken with respect to the city municipal water or sewer systems prior to
the effective date hereof, is hereby ratified.
(Ord. 122, 8-5-1980)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
6-5-1: Title
6-5-2: Purpose
6-5-3: Definitions
6-5-4: Water Supply Protection; Cross-Connection Prohibited
6-5-5: Duty To Install And Inspect Annually
6-5-6: New Construction
6-5-7: Installation Required
6-5-8: Existing Equipment
6-5-9: Repair And Maintenance Of Equipment
6-5-10: Access For Inspection
6-5-11: Certified Backflow Technician
6-5-12: Notification Of Public
6-5-13: Records
6-5-14: Violations
6-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall officially be known and cited as the CROSS-CONNECTION
CONTROL ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FAIRFIELD. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Protect the public water supply of the City by isolating the
customer's water service from the City water system, thus preventing
contamination or pollution, which could backflow from the customer's premises
to the City water system;
      2.   Eliminate both potential and existing cross-connections between the
potable water system and non-potable water systems within the customer's
premises; and
      3.   Maintain the Backflow Prevention Program by administering an
Inspection and Testing Program of the customer premises and backflow prevention
assemblies installed at the location specified by the City Water Department.
(Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR ASSEMBLY: A device or assembly that has
been designed specifically for preventing the backflow of water or liquid from
entering the system and the device that has passed laboratory and field
evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has
demonstrated competency to perform such tests to the Idaho Department of
Environmental Quality.
BACK PRESSURE: A pressure, higher than the supply pressure caused by a pump,
elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water in a potable water
distribution system as a result of cross-connection.
CITY WATER SYSTEM: The City of Fairfield's water source facilities, water
storage facilities and distribution system under the control of the City Water
Department up to and including the meter.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or piping arrangement
between a potable water system and any other source or system through which it
is possible to introduce into the potable water system any used water, water
from any source other than an approved public water system, industrial fluid,
gas or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is
supplied. Cross- connections include bypass arrangements, jumper connections,
removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other temporary or
permanent devices which, or because of which "backflow" can or may occur. (Ord.
271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-4: WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION; CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by
the City or any other water utility, unless the water supplying the premises is
protected as required by State and City laws and regulations. It is unlawful
for the owner or occupant of any premises using water supplied by the City
water system or other water utility to cross-connect such water supply to a
foreign or non-approved source of water that does not meet the standards of the
City of Fairfield and the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality. It shall
be the responsibility of the owner of occupiable premises to effect
installation and inspections as required herein, and to give notice to the
supplier water utility of any deficiencies of his/her water system in that
regard. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-5: DUTY TO INSTALL AND INSPECT ANNUALLY:
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of property where water is
consumed, to purchase, install, test and maintain approved backflow prevention
devices or assemblies wherever it will be possible for used, unclean, polluted
or contaminated water, mixtures, or substances to enter any portion of his/her
potable water system, and to otherwise control cross-connections. Such owner
shall have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once a
year at the owner's expense. Where the City deems the hazard to be great, or
where an assembly has a history of failing tests, the City may require the
owner to have such inspections and tests at a more frequent interval as
prescribed by the City. All such tests shall be made according to the standards
set forth by the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality by testers licensed
by the Idaho Bureau of Occupational Licenses. Test reports will be made in
triplicate, with copies going to the owner, the City Water Department and one
retained by the inspector for his/her records. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-6: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The building official of the City and the State plumbing inspector will review
all plans for new construction to ensure that unprotected cross-connections are
not an integral part of the owner's water system. If a cross-connection cannot
be eliminated, protection will be required by installation of an air gap or
other approved backflow prevention device or assembly, in accordance with the
Uniform Plumbing Code, Idaho Code section 37-2102, IDAPA 58.01.08, table
900.02, and the current edition of the Accepted Procedures and Practice in
Cross Connection Control Manual Pacific Northwest Section of American Water
Works Association (AWWA), as adopted. Water vacating the drinking water supply
must do so by means of an approved air gap or mechanical backflow prevention
device or assembly as required by said Code. The owner shall provide the
building official with verification of a certified test of assembly before a
certificate of occupancy is issued. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-7: INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
Whenever the City deems that a service water usage contributes a sufficient
hazard to the water supply and a property owner has not made appropriate
installation, the installation of an approved backflow prevention device or
assembly shall be required on the lateral service line of the owner's water
system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building being
served, but before the first branch line leading off the lateral service line
in any event. The type of protective device or assembly shall comply with local
and State requirements. Backflow assemblies must be on the List of Approved
Assemblies published by the University of Southern California Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. The owner shall provide the
City Water Department with a certified test of such backflow prevention devices
or assemblies within ten (10) working days after their initial installation in
order to determine proper function. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-8: EXISTING EQUIPMENT:
All existing backflow prevention assemblies, which do not meet the requirements
hereof, shall nonetheless be required to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Backflow prevention assemblies that are deemed by the building
official or the City Water Department to be adequate for the purposes intended
may receive a waiver of compliance with any particular provision hereof in
writing by the City. Such previously existing assemblies shall be subject in
any event to the annual testing requirements of this chapter. Whenever an
existing assembly is moved to another location, or requires more than minimum
maintenance, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to health, the
unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device or assembly
meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-9: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The maintenance, including necessary repairs, of all backflow prevention
devices or assemblies and cross-connection devices required by this chapter
shall be the responsibility of the owner of property where an assembly or
device is installed, and failure to adequately maintain any required equipment
shall be a violation hereof. No device or assembly shall be placed back in
service unless it is functioning as required. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-10: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
All water systems shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times by
authorized representatives of the City Water Department in order to determine
whether cross- connections or other structural or sanitary hazards including
violations of this chapter exist. In order to make such determination, the
inspection shall include access to above-ceiling areas, pits, paneled interior
areas, or their locations where cross- connections might exist. The owner and
any occupant shall be responsible to provide a route of access across the
property for inspection purposes that is free from litter, overgrowth, the
threat of a vicious animal, or other hindrance that may be detrimental to the
safety of the inspector or obstructive to his/her ease of access. (Ord. 271, 8-
11-2016)
6-5-11: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:
All tests of backflow prevention devices or assemblies shall be conducted by a
certified backflow technician who will be responsible for the competence and
accuracy of all tests and reports. Such technician shall be responsible for the
following:
   A.   Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
the testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention devices or
assemblies.
   B.   Make report of such testing and/or repair within required times to the
owner and the City Water Department on a form approved for such use by the City
Water Department.
   C.   Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts
used.
   D.   Assure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts
and that any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or
operational characteristics of the assembly.
   E.   Maintain his/her license in current condition and his/her testing
equipment in proper operating condition.
   F.   Be equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges,
and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow prevention
devices or assemblies.
   G.   Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure
backflow assembly, high hazard air gap, or other backflow prevention device or
assembly showing the serial number, date tested, and by whom, together with the
technician's license number. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-12: NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC:
Although failure of a consumer to be aware of this chapter shall be no defense
to violation hereof, the Water Department shall use reasonable means to notify
its customers of the hazards of cross-connections and the need for annual
inspection of backflow prevention devices or assemblies. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-13: RECORDS:
The Water Department shall keep records of cross-connection hazards and the
condition of backflow prevention devices or assemblies, including those records
required by State and Federal agencies. (Ord. 271, 8-11-2016)
6-5-14: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Service of water to a consumer on property found to be in violation of
this chapter should be discontinued by the City after written notice of the
violation to both the owner and consumer, if different.
      1.   A violation exists if:
         a.   Backflow prevention assemblies required by this chapter for
control of cross- connections that is not installed, tested, or maintained, as
required herein.
         b.   It is found that a backflow assembly has been removed or
bypassed.
         c.   An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.
         d.   The periodic system inspection required herein has not been
conducted.
         e.   A false report or false information is provided to the City by or
on behalf of the owner or consumer with regard to the cross-connection or
backflow prevention assembly.
      2.   Where written notification of a deficiency is provided by the City,
and the owner fails to take the required corrective action within ten (10) days
after the date of mailing such notice, the City shall immediately discontinue
water service unless the City, at the request of the owner, authorizes a longer
time for completion. Water service will not be restored until all existing
conditions or defects are corrected. In the event that there exists a
noncompliance with State or local law or other circumstances which poses a
significant health hazard, the City may immediately discontinue water service
until compliance is attained or the significant health hazard is removed. (Ord.
271, 8-11-2016)
TITLE 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Adoption And Enforcement Of Codes
7-1-2: Foundations For Structures Used As Permanent Dwellings
7-1-1: ADOPTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CODES:
   A.   Code Adoption: The approved editions of the following nationally
recognized codes, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code
board, are the official building codes of the city, except as provided in
subsection C of this section: (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
      International building code.
      International residential code, parts I through IV and IX.
      International energy conservation code.
      International fire code.
      National electrical code.
      International plumbing code.
      International mechanical code.
      B.   Successive Versions Adopted: The adopted versions of the foregoing
codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they
are adopted by the Idaho building code board, effective on the date any such
codes are made effective by the Idaho building code board. (Ord. 223, 7- 13-
2006; amd. Ord. 232, 8-14-2008; 2015 Code)
   C.   Amendments To Adopted Codes: The following amendments shall be
applicable to the adopted building codes:
      1.   To the international building code:
         a.   Section 101.1 shall be amended by inserting "city of Fairfield".
         b.   Amend IBC section 3409.2; insert "7th day of April, 1990".
      2.   To the international residential code, 2000 edition, excepting parts
VII and VIII:
         a.   Section R101.1 shall be amended by inserting "city of Fairfield".
         b.   Amend IRC Table R301.2(1) Climate And Geographic Design Criteria
as established by the building official.
         c.   Amend section R301.2.3, Snow Loads, to read as follows:
            Roof Snow Load Requirements (for buildings that require a city of
Fairfield building permit):
         1)   Required snow loads for the city of Fairfield shall be a minimum
80 psf for single ridgeline structures with 3 in 12 or greater roof pitch.
         2)   If the structure has a perpendicular ridgeline, and/or is less
than a 3 in 12 roof pitch, a licensed engineer, using the available ground snow
load data from the University of Idaho, must engineer the structure.
         d.   Amend section R407.1, Wood Columns, to read as follows: Wood
columns (commonly referred to as "polebarn" construction) shall not be used for
the purpose of constructing a building which contains, in whole or in part, a
residential dwelling. Accessory buildings may be constructed with wood columns
if built in conjunction with an existing residential building, or if a building
permit has been issued for a residential building on the same property.
      3.   To the international energy conservation code, 2000 edition, as
hereby amended:
      Amended IECC section 101.1 inserting "the city of Fairfield".
   D.   Exemptions: These codes shall not apply to: (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
      1.   Residential storage sheds (no larger than 300 square feet, not
attached to existing structure or a permanent foundation, and not used as a
dwelling); (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Residential decking (less than 30 inches from grade), and fencing
less than six feet (6') in height; and
      3.   Unmodified container units with valid identification numbers; and
      4.   Nothing herein shall act to eliminate the placement requirements
established by zoning regulations for these structures. (Ord. 298, 1-11-2024)
7-1-2: FOUNDATIONS FOR STRUCTURES USED AS PERMANENT DWELLINGS:
   A.   Permanent Foundation Required: All structures used as a permanent
dwelling shall be permanently affixed to a permanent foundation and said
foundation shall meet the building code requirements as set forth in the
international residential code and/or the building code as adopted by the city.
The requirement for permanent foundation dwelling structures shall not include
recreational vehicles or manufactured homes that are located in a manufactured
home park.
   B.   Other Structures: Other permanent structures with a minimum floor area
of eight hundred (800) square feet will be required to be permanently affixed
to a permanent foundation base and meet the requirements set forth in the city
building codes.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PREFABRICATED HOME REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Development Standards
7-2-4: Application And Certificates
7-2-5: Penalty
7-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes the minimum standards for the location and approval of
prefabricated housing as permanent dwelling units on individual lots zoned for
single-family residential uses. (2015 Code; amd. Ord. 298, 1-11-2024)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
 
                     A structure attached to or located adjacent to a
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: prefabricated home, such as awnings, carports, garages,
                     porches, or steps.
                     A weather resistant material surrounding the entire
FOUNDATION FASCIA:   perimeter of a prefabricated home which completely
                     encloses the space between the exterior wall of the
                     manufactured home and the ground.
                     A structure constructed according to HUD manufactured home
                     construction and safety standards and Idaho Code section
PREFABRICATED HOME:  39-4105(8), or constructed under the Idaho Modular
                     Building Program and Idaho Code Section 39-4301, and which
                     is designed to be used as a permanent residential
                     dwelling.
                     A prefabricated home which has been installed on a
PERMANENTLY AFFIXED: permanent foundation in accordance with applicable
                     building codes. (Ord. 298, 1-11-2024)
 
7-2-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The use of a prefabricated home as a permanent residential dwelling on a parcel
of land shall be permitted in any zoning district which permits a single-family
site built dwelling, provided the following standards are met:
   A.   Size: The prefabricated home is multi-sectional with a minimum width of
twenty feet (20') and a minimum enclosed floor space of not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
   B.   Foundation: The prefabricated homes shall be permanently affixed to a
foundation.
   C.   Pitched Roof: Prefabricated homes shall have pitched roofs with a
minimum slope of a nominal three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12')
in width.
   D.   Siding And Roofing Material: The prefabricated home has exterior siding
and roofing materials which in color, material, and appearance are generally
similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on
residential dwellings within the community, or which are comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings.
   E.   Prefabricated homes shall be less than ten (10) years old at the time
of installation. (Ord. 298, 1-11-2024)
7-2-4: APPLICATION AND CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Application: Application shall be made to the building official on a
building permit application form. The completed application shall include all
information necessary to determine conformity with required development
standards of this chapter. The applicant shall also attach to the application:
      1.   A plot plan showing existing conditions and the proposed location of
the home and other improvements at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty
feet (1" = 20').
      2.   A copy of any additional manufacturer's instructions not covered by
the Idaho manufactured homes standards or the Idaho Modular Building Program.
      3.   Other local single-family building requirements.
   B.   Certificates and Inspection:
      1.   The applicant shall sign the completed application certifying the
prefabricated home meets the required development standards of this chapter and
that site development will be in accordance with said standards and the plot
plan submitted. The applicant shall also certify that once the prefabricated
house is permanently affixed, the applicant will declare the house as real
property for taxation purposes in accordance with Idaho Code section 63-304.
      2.   Following application and plot plan approval by the building
official, the building official shall issue a building permit for the footings
and foundation for the attachment of the prefabricated home; and the building
official shall verify, in writing, that all development standards have been met
as certified by the applicant. The home may then be attached to the foundation
in accordance with city codes for permanent utility connections and other
building requirements.
      3.   Prior to occupancy, a final inspection shall be made to assure
proper attachment of the home to the foundation. (Ord. 298, 1-11-2024)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RVs, TRAVEL TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Parking On Public Property
7-3-2: Parking On Private Property
7-3-3: Penalty
7-3-1: PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No travel trailer, recreational vehicle, or motor home shall be parked on any
public property or street for more than a period of ten (10) days; nor shall
any such parking block access to any public or private property within the city
limits. (Ord. 298, 1-11-2024)
7-3-2: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Permanent Residence Prohibited: No person shall permanently reside in
any travel trailer, recreational vehicle or motor home within the city limits.
   B.   Temporary Occupancy: Individuals may occupy a travel trailer,
recreational vehicle or motor home located upon private property provided that
an application is submitted along with necessary fees to the city, and
      1.   Occupancy has a clearly define beginning and ending date.
      2.   Occupancy does not include dates between November 1st and March
31st.
      3.   Occupancy does not exceed ninety (90) days, unless associated with
construction.
      4.   Occupancy for construction purposes may be approve for up to one
hundred eighty (180) days provided there is an active building permit for a
permanent building.
      5.   Any time extension for an occupancy permit must be approved by the
council.
   C.   Connection to Water and Sewer: A request to connect to the City's water
and sewer system shall only be granted for a travel trailer, recreational
vehicle or motor home which is being temporarily occupied related to the
construction of a permanent dwelling or commercial building. An application
must be submitted with the necessary fees to the city clerk prior to any
connection. The council shall have the sole discretion in approving the
connection, and act upon the application at the next scheduled meeting.
   D.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to travel trailers,
recreational vehicles or motor homes located within a motor home park,
recreational vehicle park or similarly designated facilities. (Ord. 298, 1-11-
2024)
7-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 167, 8-5-1993; amd. 2015 Code)
 
TITLE 8
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Title
8-1-2: Authority
8-1-3: Jurisdiction
8-1-4: Policy
8-1-5: Purposes
8-1-6: Interpretation
8-1-7: Application Of Regulations
8-1-8: Amendments
8-1-9: Conflicts Of Law
8-1-10: Severability
8-1-11: Saving Provisions
8-1-12: Violations And Penalties
8-1-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this title shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as
the CITY ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FAIRFIELD. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-1-2: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Pursuant to the powers and jurisdiction vested through the laws,
statutes and regulations of the state of Idaho, the city does hereby exercise
the power and authority to adopt zoning and subdivision regulations to regulate
development of lands under its jurisdiction. Such regulation of the development
of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land development is an
exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this city. The
developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by
the planning and zoning commission for design, dedication, improvement and
restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economical
development of the city and to the safety and general welfare of the future
property owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
   B.   Under the power and authority so vested, the city hereby declares that
no building permit or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land subject to these regulations nor shall any excavation
of, filling of, and/or construction of, any public or private improvements take
place or be commenced thereon, except in conformity with these regulations, and
no land subject to these regulations shall be subdivided and sold or offered
for sale until the owner has obtained approval of a final plat in accordance
with these regulations and the approved plat is filed with the county recorder.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-3: JURISDICTION:
   A.   This title shall apply to all lands and improvements within the
corporate city limits.
   B.   This title shall also apply to lands and improvements outside the
corporate city limits that:
      1.   Are within the designated "area of impact" and are not incorporated
into an active agricultural unit of twenty (20) acres or more. (Ord. 254, 1-15-
2015)
      2.   Are under written agreement by past or present owners to be
regulated in return for enjoying the benefits of certain services normally
available only to in county lands.
   C.   For subdivision regulation only, all lands within city limits and
impact area are subject by state law to the city ordinances. (Ord. 223, 7-13-
2006)
8-1-4: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the development
of land within the jurisdiction of the city subject to the control of the city
and to adopt development regulations to facilitate accomplishment of the goals
and objectives of any comprehensive plans of the city for the orderly, planned,
efficient and economical development of the city. It shall be the general
policy of the city that:
   A.   All land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be
used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire,
flood or other menace.
   B.   Land shall not be subdivided until all available public facilities and
existing improvements have been given proper consideration by the city and
proper provision for improvements such as schools, park and recreation
facilities, transportation facilities and improvements.
   C.   All existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to, and be
properly related to, any proposals shown in a comprehensive plan, official map
or capital budget and program of the city. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-5: PURPOSES:
Pursuant to the general policy of the city, the regulations of this title are
adopted for, but not limited to, the following purposes:
   A.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the city.
   B.   To guide the future growth and development of the city, in accordance
with any comprehensive plan of the city.
   C.   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population.
   D.   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
   E.   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities.
   F.   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of the
land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways,
and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land
and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and
building lines.
   G.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use
of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided
land.
   H.   To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve any proposed development.
   I.   To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources through the city in order to
preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and value of the
land.
   J.   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
   K.   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout
of the land, including the use of average density in providing for minimum
width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as established in
this title. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
The administrator shall be responsible for the interpretation of the
regulations of this title, and any interpretation and application of the
regulations shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare. This is not intended to abrogate any appeal
rights provided herein. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-7: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or land shall hereafter
be used and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, moved or structurally altered except in
conformance with the regulations specified in this title for the district in
which it is located; nor shall any yard, lot or open space be reduced in
dimensions of area to an amount less than the minimum requirements set forth
herein. There shall be strict adherence to federal handicap act section 504.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-8: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare,
the city may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by these
development regulations. Public hearing on all proposed amendments shall be
held by the city in the manner prescribed in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-9: CONFLICTS OF LAW:
   A.   The regulations of this title are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other
provision of law. Where any provisions of law conflict, whichever provisions
are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   B.   The regulations of this title are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction; provided,
that, where the provisions of this title are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of this title shall govern. Where
the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction
impose duties and obligation of this title or the determinations of the city in
approving a subdivision or in enforcing this title, and such private provisions
are not consistent with this title or determinations thereunder, then such
private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to this title and
determinations made thereunder, but will not be enforced by the city. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any part of any provision of this title or application thereof to any person
or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or
application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder
of this title or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The
city hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of this title
even without any such part, provision or application. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-1-11: SAVING PROVISIONS:
This title shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or
by virtue of, prior existing zoning or subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as
waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the
time of the effective date hereof, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city,
except as shall be expressly provided for in this title. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-1-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Filing Of Complaint; Investigation: Whenever a violation of this title
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint shall fully state the causes and basis of the same
and shall be filed with the administrator. The administrator shall properly
record such complaint, immediately investigate the same and take such action,
or cause the same to be taken thereon, as provided by this title. The city
prosecuting attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal action is
deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this title.
   B.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Any violation of the provisions of this title
or any failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues beyond notice shall be a
separate offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official
or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
continuing violation may be found guilty of a separate offense for each day the
violation continues as aforesaid. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or
the Idaho Code.
   C.   Nonconformities: Provided, however, that where property has been made
nonconforming or where an existing nonconforming use has been increased by the
exercise of eminent domain, it shall not be a violation and no penalty, either
civil or criminal, shall result. Persons desiring to change or modify the use
of said nonconforming properties in a manner which would, but for the exercise
for eminent domain, be permitted outright, may apply for a special use permit,
which permit may be granted with due consideration given to the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
   D.   Penalty Imposed: Any person convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this title shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain words used herein shall be interpreted
and shall mean what is indicated in this section.
The present tense includes the future tense, and the singular number includes
the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
The words "shall" or "will" are a mandatory requirement; the word "may" is a
permissive requirement.
The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied".
                                        An easement across one or more adjacent
ACCESS EASEMENT:                        properties to allow vehicular access to
                                        an otherwise inaccessible area at any
                                        time.
                                        A use or structure that is incidental
                                        and subordinate to the principal
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE:             allowed use of property and located on
                                        the same lot as the principal allowed
                                        use.
ADMINISTRATOR:                          A person who is legally vested with the
                                        right of administration of this title.
ALLEY:                                  See definition of street.
                                        Animals commonly accepted as
                                        domesticated household pets. Such
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC:                      animals may include dogs, cats,
                                        ferrets, caged birds, hamsters,
                                        domesticated rabbits, chinchillas,
                                        fish, and other similar animals.
                                        Animals commonly associated with
                                        fanning or ranching. Such animals may
                                        include members of the equine family,
ANIMALS, FARM:                          bovine family, sheep, goats, poultry,
                                        swine, bees, and other animals used
                                        primarily for meat, fur, milk, honey or
                                        other animal products.
                                        A building or portion thereof designed
APARTMENT UNIT:                         for or containing either individual
                                        guestrooms or suites of rooms and
                                        dwelling units.
                                        The repair of a household or office
APPLIANCE REPAIR:                       device operated by gas or electrical
                                        current.
                                        Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean
                                        approved by the commission. All
APPROVED:                               approvals delegated herein to
                                        administrative personnel of the City
                                        are subject to review and final
                                        determination by the Council.
                                        Any projection which is not intended
                                        for occupancy and which extends beyond
                                        the face of an exterior wall of a
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION:               building but shall not include signs.
                                        Examples of such projections are
                                        cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades,
                                        gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses,
                                        etc.
                                        The area surrounding the City as
AREA OF IMPACT:                         established by mutual agreement with
                                        the County in conformance with State
                                        law.
                                        The land in the floodplain within a
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:           community subject to a one percent (1%)
                                        or greater chance of flooding in any
                                        given year.
                                        The repair, rebuilding or
                                        reconditioning of automobiles, mobile
AUTOMOBILE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER homes, travel trailers and farm
AND FARM IMPLEMENT REPAIR:              implements including collision service
                                        painting, and steam cleaning of
                                        vehicles.
                                        An open area, other than a street used
                                        for the display sale or rental of new
                                        or used automobiles, mobile homes,
AUTOMOBILE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER travel trailers, or farm implements but
AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES AREAS:         not including repair work except minor
                                        incidental repair of same to be
                                        displayed, sold or rented on the
                                        premises.
                                        Parking and/or storage of new and/or
AUTOMOBILE STORAGE SPACE:               used automobiles which are capable of
                                        immediate operation under their own
                                        power.
                                        The dismantling or wrecking of two (2)
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING:                    or more used motor vehicles, mobile
                                        homes or trailers.
                                        Any area where automobile wrecking is
                                        carried out and/or accumulation of
                                        parts thereof are stored in the open
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD:               and are not being restored to operation
                                        within six (6) months of notification;
                                        or any land, building or structure used
                                        for the wrecking or storing of such
                                        motor vehicles.
                                        The flood having a one percent (1%)
BASE FLOOD:                             chance of being equaled or exceeded in
                                        any given year.
                                        A portion of living space in a dwelling
BASEMENT:                               unit with all or at least one-half (1/
                                        2) of its height below the average
                                        level of the adjoining ground.
BICYCLEWAY:                             A public way designed for the use of
                                        nonmotorized vehicles.
                                        A group of lots, tracts or parcels
BLOCK:                                  within well defined boundaries, usually
                                        streets.
                                        Any combination of materials
                                        constructed in accordance with the
                                        current international building code and
                                        the international residential building
                                        code which is used or intended to
BUILDING:                               support or shelter any use, person,
                                        animal, plant or other property.
                                        Permanent buildings are attached to a
                                        foundation. Temporary buildings are not
                                        attached to a foundation and merely
                                        rest on the ground. Any enclosed roof
                                        projection.
                                        The vertical distance measured from the
                                        average elevation of the proposed
BUILDING HEIGHT:                        finished grade at the form of the
                                        building to the highest point of the
                                        building excluding the roof
                                        projections.
                                        Having all or part of one wall common
CARPORT, ATTACHED:                      to the dwelling or to a covered porch
                                        attached to the dwelling.
CARPORT, DETACHED:                      A roofed structure of which all sides
                                        and ends are not enclosed.
                                        A change of use from one of the
                                        following categories to another:
                                        A. Residential.
                                        B. Retail trade.
                                        C. Wholesale trade.
                                        D. Agriculture.
                                        E. Agricultural processing.
CHANGE OF USE:                          F. Sports facilities.
                                        G. Parks.
                                        H. Manufacturing.
                                        I. Communications and utilities.
                                        J. Cultural facilities.
                                        K. Public assembly.
                                        L. Transportation.
                                        M. Services.
CITY:                                   City of Fairfield, Camas County, Idaho,
                                        and its governing body.
                                        A structure or area intended for the
COMMERCIAL USE:                         selling, bartering or swapping of any
                                        merchandise, commodities, objects or
                                        services.
COMMISSION:                             Planning and zoning commission.
                                        The overall guiding document for all
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:                     development within the legal
                                        jurisdiction of the city.
                                        A building or structure having less
CONCESSION:                             than three hundred (300) square feet of
                                        area that is used for the sale of food,
                                        beverages and/or souvenirs.
COUNCIL:                                The city council of Fairfield, Idaho.
COVENANT:                               A written promise or pledge.
                                        Services offered by persons who are
                                        paid to supervise or care for six (6)
                                        or more persons including the resident
                                        children for less than fourteen (14)
DAYCARE SERVICE:                        hours per day, but excluding those
                                        businesses or religious institutions
                                        which provide incidental daycare
                                        service for patrons or attendees while
                                        parents are on the premises.
                                        The setting apart of land or interest
                                        in land for use by the public by
                                        ordinance, resolution or entry in the
DEDICATION:                             official minutes as by the recording of
                                        a plat. Dedicated land becomes public
                                        land upon the acceptance by the local
                                        authority.
                                        The owner, or his legally authorized
DEVELOPER:                              agent, of lands that are being platted
                                        or mapped.
                                        Lands within the boundaries of an area
                                        that is platted or mapped in accordance
                                        with this title and that is intended to
DEVELOPMENT:                            be improved by the construction of
                                        buildings, structures, public ways,
                                        utilities and other similar
                                        improvements.
DORMITORY:                              A rooming house or residence hall
                                        occupied by students.
DRIP LINE:                              The line where the eaves drip on the
                                        ground.
                                        A commercial establishment, excluding
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT:                 gasoline service stations, in which
                                        business is conducted while the
                                        customers are vehicle occupants.
                                        A nondedicated vehicular access
DRIVEWAY:                               constructed on private property
                                        providing access to not more than five
                                        (5) residential dwelling units.
                                        A building or portion thereof designed
                                        exclusively for residential occupancy,
DWELLING:                               but not including hotels, boarding and
                                        lodging houses, trailers, camp cars or
                                        trailer houses.
                                        A building or portion thereof
DWELLING, APARTMENT:                    containing five (5) or more dwelling
                                        units with shared access to the
                                        building and other amenities.
                                        A building containing two (2) or more
                                        dwelling units, with each unit designed
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY:                 to be used and accessed independently.
                                        May include duplexes, triplexs, and
                                        shared wall housing.
                                        A building containing one dwelling
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY:                unit, and desired to be used as living
                                        quarters for a single-family.
                                        An independent space within a structure
DWELLING UNIT:                          designed to accommodate all normal
                                        cooking, sleeping and sanitation needs
                                        of one (1) or more persons.
                                        A right of use for a stated purpose,
                                        falling short of ownership granted by a
                                        property owner to the public or to
                                        another person and restricting the
EASEMENT:                               property owner's use of the property by
                                        prohibiting the construction of any
                                        permanent building or structure over
                                        the easement and by prohibiting any
                                        other stated restriction of use.
ENGINEER:                               A professional engineer registered in
                                        the state of Idaho.
                                        An area twenty (20) acres or more in
                                        the area of impact, or ten (10) acres
FARM:                                   or more in the Ag Overlay, which is
                                        being used for the purpose of producing
                                        food, fiber, seed, stock, fodder or oil
                                        producing crops.
                                        Land used primarily for the feeding of
FEEDLOT AND DAIRIES:                    farm animals where the number of
                                        animals being fed exceeds five (5) per
                                        acre.
                                        Any floor usable for living purposes,
                                        which includes working, sleeping,
FINISH FLOOR:                           eating, cooking or recreation, or a
                                        combination thereof. A floor used only
                                        for storage purposes is not a "finish
                                        floor".
                                        The official map on which the federal
                                        insurance administration has delineated
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP:               both the areas of special flood hazard
                                        and the risk premium zones applicable
                                        to the community.
                                        The official report provided by the
                                        federal insurance administration that
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY:                  includes flood profiles, the flood
                                        boundary-floodway map, and the water
                                        surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODWATERS:                   A temporary overflow of water on lands
                                        not normally covered by water.
                                        The relatively flat areas or low lands
                                        adjoining the channel of a watercourse,
                                        or areas where drainage is or may be
                                        restricted by manmade structures which
FLOODPLAIN:                             have been or may be covered partially
                                        or wholly by floodwater, but shall
                                        compose an area not less than that area
                                        confined by the 50-year flood and shall
                                        not exceed that area confined by the
                                        100-year flood.
                                        The codes, ordinances and other
                                        regulations relating to the use of land
                                        and construction within the channel and
                                        floodplain areas, including zoning
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:                 ordinances, subdivision regulations,
                                        building codes, housing codes, setback
                                        requirements, open area regulations and
                                        similar methods of control affecting
                                        the use and development of the areas.
                                        Any combination of structural and
                                        nonstructural additions, changes or
                                        adjustments to properties and
FLOODPROOFING:                          structures which reduce or eliminate
                                        flood damage to lands, water and
                                        sanitary facilities, structures and
                                        contents of buildings.
                                        The channel of a river or other
                                        watercourse and the adjacent land areas
                                        that must be reserved in order to
FLOODWAY:                               discharge the base flood without
                                        cumulatively increasing the water
                                        surface elevation more than one foot
                                        (1').
                                        The front of the building shall be the
                                        wall so designated by the building
                                        inspector which best conforms to the
                                        intent of this title. The front
                                        property line shall be the lot line
                                        most nearly parallel to the front of a
                                        building. In designating the front of
                                        the building, the building inspector
FRONT:                                  shall base his decision on the location
                                        of the door which provides the
                                        principal access into the building and/
                                        or the location of the trafficway which
                                        provides the principal access to the
                                        property. The decision of the building
                                        inspector may be appealed to the city
                                        council for interpretation of the
                                        intent of this title and final
                                        determination of the designated front.
                                        All the property fronting on one side
                                        of a street between intersecting
                                        streets, or between a street and right
FRONT, ENTIRE:                          of way, waterway, end of dead end
                                        street or city boundary, measured along
                                        the street shall determine only the
                                        boundary of the frontage on the side of
                                        the street which it intersects.
                                        A garage having all or part of one wall
GARAGE, ATTACHED:                       common to the dwelling or to a covered
                                        porch attached to the dwelling.
GARAGE, DETACHED:                       A garage which is completely surrounded
                                        by open space.
                                        A building or a portion of a building
GARAGE, PRIVATE:                        in which only motor vehicles used by
                                        the tenants of the building on the
                                        premises are stored or kept.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY:                    The city council for the city of
                                        Fairfield, Idaho.
                                        Facilities owned and operated by a
GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES:                governmental agency for the benefit of
                                        the general public.
HIGHWAY:                                A street designated as a highway by an
                                        appropriate state or federal agency.
                                        Sites established by the city, county,
HISTORIC SITES:                         and state or federal government as
                                        historic monuments that should be
                                        preserved.
                                        A business conducted within a dwelling
                                        unit, which activity is clearly
                                        incidental to the use of the residence
                                        as a dwelling and does not change the
                                        residential character thereof; and
                                        provided, that the area used in
                                        performing the home occupation does not
                                        exceed more than fifty percent (50%) of
HOME OCCUPATION:                        the floor area of the dwelling unit, is
                                        conducted in such a manner as to not
                                        give any outward appearance of a
                                        business in the ordinary meaning of the
                                        term, and does not infringe upon the
                                        right of neighboring residents to enjoy
                                        a peaceful occupancy of their homes for
                                        which purpose the residential zone was
                                        created and primarily intended.
                                        An institution providing health
                                        services, primarily for inpatient and
                                        medical or surgical care of the sick or
HOSPITAL:                               injured, including outpatient
                                        departments, training facilities,
                                        central service facilities and staff
                                        offices. Hospitals are assumed to be
                                        for humans unless otherwise indicated.
                                        Any building containing six (6) or more
                                        rooms intended or designed to be used
HOTEL:                                  or which are used, rented or hired out
                                        to be occupied or which are occupied
                                        for sleeping purposes by guests.
                                        Any alteration to the land or other
IMPROVEMENT:                            physical construction associated with
                                        subdivision and building site
                                        developments.
                                        Any lot or premises on which more than
                                        three (3) domestic animals over one (1)
KENNEL:                                 pound of a single species and more than
                                        three (3) months of age are housed,
                                        groomed, bred, boarded, trained or
                                        sold.
LESSEE:                                 A person holding a legally enforceable
                                        lease.
                                        One of four (4) perpendicular lines
                                        established by the building inspector
                                        for the purpose of measuring setbacks.
                                        The lines shall be established parallel
LINE, BUILDING:                         to the predominant building walls and
                                        shall pass through the most exterior
                                        point on the building walls, excluding
                                        architectural features not intended for
                                        occupancy.
                                        An off street space or berth on the
                                        same lot with a building, or contiguous
                                        to a group of buildings, for the
LOADING SPACE:                          temporary parking of a commercial
                                        vehicle while loading or unloading
                                        merchandise or materials, and which
                                        abuts upon a street, alley or other
                                        appropriate means of access.
                                        Unless otherwise defined, a parcel of
                                        land with sufficient size to meet the
                                        minimum requirements of this title for
                                        use, dimensional standards and off
LOT:                                    street parking and which is owned by a
                                        single person with a separate interest
                                        or a group of persons with a separate
                                        interest together with an interest in
                                        common in the real property.
                                        The total area of a lot measured on a
                                        horizontal plane within the boundary
LOT AREA:                               lines exclusive of public and private
                                        roads, and easements of access to other
                                        property.
LOT, CORNER:                            A lot situated at the intersection of
                                        two (2) or more streets.
                                        The horizontal distance between the
LOT DEPTH:                              front and rear lot lines, measured
                                        along the median between the two (2)
                                        side lot lines.
                                        An easement granted for the purpose of
MAINTENANCE EASEMENT:                   providing access for repair and
                                        maintenance of the appurtenant property
                                        in zero lot line subdivisions.
                                        A dwelling unit which meets the
                                        building code for permanent structures
                                        designed to be transported after
MANUFACTURED HOME:                      fabrication and which is ready for
                                        occupancy as an independent unit,
                                        except for connection to utilities and
                                        location on a foundation.
                                        The fabricating or assembling of
                                        materials into finished or partially
                                        finished products by hand or by the use
                                        of machinery, but excluding home
                                        occupations, activities creating
                                        products in which the process does not
MANUFACTURING USE:                      yield any vapor, liquid or solid waste
                                        materials, and crafts made in
                                        conjunction with retail business which
                                        may include, but not be limited to:
                                        ceramics, mosaics, fabrics, jewelry,
                                        leather goods, silk screening, dress
                                        designing, sculpturing and wood
                                        carving.
                                        A permanent roofed structure supported
MARQUEE:                                by the main building and projecting
                                        over a public way.
                                        A single dwelling designated for
                                        transportation after fabrication on
                                        streets and highways on its own wheels
                                        or on a flatbed or other trailer, and
                                        arriving at the site where it is to be
                                        occupied as a dwelling complete and
                                        ready for occupancy, except for minor
MOBILE HOME:                            incidental unpacking and assembly
                                        operations, location on jacks or other
                                        temporary or permanent foundations,
                                        connections to utilities, and the like.
                                        A prefab dwelling unit or travel
                                        trailer is not to be considered as a
                                        mobile home. A travel trailer is one
                                        that can legally be towed by a
                                        passenger car.
                                        Any tract of land that is divided into
                                        rental spaces under common ownership or
MOBILE HOME PARK:                       management for the purpose of locating
                                        two (2) or more mobile homes for
                                        dwelling purposes.
                                        A parcel of land divided into
                                        individual lots which are intended to
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION:                be sold to persons and are designed to
                                        be occupied by residential buildings or
                                        permanent mobile homes.
                                        Any residential building or a building
                                        component thereof which is of closed
MODULAR HOME:                           construction and is either entirely or
                                        substantially prefabricated or
                                        assembled at a place other than the
                                        building site.
                                        Any permanent marker either of
                                        concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or on
MONUMENT:                               steel rods, used to identify any tract,
                                        parcel, lot or street lines, as
                                        specified in Idaho Code section 50-
                                        1303.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY BUILDING:            A building containing more than two (2)
                                        businesses or households.
                                        A building, structure or use not
NONCONFORMING:                          conforming to the provisions of this
                                        title.
                                        The highest level of flooding that, on
                                        the average, is likely to occur once
100-YEAR FLOOD:                         every one hundred (100) years (i.e.,
                                        that has a 1 percent chance of
                                        occurring each year).
                                        An area retaining a natural ground
OPEN SPACE:                             cover free of any buildings,
                                        structures, streets or parking areas.
                                        A lot or tract as recorded on any plat
                                        or record on file in the office of the
                                        county recorder, or an unplatted
                                        contiguous parcel of land held in one
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND:                ownership and on record at the
                                        effective date hereof. In cases of
                                        "unrecorded matters of fact", the
                                        planning and zoning commission shall
                                        use its best judgment to determine a
                                        fair designation.
ORPHANAGE:                              A rooming house or residence hall
                                        occupied by orphaned children.
                                        Any person or group of persons having
OWNER:                                  legal title to real property which is
                                        subject to this title.
                                        An area reserved for the parking of
PARKING AREA:                           vehicles consisting of one or more
                                        parking spaces.
                                        The area off of any public or private
                                        street, access easement or alley used
PARKING, ON SITE:                       for the transient storage, with
                                        appropriate dimension, of passenger
                                        vehicles, parking stalls, access drives
                                        and aisles.
                                        An enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area
                                        of not less than twenty feet by nine
                                        feet (20' x 9') in size, together with
                                        access and maneuvering space sufficient
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE:              to permit a standard automobile to be
                                        parked within the surfaced area,
                                        permanently reserved for the temporary
                                        parking or storage of one automobile.
                                        The total space shall be not less than
                                        two hundred seventy (270) square feet.
                                        A space designed and designated for the
                                        parking of vehicles located totally
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET:              outside of the right of way of any
                                        street or alley, together with properly
                                        designed access to a public street or
                                        alley, and maneuvering room.
PATIO, COVERED:                         Same as "carport" definitions.
PEDESTRIANWAY :                         A public way designed to be used as a
                                        walkway for pedestrians.
                                        An amount of money or other negotiable
                                        security paid by the subdivider or his
                                        surety to the city clerk which
                                        guarantees that the subdivider will
                                        perform all action required by the
                                        governing body regarding an approval
PERFORMANCE BOND:                       plan, and provides that if the
                                        subdivider defaults and fails to comply
                                        with the provisions of an approved
                                        plan, the subdivider or his surety will
                                        pay damages up to the limit of the
                                        bond, or the surety will itself
                                        complete the requirements of the
                                        approved plat.
PERMANENT:                              Not less than six (6) months.
                                        Any individual or any corporation,
                                        joint venture, limited partnership,
PERSON:                                 partnership, firm, association, trustee
                                        or other similar entity or
                                        organization.
PICK UP SHELTER:                        A structure used only by persons
                                        waiting for public transportation.
                                        A tract of land on which a variety of
                                        residential, commercial and
                                        manufacturing uses may coexist in a
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:               preplanned environment with more
                                        flexible standards than normally apply
                                        to the use of land in a standard zoning
                                        district.
PLANNING AND ZONING (P&Z) COMMISSION:   Planning and zoning commission.
                                        The drawings, certifications,
                                        descriptions and approval of a division
                                        or proposed division of real property
                                        into two (2) or more lots, blocks,
                                        parcel sites, plots, units, common
                                        areas, limited common areas or other
                                        descriptive designations of real
PLAT:                                   property for the purpose of offering
                                        for sale, lease or development, either
                                        on installment plan or upon any and all
                                        other plans, terms and conditions to
                                        any person having a separate interest
                                        or an individual interest in common
                                        together with a separate interest in
                                        any or all of the real property.
PORCH:                                  A covered entrance to a building.
PREMISES:                               An area of land including a lot, with
                                        or without buildings.
                                        Belonging to an individual or group of
PRIVATE:                                persons and not for the public or open
                                        to the public.
                                        Any right of way or easement indicated
                                        or platted across real property owned
PRIVATE WAY:                            by the person dedicating or platting
                                        the private way and intended for the
                                        general or special use of a person or
                                        persons rather than the general public.
                                        Services offered by persons engaged in
                                        the legal, engineering, architectural,
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:                  design, planning, accounting, auditing,
                                        educational and related professions and
                                        persons who service the human body or
                                        mind.
PROJECT:                                A development.
PROPERTY LINE:                          The legal boundary of a parcel of real
                                        property.
PUBLIC:                                 Owned by federal, state or local
                                        government or subdivisions thereof.
                                        Any right of way or easement dedicated
                                        or platted across real property owned
                                        by the person dedicating or platting
                                        the public way and intended for the
PUBLIC WAY:                             general or special use of the public;
                                        or any right of way or easement legally
                                        obtained by the city through the use
                                        thereof, provided such public way has
                                        not been vacated by the city council.
                                        Real estate consisting of: a) lands,
                                        possessory right to land, ditch and
REAL PROPERTY:                          water rights, and mining claims, both
                                        lode and placer; b) that which is
                                        affixed to land; and c) that which is
                                        appurtenant to land.
                                        The rear of a building and rear
REAR:                                   property line shall be the wall and lot
                                        line most nearly parallel to the front
                                        wall and lot line.
                                        A building intended for the worship of
                                        a God and its related facilities such
RELIGIOUS FACILITIES:                   as meeting halls, household unit for
                                        persons employed in the building, and
                                        schools for religious teachings.
                                        A rooming house or residence hall
RELIGIOUS QUARTERS:                     occupied by persons employed by a
                                        single religious organization.
                                        A permanent drawing prepared in black
                                        india ink or an archival photographic
                                        image process conforming to the
REPRODUCIBLE DRAWINGS:                  standards established by the American
                                        National Standards Institute on a
                                        polyester material four-thousandths of
                                        an inch (0.004") thick with a matte
                                        finish.
                                        A strip of land between a partial
                                        street and adjacent property which is
RESERVE STRIP:                          reserved or held in public ownership
                                        for future street extension or
                                        widening.
                                        A building without cooking facilities
                                        where one or more rooms without cooking
RESIDENCE HALL:                         facilities are occupied by separate
                                        households where more than seventy five
                                        percent (75%) of the households reside
                                        for more than thirty (30) days.
                                        Any use designed or intended to meet
RESIDENTIAL USE:                        the cooking, sleeping and sanitary
                                        needs of one or more individuals.
RETIREMENT HOME:                        A rooming house or residence hall
                                        occupied by retired persons.
                                        A strip of land dedicated or reserved
RIGHT OF WAY:                           for use as a public way, which normally
                                        includes streets, sidewalks and other
                                        public utilities or service areas.
                                        Chimneys, smokestacks, church spires,
                                        flagpoles, radio and television
ROOF PROJECTIONS:                       antennas or towers, masts, cooling
                                        towers, elevator shafts and other
                                        similar projections.
                                        A building with common cooking
                                        facilities having one or more rooms
ROOMING HOUSE:                          without cooking facilities occupied by
                                        separate households for more than
                                        thirty (30) days with or without board.
SANITARIUM, SANATORIUM:                 A private hospital, whether or not such
                                        facility is operated for profit.
SCHOOL:                                 Any place primarily used for
                                        educational purposes.
                                        A permanent building or buildings
SERVICE BUILDING:                       designed to provide service facilities
                                        to the inhabitants or users of any
                                        development.
                                        A dedicated minor way which is used for
SERVICE ROAD:                           vehicular access to back or side of
                                        residential property otherwise abutting
                                        on a street.
                                        Buildings and premises where gasoline,
                                        oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor
                                        vehicle accessories may be supplied and
                                        dispensed at retail, and where other
                                        services including minor motor vehicle
                                        repairs are done. Uses permissible at
                                        service stations do not include major
                                        body work, painting, or other work
SERVICE STATION:                        involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or
                                        other characteristics to an extent
                                        greater than normally found in service
                                        stations. Storage of automobiles not in
                                        working condition must be parked behind
                                        an enclosed area if parked for a period
                                        longer than sixty (60) days. A service
                                        station is not an automotive body shop.
                                        Service stations shall comply with
                                        health authority standards.
                                        A building or facility however named,
                                        operated on either a profit or
                                        nonprofit basis for the purpose of
SHELTER HOME:                           providing a home with necessary
                                        supervision for three (3) or more
                                        persons not related to the owner and
                                        who are unable to care for themselves.
                                        The side of a building and side
SIDE:                                   property line shall be the wall and lot
                                        line most nearly perpendicular to the
                                        front wall and lot line.
                                        All definitions for signs are located
SIGN:                                   in section
                                        8-9-2 of this title.
                                        A permit granted by the commission for
                                        a permanent use that is otherwise
SPECIAL USE PERMIT:                     prohibited but may be allowed under
                                        specific provisions when not in
                                        conflict with a Comprehensive Plan.
                                        The specifications as specified in this
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS:                title or as officially adopted by the
                                        City Council.
STATE:                                  State of Idaho.
                                        A right-of-way which provides access to
                                        adjacent properties, the dedication of
                                        which has been officially accepted. The
                                        term "street" also includes the terms
                                        highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road,
                                        avenue, boulevard, lane, place and
                                        other such terms.
                                        Alley: A minor street providing
                                        secondary access at the back of a
                                        property otherwise abutting a street.
                                        Arterial: A street designated for the
                                        purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy
                                        traffic.
                                        Collector: A street designated for the
                                        purpose of carrying traffic from local
                                        streets to other collector streets and/
                                        or arterial streets.
                                        Cul-De-Sac: A street connected to
                                        another street at one end only, and
                                        provided with a turnaround space at its
                                        terminus.
STREET:                                 Frontage: A local street parallel to or
                                        adjacent to an arterial street to
                                        provide access to abutting properties.
                                        Half Street: A street comprised of one-
                                        half (1/2) of width required to conform
                                        with a standard City street section.
                                        Local: A street which has the primary
                                        purpose of providing access to abutting
                                        properties.
                                        Loop: A local street with both terminal
                                        points on the same street or origin.
                                        Partial: A dedicated right-of-way
                                        providing only a portion of the
                                        required street width, usually along
                                        the edge of a subdivision or tract of
                                        land.
                                        Private: A street that is not accepted
                                        for public use or maintenance which
                                        provides vehicular and pedestrian
                                        access.
                                        Stub Street: A street which terminates
                                        without provisions for a turnaround
                                        area.
                                        The officially established grade of the
                                        street upon which a lot fronts. If
STREET GRADE:                           there is no officially established
                                        grade, the existing grade of the street
                                        shall be taken as the street grade.
                                        Any change which would tend to prolong
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS:                 the life of the supporting members of a
                                        building or structure, such as bearing
                                        walls, columns, beams or girders.
                                        Anything constructed or erected, the
                                        use of which requires location on the
                                        ground or attachment to something
STRUCTURES:                             having a fixed location on the ground.
                                        Among other things, structures include
                                        buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences
                                        and billboards.
                                        The individual, firm, corporation,
                                        partnership, association, syndicate,
                                        trust or other legal entity that
                                        executes the application and initiates
                                        proceedings for the subdivision of land
SUBDIVIDER:                             in accordance with the provisions of
                                        this title and title 9 of this Code.
                                        The subdivider need not be the owner of
                                        the property; however, he shall be an
                                        agent of the owner or have sufficient
                                        proprietary rights in the property to
                                        represent the owner.
                                        The result of an act of dividing an
                                        original lot, tract or parcel of land
                                        into more than two (2) parts for the
                                        purpose of transfer of ownership or
                                        development; which shall also include
                                        the dedication of public streets and
                                        other rights-of-way and the addition
                                        to, or creation of, a cemetery.
                                        However, this title, and/or title 9 of
                                        this Code, shall not apply to the
                                        following:
                                        A. An adjustment of lot lines as shown
                                        on a recorded plat which does not
                                        reduce the area, frontage, width, depth
                                        or building setback lines of each
                                        building site below the minimum zoning
                                        requirements, and does not change the
SUBDIVISION:                            original number of lots in any block of
                                        the recorded plat;
                                        B. An allocation of land in the
                                        settlement of an estate of a decedent
                                        or a court decree for the distribution
                                        of property;
                                        C. The unwilling sale of land as a
                                        result of legal condemnation as defined
                                        and allowed in the Idaho Code;
                                        D. Widening of existing streets to
                                        conform to a Comprehensive Plan;
                                        E. The acquisition of a street right-
                                        of-way by a public agency in
                                        conformance with a Comprehensive Plan;
                                        and
                                        F. The exchange of land for the purpose
                                        of straightening property boundaries
                                        which does not result in the change of
                                        the present land usage.
                                        A land surveyor or professional
SURVEYOR:                               engineer registered in the State of
                                        Idaho.
                                        An open lot or part thereof, with its
                                        appurtenant facilities, devoted
                                        primarily to the showing of moving
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE- IN:             pictures or theatrical productions, on
                                        a paid admission basis, to patrons
                                        seated in automobiles or on outdoor
                                        seats.
                                        A group of attached or detached
                                        buildings containing individual
                                        sleeping or living units designed for,
TOURIST COURT:                          or used temporarily by, automobile
                                        tourists or transients, with parking
                                        spaces conveniently located to each
                                        unit and including auto courts, motels,
                                        or motor lodges.
                                        A single-family dwelling with party
TOWNHOUSE:                              walls and no side yards between
                                        abutting dwellings.
                                        A public or a private way whose primary
TRAFFICWAY:                             use is for movement of motorized
                                        vehicles.
                                        A rooming house or residence hall
                                        having one or more rooms occupied by
TRANSIENT LODGING:                      separate families where less than
                                        seventy five percent (75%) of the
                                        families reside for more than thirty
                                        (30) days.
                                        Any unit used for living or for
                                        sleeping purposes which is equipped
                                        with wheels or similar devices used for
TRAVEL TRAILER, CAMP CAR OR TRAILER     the purpose of transporting said unit
HOUSE:                                  from place to place, whether by motor
                                        power or other means, and such vehicles
                                        that are used as aforesaid that have
                                        had the wheels or equipment removed.
UNATTENDED VEHICLE:                     A vehicle parked for more than twenty
                                        four (24) hours in one location.
UNIT:                                   A separate interest in real property in
                                        a condominium or townhouse ownership.
UNPLATTED AREA:                         Any area that has not been subdivided
                                        according to law.
                                        An activity or purpose for which land
                                        or premises or a building thereon is
USE:                                    designed, arranged or intended, or for
                                        which it is occupied or maintained, let
                                        or leased.
VARIANCE:                               A modification of the requirements of
                                        this title.
                                        A drawing which sets forth by
                                        dimensions or other descriptive means
                                        the relationship of proposed
VICINITY MAP:                           developments, trafficways or other
                                        landmarks within the general area in
                                        order to better locate and orient the
                                        area in question.
WALL:                                   The full width or length of a building,
                                        including recessed windows or doors.
                                        A required area of open space on a lot
                                        which is unoccupied and unobstructed by
                                        permanent structures as defined by
YARD:                                   zoning setbacks. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006;
                                        amd. Ord. 248, 7-12-2012; Ord. 254, 1-
                                        15-2015; Ord. 256, 2-12-2015; Ord. 268,
                                        3-17-2016; Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
 
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
8-3-1: City Planning Administrator
8-3-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
8-3-1: CITY PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby created the position of city planning
administrator. The city planning administrator shall be appointed by the
planning and zoning commission and the appointment confirmed by the city
council.
   B.   Duties: The city planning administrator, throughout this title referred
to as administrator, shall administer the provisions of this title and provide
assistance and guidance to the planning and zoning commission and the city
council, and in addition, shall have the following duties:
      1.   Advise interested persons of the zoning title provisions.
      2.   Notify the news media regarding matters of public interest.
      3.   Aid and assist applicants in the preparation and expedition of
required applications.
      4.   Issue building permits, certificates of occupancy, notifications and
such similar administrative duties.
      5.   Investigate all violations of this title and notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violations, ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
      6.   Whenever there is doubt as to the classification of use not
specifically mentioned in this title, the determination shall be made by the
administrator. Such determination shall be based upon detailed description of
the proposed use and such other information as may be required. The
administrator shall make such investigations as are necessary to compare the
nature and characteristics of the proposed use with those of listed uses in the
various districts, and shall determine that the use is, in all essentials,
pertinent to the objectives of this title, of the same character as a use
listed as allowed or as a special use permitted in one or such specified
district or districts. No use added by such administrative determination shall
permit in any district a use which is a special use permitted in such districts
or in any less restricted district, nor shall same permit a use which is an
allowed use in a less restrictive district. The determination of the
administrator shall be final unless an appeal is made to the city council
through the process specified in section
8-12-1 of this title.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 252, 5-15-2013)
8-3-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Membership; Qualifications: There is hereby created a planning and
zoning commission, and throughout this title is referred to as the
"commission". The commission shall be made up of five (5) members. The terms of
the commission members shall be for a period of six (6) years. All members of
the commission shall be residents of the city of Fairfield or Camas County and
must have resided in the city or county for at least two (2) years prior to his
or her appointment, and must remain a resident of the city or county during his
or her service on the commission. At no time shall there be more than two (2)
members of the commission who reside outside the city.
   B.   Powers: The planning and zoning commission shall be constituted and
shall function according to the bylaws herein set forth and shall have all the
power or authority to consider ordinances or to recommend amendments to or
repeal of any portion of this title. The commission shall provide guidance and
assistance to the city council, holding public hearings as required by law, and
shall grant or deny applications presented to the commission, and shall make
timely written recommendations to the city council in all matters relating to
this title in which the city council has final decision making powers. Any
action taken by the commission with respect to special use permits may, within
fifteen (15) days of a commission decision, be reviewed by the city council for
consideration to potential and significant adverse impact upon other citizens
and/or the city. The city council will have authority to reverse such action
and make an alternate determination, reversal and/or recommend further review
and discussion by the commission.
(Ord. 247, 12-28-2011)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
8-4-1: Zoning Districts Established
8-4-2: Boundaries; Map
8-4-3: General Zoning District Regulations
8-4-4: Conformity Required
8-4-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the provisions of this title, the city is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
   Residential districts: R1, R2, R3.
   Commercial district: C.
   Industrial districts: LI and HI.
   Overlay districts: CB, OS, and Ag.
(Ord. 254, 1-15-2015; amd. Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-4-2: BOUNDARIES; MAP:
   A.   Boundaries Shown On Map; The boundaries of the zoning districts listed
in section
8-4-1 of this chapter are established as shown on a map entitled zoning
district map of the city of Fairfield, Idaho, updated 2011, which map is hereby
made a part of this title. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
   B.   Boundary Lines: Unless otherwise defined on the zoning district map,
district boundary lines are lot lines; the centerline of streets, alleys,
railroad rights of way, or such lines extended; section lines; municipal
corporate lines; or other lines drawn to scale on the zoning district map.
   C.   Less Restrictive Requirements: Where a lot is divided at the time of
the effective date hereof, or by subsequent amendments, by zoning district
boundary lines, the less restrictive zoning requirements may be extended not
more than twenty five feet (25') into the more restrictive zoning district
adjacent to the zoning district boundary line. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-4-3: GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Within each of the zones, the size of buildings and structures, the density of
population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
trade, industry, residence or other purposes are hereby regulated and
restricted as set forth in this title or as may be amended. However, nothing
hereto shall be in nonconformity with the agricultural exemption as contained
in Idaho Code section 39-4116(5). (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-4-4: CONFORMITY REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided herein, land, buildings and premises in any
district shall hereafter be used only in accordance with the regulations herein
established for that district, and the following general provisions:
   A.   Buildings: All buildings shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
relocated or structurally altered to have:
      1.   Lot Occupancy: No building (including its accessory buildings) in
any residential district shall occupy more than sixty percent (60%) of lot. All
other districts determined by setbacks.
      2.   Building Height: No building in any district shall exceed thirty
five feet (35') in height from established grade point.
      3.   Foundations: All buildings over eight hundred (800) square feet, or
intended for regular access by the public, must be affixed to a permanent
foundation.
      4.   Off Street Parking: All buildings shall provide for a minimum of two
(2) off street parking spaces per dwelling unit, or as provided by chapter 8 of
this title.
   B.   Lots:
      1.   Access: All lots shall have vehicular access on a dedicated improved
public street with a sixty foot (60') minimum right of way unless a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access has been approved on a subdivision plat.
      2.   Size: No lot held under one ownership at the effective date hereof
shall be smaller than required by this title, and if already less, the
dimension of area of such lot shall not be further reduced.
      3.   Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the
acreage involved is computed excluding street rights of way.
   C.   Walls, Fences And Hedges:
      1.   Fences, walls, and hedges are permitted along the edge of any yard
to a height of six feet (6'): provided, that no fence, wall or hedge along the
sides or front edge of any front yard shall be over three feet (3') in height.
On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow
in any such manner as to materially impede vision between a height of three
feet (3') and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of intersecting
streets bounded by the property lines of corner lots on a line joining points
along said property lines for thirty feet (30'). In any zone where a front yard
requirement does not exist, no fence, wall or hedge shall be allowed along the
front edge or for a distance of twenty feet (20') back from the front edge at
any height greater than three feet (3'), without prior approval of the planning
and zoning commission.
      2.   Barbed wire and electric fences shall not be erected or maintained
within the city unless approved by the planning and zoning commission.
      3.   Fences, walls and hedges shall be maintained in a good state of
repair. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
CHAPTER 5
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Intent
8-5-2: Residential Districts
8-5-2-1: Purpose
8-5-2-2: Use Regulations
8-5-2-3: Property Development Standards
8-5-3: R3 And R4 Residential Districts (Rep. by Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-4: C Commercial District
8-5-4-1: Purpose
8-5-4-2: Use Regulations
8-5-4-3: Property Development Standards
8-5-5: LI And HI Industrial Districts
8-5-5-1: Purpose
8-5-5-2: Use Regulations
8-5-5-3: Property Development Standards
8-5-6: Overlay Districts: CB, OS and Ag
8-5-6-1: Purpose
8-5-6-2: CB - Central Business Overlay
8-5-6-3: OS - Open Space Overlay
8-5-6-4: Ag - Agricultural Use Overlay
8-5-1: INTENT:
To preserve the peace, health and safety, and to provide for various utilities,
the city hereby establishes the following districts for the benefit of its
citizens. The district boundaries are defined in chapter 4 of this title, and
on the official zoning map. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-5-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
8-5-2-1: PURPOSE:
Residential districts are intended to provide a variety of environments that
allow the present and future residents to live and play in the area with space
for personal privacy and free from encroachment by commercial and industrial
activities. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-2-2: USE REGULATIONS:
Building structures or premises within the residential districts shall be used,
and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged
only for the following uses:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Accessory buildings, personal swimming pools, and other accessory uses, and
animals as per City Code, Title 4, Chapter 5.
   Governmental protective facilities.
   Open space, public parks and playgrounds.
   R1 (low density): single-family dwellings.
   R2 (medium density): multi-family and single-family dwellings.
   R3 (high density): apartment, multi-family and single-family dwellings.
   Underground transmission lines. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 285, 6-17-
2021)
   B.   Special Uses:
      1.   A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is not in
conflict with the comprehensive plan and is not permitted outright because it
may conflict with other uses in the district unless special provisions are
taken.
      2.   Special use permits may be granted for, but not limited to, the
following uses:
      Botanical gardens and arboretums.
      Bus pick up shelters.
      Daycare facilities.
      Historic sites, monuments.
      Outdoor commercial and public swimming pool.
      Private outdoor ice and roller skating.
      Private outdoor tennis courts.
      Public and nonprofit private academic and vocational schools on arterial
or collector streets.
      Religious facilities on arterial or collector street.
      Utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 251, 7-
12-2012)
   C.   Home Occupations:
      1.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used in the conducting of the home occupation. If an
accessory building is used for the home occupation, size and appearance shall
be compatible for the zone and surrounding property use.
      2.   There shall be minimal change in the outside appearance of the
building or premises or other visible evidence of the conducting of such home
occupation. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
      3.   One professional or home occupation sign, not exceeding four (4)
square feet per side may be erected in any district. One freestanding
professional or home occupation sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet per
side, may be erected in any district along Soldier Road. (Ord. 265, 9-17-2015)
      4.   No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation
and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
meet the off street parking requirements as specified in this title and shall
not be located in a required front yard.
      5.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified in this section are prohibited
unless an administrative determination is made that the use is similar enough
to a use listed in this section that the distinction between them is of little
consequence. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-5-2-3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the residential districts. All property development shall also
comply with the international building code, the international residential code
parts I through IV, the international energy conservation code and any city
ordinance and resolution that pertains to development standards.
   A.   Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot size for a single-family dwelling shall be ten
thousand (10,000) square feet with an eighty foot (80') minimum frontage width.
The minimum lot size for a multi-family dwelling shall be fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet with a one hundred twenty foot (120') minimum frontage
width. The lot size for an apartment dwelling shall be twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet not to exceed a city block.
      2.   A permitted use that conforms to all other provisions of this title
may be allowed on a lot which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements
contained herein, if the lot existed at the effective date hereof and conformed
to the minimum lot size requirements of this code at the time it was created.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Determination: All setbacks will be determined from the drip line to
include architectural projects except rain gutters.
      2.   Front Yard:
         a.   Residential dwellings shall be no closer than twenty feet (20')
to the front property line.
         b.   Where lots have double frontage on two (2) streets, the required
front yard residential dwellings shall be twenty feet (20') on the front and
twenty feet (20') on the side street, except when such lot is six thousand two
hundred fifty (6,250) square feet or less, the setback on the side street shall
be ten feet (10').
         c.   No accessory building shall be constructed in the front yard nor
closer than twenty feet (20') to any other street frontages.
      3.   Side And Rear Yards:
         a.   Residential dwellings shall be no closer than ten feet (10') to
the side or rear property line with the exception of shared wall housing which
may be built without a side setback.
         b.   Detached accessory buildings shall not be closer than ten feet
(10') to the side or rear property line.
   C.   Signs: R1 and R2 dwelling units are allowed one nameplate sign mounted
on the building or a freestanding sign no higher than seven feet (7'). Signs
shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. R3 dwellings are allowed two (2)
nameplates mounted on the building and/or a freestanding sign no higher than
seven feet (7'), total signage not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet and
shall be indirectly illuminated. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-3: R3 AND R4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-4: C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
8-5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The C (commercial) district is intended to provide for general commercial
activities of various sizes from large retail stores to small specialty shops
with residential opportunities for persons wishing to work and live in a
unified environment. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-4-2: USE REGULATIONS:
Building structures or premises within the C commercial district shall be used,
and buildings and structures shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged
only for the following uses:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Residential:
      Dwelling units associated with (above or behind) a commercial building,
and clearly subordinate to a building's commercial use. Dwelling unit shall not
exceed more than fifty percent (50%) of total floor area.
      Dwellings existing at the time of the effective date hereof.
      Rooming halls, residence halls, residential hotels.
      2.   C - Commercial:
      Apparel - retail and repair.
      Financial and/or personal services.
      Public and cultural facilities.
      Restaurants and bars.
      All businesses allowed in the CB district.
      Automobile service stations and car washes.
      Communication and utility facilities.
      Funeral homes, excluding cremation.
      Governmental protective agencies.
      Medical, clinics and related services.
      Religious facilities.
      Sporting facilities.
      Transportation facilities.
   B.   Special Uses:
      1.   A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is not in
conflict with the comprehensive plan and is not permitted outright because it
may conflict with other uses in the district unless special provisions are
taken.
      2.   Special use permits may be granted for, but not limited to, the
following uses:
      Automobile and truck sales and repair.
      Drive-in establishments.
      Sporting vehicles sales and repair.
      Veterinarian, small animal hospital, or kennel.
      Wholesale distribution and warehousing.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified in this section are prohibited
unless an administrative determination is made that the use is similar enough
to a use listed in this section that the distinction between them is of little
consequence. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 251, 7-12-2012; Ord. 285, 6-17-
2021)
8-5-4-3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the commercial district. All property development shall also
comply with the international building code, the international residential code
parts I through IV, the international energy conservation code and any city
ordinance and resolution that pertains to development standards.
   A.   Lot Area: The minimum lot size in the C district shall be six thousand
two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Buildings in the commercial zone shall be no closer than five feet
(5') to the front property line, or to any side street.
      2.   Buildings in the commercial zone may have a zero (0) interior
setback if the adjoining property is zoned commercial and adjacent owner is in
agreement.
      3.   The rear setback in the commercial zone shall be three feet (3') if
an alley is present or ten feet (10') if no alley is present.
      4.   If an interior side or rear property line abuts to property which is
zoned residential, the setbacks of the district with the most restrictive
standards shall apply.
      5.   If an interior side setback is less than ten feet (10') and the roof
slopes toward the property line, the roof shall be designed to hold or shed
snow to prevent snow accumulation on adjoining properties, unless otherwise
allowed through a subdivision or PUD approval. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-5: LI AND HI INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
8-5-5-1: PURPOSE:
The LI and HI districts are intended to provide areas for industrial activities
of various sizes that generate heavy traffic, noise, light or odors not
acceptable in the commercial or residential districts. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-5-5-2: USE REGULATIONS:
Building structures or premises within the LI light industrial and HI heavy
industrial districts shall be used, and buildings and structures shall
hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   LI light industrial:
         a.   Manufacturing and/or wholesale businesses that are clean, quiet
and free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust,
smoke or glare detectable outside of the business premises.
         b.   Any LI light industrial business operating more than sixteen (16)
hours per day shall conduct all activities between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. within an entirely enclosed building.
No truck deliveries shall take place between these hours.
      2.   HI heavy industrial: A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw
materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using
flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that
potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
   B.   Special Uses: A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is
not in conflict with the comprehensive plan, and that is not permitted outright
because it may conflict with other uses in the district unless special
provisions are taken. Special use permits may be granted for any use not
already listed by review from the planning and zoning commission and approval
from the city council.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: Uses not specified in this section are prohibited
unless recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the
city council. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-5-5-3: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and
buildings in the light industrial and heavy industrial districts. All property
development shall also comply with the international building code, the
international residential code parts I through IV, the international energy
conservation code and any city ordinance and resolution that pertains to
development standards.
   A.   Lot Area: No requirement.
   B.   Setbacks: Property line setbacks in the industrial districts shall be
calculated so that no snow is deposited outside the property lines of said
property or on city property. Snow removal from city streets must be considered
in design.
   C.   Off Street Loading And Unloading Area: No building shall be constructed
in the industrial districts unless provisions are made for off street loading
and unloading areas. The planning and zoning commission shall approve the size
of all loading and unloading areas before a permit shall be granted for any new
construction or additions to existing buildings. Reference chapter 8 of this
title.
   D.   Buffer Zones: Fences and/or vegetative barriers shall be erected along
the borders of industrial uses and residential uses to minimize the impact of
traffic, noise, light, and odors.
   E.   Parking And Loading: See chapter 8 of this title.
   F.   Other Standards: All other commercial district property development
standards shall apply to all land and buildings in the industrial districts.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-5-6: OVERLAY DISTRICTS: CB, OS and A2:
8-5-6-1: PURPOSE:
Overlay districts are intended to address areas of special interest within the
City of Fairfield by adding or removing requirements of pre-existing zoning.
Unless otherwise noted in this section, the use regulations and property
development standards of the underlying zone shall apply to the property
located within an overlay. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-6-2: CB - CENTRAL BUSINESS OVERLAY:
   A.   Use Regulations: Property, premises or structures within the CB Overlay
shall be used, erected, altered or enlarged only if they meet the additional
requirements of the overlay district.
      1.   Permitted Uses: Commercial use within the CB Overlay shall be
limited to:
      Apparel - retail and repair.
      Financial and/or personal services,
      Public and cultural facilities.
      Restaurants and bars.
      Retail businesses reguiring only one (1) or two (2) lots.
      2.   Special Uses:
      A special use may be granted for a permanent use that is not in conflict
with the comprehensive plan and is not permitted outright because it may
conflict with other uses in the district unless special provisions are taken.
   B.   Property Development Standards: The following standards shall apply to
all property, premises or structures within the CB Overlay All property
development shall also comply with Title 7: Building Regulations.
      1.   Lot Area: The minimum lot size within the CB Overlay shall be two
thousand seven hundred fifty (2,750) square feet.
      2.   Setbacks: No setbacks are required in the CB Overlay except when
there is an alley. When an alley is present, the rear setback shall be three
(3) feet. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-6-3: OS-OPEN SPACE OVERLAY:
   A.   Use Regulations: Property, premises or structures within the OS Overlay
shall be used, erected, altered or enlarged only to promote the public use of
open space.
      1.   Permitted Uses:
      Accessory buildings, public swimming pools, and other public event
facilities.
      Open space, public parks and playgrounds.
      2.   Prohibited Uses:
      All uses not specified in this section are prohibited unless use is
approved by the City Council. In the event that the overlay district boundary
is changed, use shall revert to the underlying zone as defined by the Zoning
Map. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
8-5-6-4: AG-AGRICULTUAL USE OVERLAY:
   A.   Use Regulations: Any property within the corporate boundry of the City
of Fairfield which has not been subdivided according to Title Nine: Subdivison
Regulations. shall be included in the Ag Overlay and subject to the following
regulations.
      1.   Permitted Uses:
         a.   Growing or harvesting agricultural, horticultural and/or
viticultural crops.
         b.   Raising livestock for meat, dairy, eggs, honey, or for any other
commercial or personal purpose.
      2.   Prohibited Uses:
         a.   Uses which are in violation of Chapter 4, Article B.
         b.   CAFOs as defined by Idaho DEO, ISDA, or EPA.
         c.   Activities which might present a physical or health danger to the
residents of platted areas of the city are prohibited within one hundred feet
(100') of any subdivision boundary.
   B.   Property Developmnet Standards: No property development shall be
allowed, nor shall any building permit be issued, for property within the Ag
Overlay unless the following standards are met.
      1.   Parcel of land is twenty (20) acres or larger and used solely for
agricultural purposes, or
      2.   A subdivision plat has been filed and approved by the City of
Fairfield. (Ord. 285, 6-17-2021)
CHAPTER 6
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purposes
8-6-2: Designated Floodplain
8-6-3: Identified Flood Hazard Areas
8-6-4: Regulations
8-6-5: Fences
8-6-6: Obstruction
8-6-1: PURPOSES:
To minimize the public and private losses due to flood conditions, the
following purposes shall apply:
   A.   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
   B.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   C.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   D.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   E.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   F.   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard;
   G.   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions; and
   H.   To reference city ordinance 146, "floodplain ordinance", as a guide.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-6-2: DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN:
The outer limits of the 100-year frequency flood are shown on a map filed with
the city clerk as the designated floodplain. Said map is attached as exhibit A
to the ordinance codified herein and by this reference made a part hereof. New
or additional engineering data may be considered for reevaluation of floodplain
delineation and such data will be submitted to the city building inspector's
office for review and conformance with the city policies, that the 100-year
flood capacity is maintained, and that minimum floor elevations are above the
100-year water surface elevation for residential structure and above or
protected from the 100-year surface elevation from nonresidential structures,
and that there is not substantial hazard to either the proposed improvements or
to any adjoining property. The city reserves the right to consult with any
private agency in reevaluation of floodplain or flood hazard area delineation.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-6-3: IDENTIFIED FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The federal insurance administration has identified flood hazard areas within
the city as shown on FIA flood hazard boundary map 160140-001A, inclusive,
which maps are attached as exhibit B to the ordinance codified herein and by
this reference made a part of this title. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-6-4: REGULATIONS:
In order to promote safety and general welfare, the city shall enforce, through
the city building inspector, the following floodplain or flood hazard area
regulations:
   A.   Greenbelt Area: A fifty foot (50') width from each bank of all
waterways in the city and the impact area for the city shall be set aside as a
greenbelt area. The boundaries of the impact area are: on the north, "Work
Road" to "Wilder Road" on the south.
   B.   Maintaining Floodway Capacity: No construction shall occur within any
100-year designated floodplain or flood hazard area that will reduce its flood
carrying capacity unless mitigating measures, including, but not limited to,
channel widening, deepening, or piping are taken to maintain the original
floodway capacity without raising the base floodwater surface elevation.
   C.   Building Permit Application: No building permits for construction shall
be issued by the city within the 100-year floodplain or flood hazard areas
except as provided in this subsection. An applicant for a building permit shall
furnish to the city building inspector sufficient engineering data to enable
the city building inspector to determine that proper care will be taken to
preserve the 100-year flood capacity of the floodplain and flood hazard areas,
and that said construction will not create a flood or associated hazard to
adjoining property or to the proposed improvements constructed therein.
   D.   Review Of Building Permit Requests: The city building inspector shall
review and approve all requests for building permits before issuance to ensure
compliance with this title.
   E.   Engineering Data Required; Drainage Criteria: Any applicant for a
building permit shall furnish satisfactory engineering data to allow the city
building inspector to ascertain that any proposed construction will comply with
the following drainage criteria:
      1.   A conceptual drainage plan shall be presented and approved with the
preliminary plat. A drainage study shall be submitted and approved before any
improvement plans are reviewed.
      2.   The drainage plan shall be submitted by a civil engineer registered
in the state of Idaho.
      3.   The drainage study and conceptual plan shall be submitted under the
following concepts:
         a.   Drainage Patterns: Drainage flows of all frequencies should enter
and depart from the property to be developed in substantially the same manner
as predevelopment conditions.
         b.   Street Relationships; Emergency Access: All lots, structures,
etc., within a development shall be accessible by at least one route during a
100-year storm with a maximum street water depth of one foot (1'). In all
cases, the flow of water shall be contained within rights of way.
         c.   Finished Floor Elevations:
            (1)   The finished floor elevations (including basement) of all
residential structures, except as noted in subsection B of this section shall
be above the 100-year stormwater surface elevation and the finished floor
elevation of all nonresidential structures shall be above or protected from the
100-year stormwater surface elevation. The determination of the 100-year
stormwater surface elevation shall be based on a watershed which includes all
natural and existing conditions per current zoning ordinance, whichever
indicates the higher water surface elevation.
            (2)   Each individual residential structure shall have its finished
floor elevation above the 100-year stormwater surface elevation when, according
to exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein, the structure is
located in a zone designated as "A".
            (3)   The city building inspector shall review and approve all
requests for building permits for prefabricated and mobile homes to assure:
               (A)   The structure is protected against flood damage.
               (B)   The structure is designed (or modified) and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapsing or lateral movement.
               (C)   Construction materials and methods are being used to
minimize flood damage. Specific requirements shall be that:
                  (i)   Over the top ties per side at intermediate locations
and mobile homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring an additional tie
per side.
                  (ii)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with
five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less
than fifty feet (50') long requiring four (4) additional ties per side.
                  (iii)   All components of the anchoring system be capable of
carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds, and any
additional to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
                  (iv)   Each residential structure shall have its finished
floor elevation certified by a civil engineer or land surveyor registered in
the state of Idaho that the finished floor has been constructed above the 100-
year stormwater surface elevation. This certification shall be approved prior
to foundation inspection.
                  (v)   Each nonresidential structure shall have its finished
floor elevation certified by a civil engineer or land surveyor registered in
the state of Idaho that the finished floor has been constructed above or is
protected from the 100-year stormwater surface elevation. This certification
shall be approved prior to foundation inspection.
         (D)   Where possible, the retention area shall have four to one (4:1)
side slopes and be drained within a ninety six (96) hour period by methods
approved by the city building inspector.
         (E)   Parking in floodplains, commercial: Parking within the 100-year
floodplain shall be allowed; provided, that there are no unattended vehicles
and that there is no substantial obstruction to the free flow of water. If the
depth of water exceeds one foot (1') during the base flood, the parking area
shall be signed to show the parking area is subject to periodic flooding. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-6-5: FENCES:
Building permits shall be required for fences within designated floodplains and
flood hazard areas. The city building inspector shall be provided with
sufficient engineering data to ascertain that the proposed fence will not
substantially alter stormwater flow. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-6-6: OBSTRUCTION:
No person, firm or corporation in the city shall either obstruct or reduce the
capacity of a floodplain or flood hazard area by any use or by filling, dumping
or constructing, except as proved in this title. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
CHAPTER 7
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
8-7-1: Geographic Area Of City Impact
8-7-2: Purpose
8-7-3: Governing Plan; City Ordinances
8-7-1: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
There is hereby established and adopted a geographical area of city impact, as
shown on the map entitled, "area of city impact for Fairfield, Idaho", which
map is incorporated herein as if the same were set out in full, and is hereby
adopted as the official area of impact map, and is described as follows:
City impact area:
   On the north: Work Road from Gardner Road on the west to Soldier Road and
from Soldier Road eastward on the land boundary line to White Lane.
   On the west: Gardner Road from Work Road on the north to Wilder Road on the
south.
   On the south: Wilder Road from Gardner Road on the west to Reynolds Lane on
the east.
   On the east: White Lane from one mile north of Highway 20 to Highway 20 and
Reynolds Lane from Highway 20 to Wilder Road. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-7-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Pursuant to the mandate of Idaho Code section 67-6526, which requires,
among other things, that cities and counties:
      Shall adopt by ordinance a map identifying an area of city impact within
the unincorporated area of the city; and
      Shall, by separate ordinance, provide for the application of plans and
ordinances for the area of city impact;
   the Camas County planning and zoning commission and the Fairfield city
planning and zoning commission have entered into and have conducted extensive
negotiations regarding the area of impact.
   B.   The aforementioned negotiations considered the following factors:
      1.   Trade area;
      2.   Geographic factors; and
      3.   Areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed into the city in
the near future.
   C.   In establishing an area of impact, the planning and zoning commissions
of the county and city negotiated and compromised, each with the other, and the
city planning and zoning commission did submit to the city council the
questions of:
      1.   Area of city impact, and
      2.   The plan and ordinance requirements that should apply thereto. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-7-3: GOVERNING PLAN; CITY ORDINANCES:
   A.   The comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments thereto, together with
the zoning and subdivision ordinances, and subsequent amendments thereto, as
officially adopted by the city, and all national and state codes so adopted
shall apply to the agreed upon area of city impact.
   B.   Within the area of impact, city ordinances, rules and regulations shall
not apply to any parcel of land twenty (20) acres or larger used solely for
agricultural purposes. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
CHAPTER 8
OFF STREET PARKING, DRIVEWAYS AND LOADING
SECTION:
8-8-1: Parking Provisions, Driveways And Loading Areas
8-8-2: Parking Area Development Standards
8-8-3: Off Street Parking Requirements
8-8-4: Driveways
8-8-5: Commercial Zone Special Development Standards
8-8-6: Loading Areas
8-8-1: PARKING PROVISIONS, DRIVEWAYS AND LOADING AREAS:
   A.   Parking And Loading Spaces Required: No building or structure shall be
erected, nor any residential use changed to commercial or industrial use,
unless maintained off street parking and loading spaces have been provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Even where the new use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such spaces as
may be required by this chapter.
   B.   Building Alterations: No building or structure shall be substantially
altered, added to or enlarged, or its use changed permanently unless there is
provided as many such spaces as may be required by this title with respect to
the square footage as to which alteration, addition, enlargement, or change of
use has occurred.
   C.   Parking On Certain Areas Prohibited: Parking and/or storage of
otherwise legal and licensed vehicles of any kind, except upon properly
surfaced and approved driveways or parking aprons, is prohibited. Parking of
such vehicles on lawns, patios, garden area, or naturally wooded terrain is
expressly forbidden at any time, except in an emergency such as fire, flood,
earthquake, etc., or to facilitate approved construction work.
   D.   Location Of Parking Spaces: The following regulations shall govern the
location of off street parking spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on
the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve.
      2.   Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses
shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the principal use
and shall be located behind or beside the use.
      3.   Parking spaces for apartments, condominiums or similar residential
uses shall be located not more than two hundred feet (200') from the principal
use on the same developed property.
      4.   In all zones, if a new single-family residential structure is built
without a garage, space shall be provided for the lawful addition of future
covered parking.
      5.   No parking lot pavement edge for a commercial or industrial use may
be located closer than five feet (5') from the right of way of a public street.
   E.   Maintenance: The owner of property used for parking and/or loading
shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust,
trash and other debris. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
   F.   Disabled Vehicles: The parking of a disabled vehicle within a
residential or commercial zone for a period of more than thirty (30) days shall
be prohibited, unless such vehicle is stored in an enclosed garage or other
accessory building. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
   G.   Parking Space Requirements Not Listed: Parking spaces for other
permitted or conditional uses not listed in this chapter shall be determined by
the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
   H.   Fractional Numbers: Fractional numbers shall be increased to the whole
number.
   I.   Agreement For Reduction In Requirement: Where there is an adequate
public transit system, or where, for any other reason, parking demand is
unusually low, such as where uses with differing operating hours or needs share
parking under a formal, written agreement to which the city is a party, then
the parking space provisions cited herein may be reduced proportionately by the
planning and zoning commission. If the owner whose parking facility is under
such an agreement which requires the facility to be available to the patrons of
the other use(s), fails or refuses to make such parking available in accordance
with the agreement, such failure or refusal is a violation of this title.
   J.   Special Conditions: Where special conditions exist which make
compliance with these standards impractical, the planning and zoning commission
will consider alternative proposals presented according to the procedures and
standards for a variance.
   K.   Loading Spaces: Required off street loading space is not to be included
as off street parking space in computation of required off street parking
spaces. All off street loading spaces shall be located outside of any right of
way or a street or alley.
   L.   Snow Removal And Storage: Where snow removal and storage may pose a
problem to traffic circulation or reduce the amount of adequate parking for
winter business, the developer or owner of the property shall designate a snow
storage area and remove snow as necessary to maintain minimum traffic
circulation and parking.
   M.   Adjustments: Adjustments to required parking may be authorized by the
planning and zoning commission based upon evidence of actual parking demand for
the proposed use.
   N.   Multiple Uses; Shared Parking: Required parking facilities for two (2)
or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same
parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators
show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g.,
uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature; weekday uses versus
weekend uses); and provided, that the right of joint use is evidenced by a
recorded deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the
joint use. The city may review and approve owner requests for shared parking.
   O.   Authority To Reduce Required Parking: If more than one type of land use
occupies a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off
street automobile parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses,
unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are actually less (i.e.,
the uses operate on different days or at different times of the day). The city
may reduce the total parking required accordingly. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd.
Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-8-2: PARKING AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Surfacing:
      1.   Parking and loading spaces for commercial and industrial uses shall
have an improved surface including asphalt, concrete, paving stones or bricks.
      2.   Parking and loading spaces for residential uses may use other
materials (such as gravel) that provide a stable driving surface under all
weather and moisture conditions and during ordinary use by wheeled vehicles
which prevents the raising of road dust or other like particulate matter into
the air.
   B.   Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper
drainage of surface water so as to prevent the drainage of such water onto
adjacent properties or walkways. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
   C.   Lighting: Any parking area which is intended to be used during
nondaylight hours shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Any lights
used to illuminate a parking lot shall follow regulations outlined in chapter
10, "Outdoor Lighting", of this title. (Ord. 256, 2-12-2015)
   D.   Access: Any parking area (except approved residential driveways) shall
be designed in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking
area from or onto a public or private street shall be traveling in a forward
motion. Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be located
in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be clearly
visible by a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a
public or private street.
   E.   Screening And/Or Landscaping:
      1.   Parking areas shall be effectively screened on all sides which
adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes by an acceptably
designed wall, fence or planting screen. Use of chainlink fencing in or
adjacent to residential areas is discouraged; if proposed, approval by the
administrator is required.
      2.   Such fence or wall shall be not less than four feet (4') nor more
than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained in good condition.
Planting screens shall not be less than four feet (4') in height and shall be
maintained in good condition.
      3.   The space between such fence, wall or planting screen and the lot
line of the adjoining premises in any residential zone shall be landscaped with
appropriate natural vegetation, including grasses, hardy shrubs, or evergreen
ground cover, and maintained in good condition.
      4.   In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that
the erection of such fence, wall or planting screen will not serve the intended
purpose, then, with the prior concurrence of the planning and zoning
administrator in writing, no such fence, wall or planting screen and
landscaping shall be required. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-8-3: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Dimensions:
      TABLE A
      DIMENSIONS
 
If parking is at:         45°60°90°Parallel
Then the:                 Shall be:
 Width of parking1       13' 10' 9'  9'
 Length of parking space 15' 18' 20' 23'
 Width of driveway aisle 13' 17' 25' 12'
 
   Note:
      1.    Width is measured parallel to the sidewalk or paved street surface.
   B.   Relationship Of Standard And Compact Parking Spaces: Up to thirty five
percent (35%) of any parking lot may be designated for compact car spaces. Such
spaces shall be permitted only on hard surfaced lots where the space is marked
both on the pavement and by a sign.
   C.   Parking Space Requirements: For the purpose of this title, the parking
space requirements presented in table B of this section shall apply; see also
R1 and R2 property development standards and R3 and R4 property development
standards, for general parking area requirements for residential properties.
      TABLE B
      VEHICLE PARKING
Type Of Use Parking Spaces Required
Type Of Use                               Parking Spaces Required
Residential:                               
 Apartments or multi-family dwelling     11/2 for each unit
 Boarding houses, rooming houses,        1 for each sleeping room, plus 1 for
  dormitories and permanent occupant      each permanent occupant
 Mobile home park                        1 for each unit, plus 1 space for
                                          each 5 units
 Single-family or two-family dwelling    2 for each unit
Commercial:                                
 Automobile service garages which also   1 for each 4 gasoline pumps and 2 for
  provide repair                          each service bay
 Banks, financial institutions and       1 for each 300 square feet of floor
  similar uses                            area
 Durable goods, retail (furniture,       1 for each 700 square feet of floor
  appliances)                             area
  Funeral parlors, mortuaries and similar 1 for each 100 square feet of floor
 types of uses                           area in slumber rooms, parlors or
                                          service rooms
                                          1 per each sleeping room and 1 space
                                          for each 2 employees; in addition, 10
 Hotels, motels                          percent of the parking spaces shall
                                          be oversized spaces (equivalent of 2
                                          compact spaces situated front to
                                          back)
 Offices, public or professional         1 for each 300 square feet of floor
  administration or service buildings     area
 Retail stores                           1 for each 300 square feet of floor
                                          area
 All other types of business or          1 for each 300 square feet of floor
  commercial uses permitted in any zone   area
Recreational or entertainment:             
 Auditoriums, sports arenas, theaters    1 for each 4 seats
  and similar uses
                                          4 for each alley or lane, plus 1
 Bowling alleys                          additional space for each 100 square
                                          feet of the area used for restaurant,
                                          cocktail lounge or similar use
 City parks:                              
  Community                             Use local street parking
  Neighborhood                          1 per 5,000 square feet, including
                                          abutting on street parking
  Large play areas                      1 per 8,000 square feet, including
                                          abutting on street parking
  Open space                            None required
  See title 9, "Subdivision              
    Regulations", of this code
 Dance floors, skating rinks             1 for each 100 square feet of floor
                                          area used for the activity
 Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns,     1 for each 100 square feet of floor
  nightclubs, clubhouses, etc.            area
                                          1 for each 5 persons' capacity, plus
                                          public or community or club, 1 for
 Outdoor swimming pools (public)         each 4 seats or 1 for each 30 square
                                          feet of floor area used for seating
                                          purposes, whichever is greater
Institutional:                             
 Churches and other places of religious  1 for each 5 seats
  assembly
 Hospitals                               1 for each bed and 1 for every office
                                          employee
                                          1 for every 250 square feet of floor
 Medical and dental clinics              area of examination, treatment,
                                          office, and waiting rooms
  Sanatoriums, homes for the aged,
 nursing homes, children's homes,        1 for each 2 beds
  asylums and similar uses
Schools (public or parochial or private):  
 Business, technical and trade schools   1 for each 2 students
 Colleges, universities                  1 for each 4 students
                                          2 for each classroom and 1 for every
 Elementary and junior high schools      8 seats in auditoriums or assembly
                                          halls
 High schools                            1 for every 10 students and 1 for
                                          each teacher and employee
 Kindergartens, childcare centers,       2 for each classroom but not less
  nursery schools and similar uses        than 6 for the building
Manufacturing (or any type of industrial   
use):
  All types of manufacturing, storage and 1 for every 2 employees (on the
 wholesale uses permitted in any         largest shift for which the building
  manufacturing zone                      is designed), plus 1 for each vehicle
                                          used on the premises
                                          1 for every 2 employees (on the
 Express, parcel delivery and freight    largest shift for which the building
  terminal                                is designed) and 1 for each motor
                                          vehicle maintained on the premises
 
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-8-4: DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Minimum Width: The minimum driveway width in the commercial, central
business, light industrial and heavy industrial districts shall be twenty feet
(20') for two-way traffic and fourteen feet (14') if there is one-way traffic.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
   B.   Drive-Up And Drive-Through Uses: Drive-up and drive-through uses and
their queuing areas shall be oriented away from street rights of way and away
from residential districts. There shall be no such uses in the residential
zones (except those which already exist). All such uses otherwise require
review from the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city
council. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-8-5: COMMERCIAL ZONE SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Drive-Up Facilities Design Standards: The following standards shall
apply to all drive-up, drive-through and drive-in facilities in any zone:
      1.   The facility shall receive access from a driveway or alley and not a
street.
      2.   None of the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities (e.g.,
driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, drop boxes
and similar facilities) are located within twenty feet (20') of a street and
shall not be oriented to a street corner.
      3.   The facility shall be subordinate to a primary permitted use.
"Subordinate" means all components of the facility, in total, occupy less
street frontage than the primary commercial use.
      4.   No more than one drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facility shall
be permitted on one block, or for a distance of four hundred (400) linear feet
along the same street frontage, whichever is less. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-8-6: LOADING AREAS:
   A.   Loading Space Requirements And Dimensions: Off street loading spaces
for commercial uses shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
 
Gross Floor Area Quantity And Type
(Square Feet)
14,000 - 36,000  (1) B2
36,001 - 60,000  (2) B2
60,001 - 100,000 (2) B + (1) A1
 
   Notes:
      1.    Type A spaces are 65 feet in length
      2.    Type B spaces are 35 feet in length
   For each additional 75,000 square feet or fraction thereof, an additional
type A space will be provided.
   (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
   B.   Size And Location Of Loading Spaces:
      1.   Size Of Off Street Loading Spaces: The size of off street loading
spaces shall not be less than the following, exclusive of access platform and
loading area:
 
Length  Width
35 feet 12 feet
65 feet 15 feet
 
      2.   Convenient Access: Convenient access to loading spaces from streets
or alleys shall be provided, and be not less than twelve feet (12') in width.
      3.   Location Of Required Loading Facilities: The off street loading
facilities required for the uses mentioned shall not project into the public
right of way or setback area. In no case shall required off street loading
berths be part of the area used to satisfy the off street parking requirements.
      4.   Entrances And Exits: Design and location of entrances and exits for
required off street loading areas shall be subject to review of the planning
and zoning commission.
   C.   Computation And Location: Required off street loading space is not to
be included as off street parking space in computation of required off street
parking space. All off street loading spaces shall be located outside of any
right of way of a street or alley. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
CHAPTER 9
SIGNS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Intent And Purpose
8-9-2: Definitions
8-9-3: Permit Requirements
8-9-4: Restrictions
8-9-5: Permitted Signs For Uses Conducted On Same Premises (On Site)
8-9-6: Signs Permitted Off Site In Any District
8-9-7: Exempted Signs
8-9-8: Special Use Sign Permits
8-9-9: Nonconforming Signs
8-9-10: Design And Construction Standards
8-9-11: Maintenance And Repair
8-9-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose And Authority: It is the purpose of this chapter to establish
standards for the fabrication, erection, and use of signs within the city.
These standards are designed to protect and promote the public welfare, health,
and safety of persons within the community; to protect property values; to
promote traffic safety; to provide visibility and to aid in the development and
promotion of business by providing regulations which encourage aesthetic
creativity, effectiveness, flexibility in the design and use of such devices
and to promote energy conservation; and this chapter is adopted in accordance
with the authority granted in Idaho Code sections 67-6511, 67-6518, and all
applicable laws.
   B.   Historical Character: A historical character is established in
Fairfield and this character shall be maintained in the fabrication and
installation of signs. This is in keeping with the goal of the community design
section in the Fairfield comprehensive plan. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
8-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business, owner,
lessor, product or activity conducted.
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign with action or motion, flashing, color changes requiring
electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but not
including wind actuated elements such as flags, banners or specialty items.
This definition does not include public service signs such as time and
temperature units.
ARCHITECTURAL BLADE: A roof sign or projecting sign with no visible legs or
braces, designed to look as though it could have been part of the building
structure, rather than something suspended from or standing on the building.
AREA OF SIGN: The area of the face of the sign per side within a perimeter
which forms the outside shape, including any frame, which forms an integral
part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which
the sign may be placed.
ART: Any form that is used to depict form or beauty that is not part of the
commercial message of the sign.
AWNING: A shelter supported entirely by the exterior wall of the building or
structure to which it is attached.
BANNER OR PENNANT: A temporarily placed piece of cloth, plastic, paper, or
other such material varying in size, shape, or design, erected as an
advertising device.
BILLBOARD: A large outdoor advertising sign and structure typically found in
high traffic areas such as state highways or local arterial roads. Billboards
present large advertisements to passing pedestrians and drivers. Billboards
range in size from ten by sixteen feet (10 x 16') to twenty five by one hundred
feet (25 x 100') and may be double sided.
BUILDING COMPLEX: A building or group of buildings within a single
architectural plan and/or a parcel of property housing two (2) or more
commercial units of operation and providing common facilities or utilities,
such as shopping centers, professional office buildings, etc. The building
owner may elect to designate a building a complex.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL: All wall area including windows and doors of a building
in one plane or elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear width of a principal building fronting the street
address right of way.
CANOPY, AWNING OR MARQUEE SIGN: Any such sign attached to or constructed in or
on a canopy or marquee.
CANOPY; STRUCTURAL: Any cover or structure that uses a permanent roof structure
to provide protection from weather supported by upright support columns or the
principal building itself.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, AUTOMATIC: An electronically or electrically controlled
time, temperature and date sign, message center or reader board, where
different copy changes are shown on the same location.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL: A sign on which copy or sign panels may be
changed manually, such as boards with changeable letters or changeable
pictorial boards.
COMMUNITY OR CIVIC EVENT: A public event, which may be of interest to the
community as a whole. This does not include any commercial products, goods or
services.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying a building or construction site
and the architects, engineers, financial institutions, contractors, and
suppliers involved.
COPY: The wording on a sign surface.
DESIGN REVIEW: The process whereby the planning administrator, planning and
zoning commission, or city council review sign design to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS: On premises incidental signs designed to guide or direct
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A fixed sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole
and not attached to any building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade
or upper surface of the street curb to the highest point of said sign.
INTERNALLY LIGHTED SIGN: A sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by an
internal light source, from which source light passes through the display
surface to the exterior of the sign.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any permanent rooflike structure projecting beyond a building.
This is generally designed to provide protection from the weather and usually
has changeable copy letters on it (i.e., a theater marquee).
MURAL: A picture or scene painted directly on a wall for aesthetic or artistic
purposes.
NEON SIGN: Any sign or portion of a building illuminated or outlined by tubes
using electrically stimulated neon or other gas.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any advertising structure or sign which was erected and
maintained prior to the effective date hereof, and which fails to conform to
all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
OFF PREMISES SIGNS: A sign mounted on property other than that occupied by the
business being advertised by said sign.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign other than a temporary sign.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or building,
such as a sign on wheels, or sign supported by an A-frame apparatus or a heavy
weight at the base which can be moved from place to place, or any other device
in the form of a sign which is of a temporary nature.
PREMISES: An area of land with its appurtenances and building(s) which, because
of its unity, is one unit of real property.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which the primary use for the property is
conducted.
   A.   In a single use, one business per property.
   B.   In a complex, the building or area of a building from which each
business conducts its primary business.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and
projects from a structure or building face.
REVOLVING SIGN: A sign which revolves or rotates about an axis.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building
and which is wholly or partially supported by said building. Supports must be
an integral part of the design. There shall be no exposed wire or struts.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A temporary sign that is generally constructed in such a
manner as to form an "A" or a tentlike shape that is placed on, but not
permanently attached to, the ground. This definition also includes signs of
similar temporary nature but that are constructed with a base and a single
upward sign face, forming an upside down "T".
SIGN: Any structure or natural object or part thereof, or device attached
thereto or painted or represented thereon, which shall be used to attract
attention to any product, place, activity, person, institution, organization,
or business; or which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner,
flag, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of,
an announcement, direction or advertisement. A sign shall have no more than two
(2) sides.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports or is capable of supporting a
"sign" as defined in this section.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed and has a limited one
week display period, after which it is removed.
TOTAL SIGNAGE: The sum of all sign areas.
WALL SIGN: A sign painted on any surface area of a building, including windows
and doors, attached to, or erected against, a wall, window or door of a
building with the face parallel to the building wall and extending not more
than one foot (1') therefrom.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign installed for the purpose of viewing from the outside.
(Ord. 248, 7-12-2012; amd. Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-9-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct,
structurally alter, or change the use of any "sign", as defined in this chapter
without first obtaining a sign permit from the planning administrator.
   B.   Application; Fee; Site Plan: All applications for sign permits shall be
on forms furnished by the city and accompanied by the appropriate fee and site
plans drawn to scale which show the following specifications:
      1.   Dimensions, lighting, colors, clearances, location, language,
images, and setbacks to property lines.
      2.   Other architectural features or design elements of the sign.
   C.   Permit Approval Or Denial:
      1.   The city planning administrator shall have the authority to approve
or deny a sign permit application. The city planning administrator's review of
the application shall be based on criteria in this title and in this chapter,
including those provisions relating to the number, size, location, design,
quality, construction, proposed installation and lighting of the sign.
      2.   Denial of a permit by the city planning administrator, or approval
of the permit with conditions unacceptable to the applicant may be appealed to
the planning and zoning commission pursuant to procedures set forth in section
8-3-2 of this title. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
8-9-4: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Chapter: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
construct, alter, maintain, or use any sign, except as provided for in this
chapter.
   B.   Placement In Public Right Of Way: No sign, including temporary signs,
shall be placed in any public right of way, except for public signs such as
traffic control and directional signs.
   C.   Obstructing Clear Vision: No sign, in any zone, shall be erected in
such a manner as to obstruct the free and clear vision of vehicular traffic and
pedestrians, or at any location where, by reason of similarity of position,
shape, color, words or symbols, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or
be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
   D.   Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited in any zone:
      1.   Neon signs on the outside of a building unless neon tubes are used
for indirect illumination of lettering, not themselves visible.
      2.   Billboards.
   E.   Banners Or Portable Signs: No banners or portable signs may be used as
permanent signs. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
8-9-5: PERMITTED SIGNS FOR USES CONDUCTED ON SAME PREMISES (ON SITE):
   A.   Home Occupation: One professional or home occupation sign not to exceed
four (4) square feet per side may be erected in any district. One freestanding
professional or home occupation sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet per
side, may be erected in any district along Soldier Road.
   B.   Maximum Signage: Except as otherwise provided herein, the maximum
signage in the commercial and light industrial zones shall not exceed one and
one-half (1.5) square feet of sign area per linear foot of building frontage up
to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet. If the business is located at
the intersection of two (2) city streets, a second sign may be located on the
nonaddress side, not to exceed ten (10) square feet.
   C.   Maximum Number Of Signs: The maximum number of signs for a building
complex in commercial and light industrial zones shall be as follows:
      1.   One freestanding sign not to exceed twenty five (25) square feet per
side for the complex, and one wall sign for each business not to exceed ten
(10) square feet each, and they shall have a common design.
      2.   One freestanding sign not to exceed forty eight (48) square feet, or
twenty five (25) square feet per side for the complex, and one wall sign for
each business not to exceed ten (10) square feet, each having a common design,
may be erected in any district along Highway 20.
   D.   Ranch Or Farm Identification: Ranch or farm identification sign
incorporated into the entry gate not to exceed thirty (30) square feet per
side.
   E.   Internally Lighted Signs: Lighting utilizing internal illumination
shall be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives of this
chapter. Lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended character of the
general vicinity and will not change the essential character of the same area.
Lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses. (Ord.
265, 9-17-2015)
8-9-6: SIGNS PERMITTED OFF SITE IN ANY DISTRICT:
   A.   Off site, nonilluminated signs for identification of commercial,
tourist, recreational, or cultural use shall be permitted, provided the use's
location is off Main Street. Off site signs shall be limited to one with a
maximum sign area of ten (10) square feet per side.
   B.   Any property owner leasing, renting, loaning, or donating space for an
off site sign to a commercial, tourist, recreational, or cultural use, shall
forfeit that same amount of sign area for the property owner's own use. A
property owner may lease, rent, loan, or donate to the city without forfeit of
sign area.
   C.   Off site signs on vacant lots are prohibited except for a directional
sign to a business in the city limits which has a current, valid business
license. One sign is allowed per vacant lot, with the size not to exceed ten
(10) square feet per side, with the property owner's consent. Signs on vacant
lots along Highway 20 are not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per side.
(Ord. 265, 9-17-2015)
8-9-7: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The following signs are exempted from provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Directing Traffic: All signs erected in a public right of way by a
public agency controlling or directing traffic.
   B.   Political Signs: Political signs pertaining to a specific election
displayed within any district, provided they shall be removed within five (5)
days after the election.
   C.   Real Estate Signs:
      1.   One unlighted real estate sign in any zone not to exceed four (4)
square feet of sign area per side, provided such sign is located on the
premises and shall not occupy any portion of the public right of way.
      2.   One unlighted real estate sign advertising two (2) or more lots for
sale not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area per side, provided such sign
is located on the premises and shall be removed upon the sale of the last lot.
      3.   One unlighted real estate sign advertising the sale or lease of a
farm or ranch, twenty (20) square feet per side, provided such sign is located
on the premises.
      4.   Temporary off site real estate sign(s) announcing an open house
which shall be removed immediately at the conclusion of the event.
   D.   Construction Signs:
      1.   One unlighted construction sign announcing the construction of a
building or project, with sign area not to exceed twenty (20) square feet per
side, provided the sign shall be removed upon occupancy of the building or sale
of the land for which the sign was intended.
      2.   Signs shall not be erected until a building permit is approved.
   E.   Flags: Flags, either official or historical, of any state or nation.
The pole height shall not exceed ten feet (10') above the real roofline, and
the flag shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
   F.   Owner Identification; For Rent: One owner identification or occupant
identification sign, for rent, in the residential zone which shall not exceed
two (2) square feet per side.
   G.   Warning Signs: Warning signs in commercial and light industrial zones,
such as "no parking", and directional signs such as "entrance", not to exceed
two (2) square feet per side.
   H.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs, banners, or pennants announcing
community events, yard sales, farmers' markets, and conventions, which shall be
removed immediately at the conclusion of the event. Provided, that such signs
do not obstruct the free and clear vision of vehicular traffic, parking, and
pedestrian crossing. Such signs are not allowed on Soldier Road between Willow
Avenue and Camas Avenue.
   I.   Murals: Murals, provided no words or commercial images are used for the
intent of advertising. Murals shall be artistic and nostalgic in nature and
shall follow the theme of the city's architecture.
   J.   Nonprofit Organizations: Signs for charitable, service and other
nonprofit organizations. Signs shall not be more than four (4) square feet per
side.
   K.   City Signs: All city signage is exempt.
   L.   Signs Required By Law: All signage required by law is exempt, to
include, but not limited to: handicap parking, fire lane, crosswalk and school
zone signs. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
8-9-8: SPECIAL USE SIGN PERMITS:
Conditional uses for these signs are limited to:
   A.   A special use is a permanent or temporary use conditionally permitted
by this chapter or this title and which may be approved subject to conditions
as allowed by this title and when not in conflict with the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
   B.   Temporary special use sign permits may be granted for any appropriate
use, not already listed, by review from the city council. (Ord. 257-A, 1-15-
2015)
   C.   Time limits may be set for special use sign permits in addition to the
requirements of section
8-12-3 of this title. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
   D.   The special use permit process shall be followed per section
8-12-3 of this title, with review and approval by the city council prior to
issuance of a special use sign permit. The city council shall either approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the application as presented.
   E.   Special use permits are required for the following signs regardless of
the zoning district in which they are located:
      1.   Off site signs.
      2.   Signs that include flashing, revolving, moving intermittent, or
oscillating parts or attachments. (Ord. 257-A, 1-15-2015)
8-9-9: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   It shall be the policy of this title to allow, but not encourage, the
continuation of existing nonconforming signs. Lawful nonconforming signs shall
not be replaced with nonconforming signs.
   B.   Deteriorating or damaged signs shall be repaired or improved within
thirty (30) days of notification from the city. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
8-9-10: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Height: No freestanding, projecting, or wall sign shall be designed,
constructed, or erected which extends above the roofline of the building
containing the business it advertises. These signs may be mounted up to the
real roofline of the building.
   B.   Projecting: No projecting sign, canopy, or marquee shall extend from a
building to a point five feet (5') beyond the property line and may encroach
only within public right of way. The bottom of any projecting sign may not be
lower than eight feet (8') above any public right of way.
   C.   Supports: All supports for all signs or sign structure shall be placed
in and upon private property.
   D.   Art: Any art or lines that are an integral part of the lettering shall
be considered as part of the sign.
   E.   Freestanding: Freestanding signs shall not be greater than twelve feet
(12'), measured from natural grade to the top of the sign. No freestanding sign
shall extend six feet (6') beyond the property line and may encroach only
within public right of way. The bottom may not be lower than eight feet (8')
above any public right of way. (Ord. 265, 9-17-2015)
8-9-11: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
   A.   Safety And Maintenance Standards:
      1.   Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times, including the repair or replacement of
defective parts, painting, cleaning, and other acts required for maintenance.
      2.   If the sign is not made to comply with adequate safety and
maintenance standards, the planning administrator and/or the building official
shall require its removal in accordance with this section.
   B.   Removal And Disposition Of Signs:
      1.   Abandoned Signs: Any sign that is located on property that is vacant
and unoccupied for a period of twenty four (24) months or more; pertains to a
time, event, or purpose which no longer applies; or advertises products,
services, or facilities which have not been available to the public for a
period of twenty four (24) months, shall be deemed abandoned. Permanent signs
applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in
ownership, management or seasonal closure shall not be deemed abandoned unless
the property remains vacant twenty four (24) months or more. Abandoned signs
shall be removed by the owner of the premises.
      2.   Dangerous Or Defective Signs:
         a.   No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
property owned by him, any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition.
Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or the
owner of the sign.
         b.   Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or
defective sign, the building inspector and/or the planning administrator shall
proceed as described in subsection B3 of this section.
      3.   Removal Of Signs: The building inspector and/or the city planning
administrator shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public
safety, such as signs that are abandoned or dangerous structurally, materially,
or electrically. The building inspector and/or the planning administrator shall
send a notice by certified mail to the owner of the property on which the sign
is located specifying the violation involved. If the sign is not removed or the
violation not corrected within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing,
the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. If
any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to the
last known address and posted on the sign or premises.
      4.   Right To Appeal: The determination of the building inspector and/or
city planning administrator ordering removal or compliance may be appealed by
filing written notice with the city council within twenty (20) days after
receipt of notice.
      5.   Immediate Removal Of Dangerous Sign: In cases of imminent danger to
public safety, the city planning administrator and/or building inspector may
cause immediate removal of a dangerous sign without notice.
      6.   Disposal Of Signs; Costs:
         a.   Any sign removed by an agent of the city pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be
disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate.
         b.   The cost of removal shall be considered a debt owed to the city
by the property owner, and may be recovered in court action or result in a lien
against the property. (Ord. 248, 7-12-2012)
CHAPTER 10
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
SECTION:
8-10-1: Purpose
8-10-2: Definitions
8-10-3: New Lighting
8-10-4: Outdoor Lighting Standards
8-10-5: Lighting Plan; Review And Recommendation
8-10-6: Exemptions
8-10-7: Penalty
8-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The general purpose of this section is to protect and promote the
public health, safety and welfare, the quality of life, and the ability to view
the night sky, by establishing regulations and a process of review for exterior
lighting.
   B.   This section establishes minimum standards for exterior lighting in
order to accomplish the following:
      1.   To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting;
      2.   To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians;
      3.   To protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky, and help
preserve the quality of life and the tourist experience;
      4.   To prevent light trespass in all areas of the city;
      5.   To ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to
promote safety and security;
      6.   To allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures; and
      7.   To provide lighting guidelines. (Ord. 256, 2-12-2015)
8-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
FLOODLIGHT: A lamp that is designed to flood a well defined area with light.
FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRES: A luminaire designed and installed where no light is
emitted at or above a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the
luminaire.
FULLY SHIELDED: A type of luminaire that incorporates a solid barrier (the
shield), which permits no light to escape through the barrier.
GLARE: Stray, unshielded light striking the eye that may result in: a) nuisance
or annoyance glare such as light shining into a window; b) discomfort glare
such as bright light causing a squinting of the eyes; c) disabling glare such
as bright light reducing the ability of the eyes to see into shadows; or d)
reduction of visual performance.
LAMP: The generic term for an artificial light source, to be distinguished from
the whole assembly (see definition of Luminaire). Commonly referred to as
"bulb".
LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not limited
to, discomfort to the eye or diminished vision due to glare, light trespass,
uplighting, the uncomfortable distraction of the eye, or any manmade light that
diminishes the ability to view the night sky.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light falling on the property of another or the public right of
way when it is not required to do so.
LIGHTING: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light.
LIGHTING ADMINISTRATOR: The Fairfield planning and zoning administrator shall
administer, interpret, and enforce this chapter, and make recommendations
hereunder.
LUMEN: The unit used to quantify the amount of light energy produced by a lamp
at the luminaire. Lumen output of most lamps is listed on the packaging. For
example, a sixty (60) watt incandescent lamp, six (6) to eight (8) watt LED,
and a fluorescent thirteen (13) watt lamp produce approximately nine hundred
(900) lumens while a fifty five (55) watt low pressure sodium lamp produces
eight thousand (8,000) lumens.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamp or lamps together
with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the
lamps and to connect the lamps to the power. When used, includes ballasts and
photocells. Commonly referred to as "fixture".
OPAQUE: The effect of a part or parts of a luminaire that provide(s) a barrier
above and in some cases around the lamp, that does not allow any light to pass
through.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located or
used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outdoors. Luminaires that
are indoors that are intended to light something outside are considered outdoor
lighting for the purpose of this chapter.
PARTIALLY SHIELDED: A type of luminaire that incorporates a translucent
barrier, the "partial shield" around the lamp that allows some light to pass
through the barrier while concealing the lamp from the viewer.
SKYGLOW: The overhead glow from light emitted sideways and upwards caused by
the reflection and scattering of light by dust, water vapor and other particles
suspended in the atmosphere, and which reduces one's ability to view the night
sky.
UNSHIELDED: A type of luminaire that only incorporates clear glass, which
permits all light to escape.
UPLIGHTING: Fully shielded lighting that is directed in such a manner as to
shine light rays above the horizontal plane. (Ord. 256, 2-12-2015)
8-10-3: NEW LIGHTING:
All exterior lighting installed after the effective date hereof in any and all
zoning districts in the city shall be in conformance with the requirements
established by this chapter. (Ord. 256, 2-12-2015)
8-10-4: OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS:
   A.   Outdoor Luminaires: All outdoor lighting shall not cause the lamp to
shine directly on adjacent property or public rights of way. Outdoor lighting
luminaires shall be one of the following:
      1.   Full cutoff and fully shielded.
      2.   Luminaires that are partially shielded; provided, that the lamp is
not visible, and the luminaire has an opaque top or is under an opaque
structure.
      3.   Floodlights with external shielding and which are angled; provided,
that no light is directed above a twenty five degree (25°) angle measured from
a vertical line from the center of the light extended to the ground.
      4.   Unshielded or clear glass luminaires that have a maximum output of
four hundred fifty (450) lumens per fixture (equal to one 40-watt incandescent
lamp or one 4- to 5-watt LED) which have an opaque top or are under an opaque
structure.
   B.   Height Of Luminaires:
      1.   Parking area luminaires shall be no higher than twenty feet (20')
above ground.
      2.   Freestanding luminaires, not attached to a structure in residential
zones shall be no higher than fifteen feet (15') above ground.
      3.   Streetlights used on arterial roadways may exceed twenty feet (20')
in height, with the approval of city council, and only with a finding that
exceeding twenty feet (20') is necessary to protect the safety of the residents
of Fairfield.
      4.   The height of any light fixture or luminaire shall be no higher than
thirty feet (30') above ground.
   C.   Examples: Examples of the following types of lighting, in the form of
diagrams, are included within the ordinance codified herein on file in the
office of the city clerk:
      1.   Full cutoff luminaires with the light source downcast and fully
shielded.
      2.   Luminaires that are partially shielded with the lamp not visible and
have an opaque top or are under an opaque structure. Unshielded or clear glass
luminaires that have a maximum output of four hundred fifty (450) lumens per
fixture (equal to one 40-watt incandescent lamp or one 4- to 5-watt LED) which
have an opaque top or are under an opaque structure.
      3.   Floodlights with external shielding shall be angled; provided, that
no light is directed above a twenty five degree (25°) angle measured from a
vertical line from the center of the light extended to the ground. (Ord. 256,
2-12-2015)
8-10-5: LIGHTING PLAN; REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION:
   A.   All applications for zoning, special use permit, subdivision, planned
unit developments and building permits shall include lighting plans showing
location, type and boundary of light.
   B.   The administrator shall review any new lighting on the subject property
that is part of an application for zoning, special use permit, subdivision,
planned unit developments and building permits, to determine whether the
lighting complies with the standards of this chapter. The administrator shall
convey in writing a recommendation whether the lighting complies with the
standards of this chapter to the building official, the city council, or
planning and zoning commission prior to approval of any zoning permit,
subdivision application, or certificate of occupancy.
   C.   For all other lighting which must conform to the requirements of this
chapter, the administrator shall issue a decision whether the lighting complies
with the standards of this chapter. The administrator, prior to issuance of its
decision, may request additional information from the applicant. All such
decisions may be appealed pursuant to section
8-12-1 of this title to the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30)
days of the decision. (Ord. 256, 2-12-2015)
8-10-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following forms of outdoor lighting are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter and are not required to comply with its terms:
   A.   A single light for the sole purpose of uplighting of a flag with a
maximum lumen output of one thousand five hundred (1,500) lumens, a shielded
lamp no more than forty five degree (45°) angle spotlight.
   B.   Sports, recreation and entertainment lighting required for public
events.
   C.   Lighting that is required to meet the federal aviation authority's
compliance standards.
   D.   Traffic control, roadway, vehicular lights and all temporary emergency
lighting.
   E.   Lighting activated by a motion sensor, provided:
      1.   It is located in such a manner as to prevent glare and lighting onto
properties of others or into a public right of way.
      2.   The luminaire is set to only go on when activated and to go off
within five (5) minutes after activation has ceased.
      3.   The luminaire shall not be triggered by activity off the subject
property. (Ord. 256, 2-12-2015)
8-10-7: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and subject to penalty as
provided in section 8-1-12, "Violations And Penalties", of this title. (Ord.
256, 2-12-2015)
CHAPTER 11
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
8-11-1: Building Permit
8-11-2: Certificate Of Occupancy
8-11-3: Permits And Certificates Used For Purposes For Which Issued
8-11-1: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, convert, or demolish any building or structure in the city or
cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit
for each such building or structure from the city building official. (Ord. 250-
B, 7-12-2012)
   B.   Application For Permit: To apply for a permit, the applicant shall
first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that
purpose by the city building official, who shall determine the acceptability of
the request in conformance with the international building code and the
international residential building code, and who shall thereupon issue or deny
the application. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
   C.   Contents Of Application: The application for a building permit shall be
signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all
information supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state
that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun or is not
substantially completed within one year. As a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property.
      3.   Existing use.
      4.   Proposed use.
      5.   Zoning district.
      6.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the
lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing building on the
lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alteration.
      7.   Building heights.
      8.   Number of off street parking spaces or loading berths.
      9.   Number of dwelling units.
      10.   Proposed sewer and water facilities.
      11.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for, the enforcement of this title. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
   D.   Approval Of Permit: Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of an
application, the building official shall either approve or disapprove the
application in conformance with the provision of this title. All building
permits shall, however, be conditional upon the commencement of work within one
hundred eighty (180) days. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the
applicant by the city clerk and shall have marked such copy either as approved
or disapproved and attested to same by the building official's signature on
such copy. One copy of plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the city
clerk. (Ord. 250-B, 7-12-2012)
   E.   Expiration Of Permit: If the work described in a building permit has
not begun within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance
thereof, said permit shall expire. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-11-2: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of, any
building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefor by
the building official stating that the proposed use of the building conforms to
the requirements of this title and with all conditional provisions that may
have been imposed. (Ord. 250-B, 7-12-2012)
8-11-3: PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES USED FOR PURPOSES FOR WHICH ISSUED:
   A.   Building permits issued by the building official or zoning permits
issued by the city council or the planning and zoning commission authorize only
the use and arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto, and no other. Any use, arrangement or construction contrary
to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 254, 1-15-
2015)
   B.   The city clerk shall maintain a public record of all zoning permits and
certificates of occupancy. (Ord. 250-B, 7-12-2012)
CHAPTER 12
APPEALS, VARIANCES AND SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
8-12-1: Appeal Procedure; Hearings
8-12-2: Variances
8-12-2-1: Definition
8-12-2-2: Authority To Grant
8-12-2-3: Application
8-12-2-4: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
8-12-2-5: Public Hearing; Notice
8-12-2-6: Action By Commission
8-12-2-7: Notification To Applicant
8-12-2-8: Appeal To Council
8-12-3: Special Uses
8-12-3-1: Definition
8-12-3-2: Authority To Grant
8-12-3-3: Application
8-12-3-4: Standards Applicable To Special Uses
8-12-3-5: Restrictions
8-12-3-6: Public Hearing; Notice
8-12-3-7: Action By Commission
8-12-3-8: Notification To Applicant
8-12-3-9: Transfer, Review And Discontinuance Of Special Use Permits
8-12-3-10: Appeal To City Council
8-12-1: APPEAL PROCEDURE; HEARINGS:
   A.   Appeals From Decisions Of Administrator:
      1.   Appeals To Council: Appeals to the council concerning the
administrator's interpretation and administration of this title may be taken by
any person aggrieved by a decision of said administrator. Said appeal shall be
taken within twenty (20) calendar days after the decision of the administrator
by filing with the administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon
which the appeal is to be taken. The appellant shall lodge all legal and
factual material in support of the appeal with the administrator within
fourteen (14) calendar days after the notice of appeal is filed. If any of such
lodged material had not been submitted to the administrator prior to the
administrator's decision, the council may remand the matter to the
administrator for reconsideration in light of the new material. The cost of an
appeal from decisions of the administrator shall be based on the schedule of
fees.
      2.   Hearing By Council: The council shall hold a public hearing on all
appeals from decisions of the administrator as soon as possible following
receipt of the notice of appeal. The council shall publish a copy of the notice
of appeal, together with the time, place, and date of the appeal hearing, in
one newspaper of general circulation in the county, once, at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing.
      3.   Decision By Council: The council shall, within twenty eight (28)
days after the public hearing, enter a written order affirming, reversing, or
modifying the administrator's decision. The order shall also contain the
reasons for the administrator's decision. The council may, within fourteen (14)
calendar days of issuing a written decision, reconsider that decision under
procedures outlined in subsection B3 of this section.
   B.   Appeals From Decisions Of Commission:
      1.   Appeals To Council: Any person aggrieved by any final action of the
commission may appeal the commission's decision to the council by filing a
notice of appeal within twenty (20) days of the commission's final action. The
notice of appeal shall state the date and substance of the decision appealed
from and state the grounds for the appeal. Copies of the notice of appeal shall
be filed with both the council and the commission. The administrator shall
provide any such aggrieved person with a written statement of the estimated
cost of transcript preparation.
      2.   Transmission Of Record And Briefs:
         a.   Transmission Of Record: Within thirty (30) days after a notice of
appeal is filed, the commission shall prepare five (5) copies of a summary of
the proceedings appealed from and forward said summary to the council. The cost
of an appeal shall be based on the schedule of fees and shall include the cost
of transcript preparation. The cost of such preparation shall be based on
current costs of outside temporary employees to furnish such transcripts and
the cost shall be paid by the appellant before the transcript may be forwarded
to the council. The commission shall serve one copy of the summary or
transcript on the appellant and one copy on the attorney for the respondent.
The commission shall submit to the council with the summary or transcript all
documents, exhibits, and orders pertinent to the appeal. The entire record
shall be forwarded to the council with a certificate signed by the
administrator listing all documents in the record in chronological order of
filing together with the administrator's certificate stating that the documents
listed comprise the complete record of the commission's proceedings.
         b.   Briefs On Appeal:
            (1)   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "brief" is
defined as any written document, regardless of form, outlining the parties'
legal positions. Parties to an appeal are not required to file briefs. If a
party chooses not to file a brief, the administrator shall be notified in
writing.
            (2)   Number Of Copies: The original and five (5) copies of all
appellate briefs shall be filed with the administrator.
            (3)   Time For Filing: The appellant's brief shall be filed within
fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the transcript. The respondent's
brief shall be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days from receipt of the
appellant's brief. No briefs shall be accepted outside of the time periods
described under this subsection. If the commission is the only respondent, no
respondent's brief is required.
      3.   Hearing By Council: The council shall hold a hearing on the appeal
as soon as possible following receipt of the administrator's certificate and
the commission's record. The council shall publish a notice specifying the
time, date and place of the hearing and stating the subject of the appeal. The
notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The council may not take additional
evidence at the hearing. The parties to the appeal may present briefs to the
board. Each party may present not more than fifteen (15) minutes of oral
argument to the council.
      4.   Decision By Council: The council shall enter an order within fifteen
(15) days after the hearing affirming, reversing, or modifying the commission's
decision. The order shall contain a statement of the decision. The council may,
within fourteen (14) calendar days of issuing a written decision, reconsider
that decision under procedures outlined in subsection B3 of this section.
   C.   Request For Rehearing: Any applicant or affected person seeking
judicial review of compliance with the provisions of this section must first
seek reconsideration of the final decision within fourteen (14) days. The
applicant will inform the administrator of what changes are requested. Such
written request must identify specific deficiencies in the decision for which
reconsideration is sought. Upon reconsideration, the decision may be affirmed,
reversed or modified after compliance with applicable procedural standards. A
written decision shall be provided to the applicant or affected person within
sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration or the request is
deemed denied. A decision shall not be deemed final for purposes of judicial
review unless the process required in this subsection has been followed. The
twenty eight (28) day time frame for seeking judicial review is tolled until
the date of the written decision regarding reconsideration or the expiration of
the sixty (60) day reconsideration period, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 258,
10-9-2014)
8-12-2: VARIANCES:
8-12-2-1: DEFINITION:
Variance is a modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size,
lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking
space, height of building or other provisions of this title affecting the size
or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the
size of lots and public ways. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-2: AUTHORITY TO GRANT:
The commission may authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms of
this title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for
issuance of a variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of
convenience or profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of
this title would result in unnecessary hardship or the loss of a building or
site that is on a national, state, or local register of historic places or
sites. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   Required Information: A variance from the terms of this title shall not
be granted by the commission unless and until a written application for a
variance is submitted to the commission containing:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property.
      3.   Description of the nature of the variance requested.
      4.   A narrative statement and documentation demonstrating that the
building or site is on a national, state or local register of historic places
or sites or that the requested variance conforms to all the following
standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structures or buildings in the same district.
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this title.
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
   B.   Findings Of Fact: A variance shall not be granted unless the commission
makes specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence
presented to it which support conclusions that the above mentioned standards
and conditions have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-4: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
Under no circumstances shall the commission grant an appeal or variance to
allow a use not permissible under the terms of this title in the district
involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this
title in said district. In granting any appeal or variance, the commission may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this title.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the appeal or variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this title. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-5: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
   A.   Prior to granting a variance permit, at least one public hearing before
the commission in which interested persons shall have the opportunity to be
heard shall be held. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of
the time and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of
the city. Notice may also be provided to stations serving the jurisdiction for
use as a public service announcement. Written notice shall also be provided to
property owners and residents of adjoining land with the parcel under
consideration. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
   B.   When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or
residents, in lieu of mailing notification, three (3) notices in the newspaper
or paper of general circulation is sufficient, provided the third notice
appears ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-6: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
   A.   Decision: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the
commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the request for
appeal or variance.
   B.   Denoting Specifics: Upon granting or denying an application, the
commission shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   C.   Right To Appeal Commission Decision: The applicant or any affected
person may appeal the decision of the commission to the council, provided a
written appeal is submitted to the council within fifteen (15) days from the
commission's decision. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-7: NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT:
Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the city council shall
provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-2-8: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
A decision by the commission on a variance permit application may be appealed
to the city council through the process specified in section 8-12-1 of this
chapter. (Ord. 252, 5-15-2013)
8-12-3: SPECIAL USES:
8-12-3-1: DEFINITION:
A special use is a permanent use otherwise prohibited by the terms of this
title in a given zone, but which may be allowed with conditions under specific
provisions of this title and when not in conflict with a comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-2: AUTHORITY TO GRANT:
The commission may authorize in specific cases special uses, subject, however,
to the minimum conditions and requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located and subject to additional conditions and requirements necessary to
protect the best interest of affected persons and the city as a whole. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-3: APPLICATION:
An application for special use permit shall be filed with the city clerk by at
least one owner or lessee of property for which a new special use is proposed
or for which an expansion or relocation of an existing special use is proposed.
At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
   B.   Legal description of property.
   C.   Description of existing use.
   D.   Zoning district.
   E.   Description of proposed special use.
   F.   A plan of the proposed site for the special use showing the location of
all buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the commission may require to
determine if the proposed special use meets the intent and requirements of this
title.
   G.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effects of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on
adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and
other properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to a
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-4: STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIAL USES:
The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed special use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
   A.   Will, in fact, constitute a special use as established by zoning
requirements for the zone involved.
   B.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives
or with any specific objective of a comprehensive plan and/or zoning
regulations.
   C.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and such use will not change the essential character of the
same area.
   D.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses.
   E.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools; or that the persons responsible
for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately
any such services.
   F.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.
   G.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person, property or to
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare, or odors.
   H.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares.
   I.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic
or historic features of major importance. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-5: RESTRICTIONS:
In granting any special use, the commission may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the special use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-6: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
Upon receipt of the application for a special use, the commission shall hold a
public hearing, publish notice in the newspaper and give written notice to all
parties as required for variance permits. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-7: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
   A.   Commission Action: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing,
the commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
application as presented. If the application is approved or approved with
modifications, the commission shall direct the city clerk to issue a special
use permit listing the specific conditions specified by the commission for
approval.
   B.   Conditions Attached: Upon granting a special use permit, conditions may
be attached to a special use permit, including, but not limited to, those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other developments.
      2.   Controlling the sequence and time of development.
      3.   Controlling the duration of development.
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly.
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
      6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services.
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this title. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
      8.   Concerning time line for review. If use does not change, application
fee may be waived.
      9.   Concerning use permit recorded against the property.
      10.   Concerning the fact that a new owner is required to meet with the
planning and zoning administrator to review special use permit. (Ord. 251, 7-
12-2012)
   C.   Request For Studies: Prior to granting a special use permit, the
commission may request studies from the planning staff or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed
special use. A special use permit shall not be considered as use permits. A
special use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to another, but
may be transferable from one owner to another, provided all conditions of the
special use permit continue to be met.
   D.   Decision; Denoting Specifics: Upon granting or denying an application,
the commission shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   E.   Right To Appeal Commission Decision: The applicant or any affected
person who appeared in person or in writing before the commission may appeal
the decision of the commission to the council, provided a written appeal is
submitted to the council within fifteen (15) days from the commission's action.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-8: NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT:
Within ten (10) days after decision has been rendered, the city clerk shall
provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-12-3-9: TRANSFER, REVIEW AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   A special use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to
another, but may be transferable from one owner to another, provided all
conditions of the special use permit continue to be met.
   B.   Special uses which have not been established within one year of the
date of issuance of the special use permit may be reviewed by the commission to
determine if the facts and circumstances have changed; the commission may call
for a new special use permit application.
   C.   A special use which has been discontinued for a period of one year
shall not be reestablished without a new special use permit. (Ord. 223, 7-13-
2006)
8-12-3-10: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
A decision by the commission on a special use permit application may be
appealed to the city council through the process specified in section
8-12-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 252, 5-15-2013)
CHAPTER 13
ZONING AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
8-13-1: Authority To Amend
8-13-2: Initiation Of Zoning Amendments
8-13-3: Amendment Application, Contents
8-13-4: Commission Action
8-13-5: Public Hearing
8-13-6: Approval Or Denial Of Amendment
8-13-7: Action By City Council
8-13-8: Resubmission Of Application
8-13-9: Zone Boundary Change, Publication Of Notice (Rep. By Ord. 284, 6-10-
2021)
8-13-1: AUTHORITY TO AMEND:
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices require, the city council may, by ordinance, after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the planning and zoning commission and subject to
procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, change or re-appeal the
regulations, restrictions and boundaries or classification of property. (Ord.
223, 7-13-2006)
8-13-2: INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title may be initiated in one of the following ways:
   A.   By adoption of a motion by the city council.
   B.   By adoption of a motion by the planning and zoning commission.
   C.   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who has
an existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-13-3: AMENDMENT APPLICATION, CONTENTS:
Applications for amendments to the official zoning map adopted as part of this
title shall be provided by the city clerk and shall contain at least the
following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant.
   B.   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the commission.
   C.   Present land use.
   D.   Present zoning district.
   E.   Proposed use.
   F.   Proposed zoning district.
   G.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator, showing the
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning, and such other
items as the planning and zoning commission may require.
   H.   A list of all property owners and residents and their mailing addresses
who are within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land
being considered.
   I.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to a comprehensive
plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility of public facilities
and compatibility with the surrounding area.
   J.   A fee as established by the city council. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-13-4: COMMISSION ACTION:
Zoning districts, zoning subdistricts and overlay districts shall be amended in
the following manner:
   A.   Requests for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
commission which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested.
   B.   If the request is in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the request
shall be submitted to the commission or, in its absence, the city council which
shall recommend and the city council may adopt or reject an amendment to a
comprehensive plan under the notice and hearing procedures provided in Idaho
Code section 67-6509. After a comprehensive plan has been amended, this title
may then be amended as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-13-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on proposed
zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or map revision.
   A.   Zoning Text Amendment: The planning and zoning commission, prior to
recommending a zoning text amendment to the city council, shall conduct at
least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity
to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time
and place and the amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or
paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of the city. Following the
commission's hearing, if the commission makes a material change from what was
presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the
city council.
   B.   Zoning Map Amendment:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission, prior to recommending a zoning
map amendment that is in accordance with a comprehensive plan to the city
council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons
shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing, notice of time and place and the amendment shall be published in the
official newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of the city.
Additional notice shall be provided by mail to property owners and residents
within the jurisdiction of the city. Additional notice shall be provided by
mail to property owners and residents within the land being considered; three
hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered;
and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as
determined by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
      2.   The applicant requesting the zoning map amendment shall sign an
affidavit stating that he has noticed in writing, the required residents and
the property owners as to his purpose of application, time and place of
hearing, residents served, and date of service. A copy of notification shall be
attached to the affidavit. (Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
      3.   When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners
or residents, notice of said proposed change and the hearing thereon shall be
published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks, with at least one said
publication being fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for hearing on the
proposed change and for which said notice is given. Said publication shall be
published in a local paper of general circulation. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-13-6: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF AMENDMENT:
Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the planning
and zoning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council.
The city council may recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or
it may recommend a modification or that the amendment be denied. The planning
and zoning commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for
amendments are in accordance with a comprehensive plan and established goals
and objectives. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
8-13-7: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Public Hearing: The city council, prior to adopting, revising or
rejecting the amendment to this title, as recommended by the planning and
zoning commission, may conduct a public hearing using the same notice and
hearing procedures as the planning and zoning commission. Following the city
council hearing, if city council makes a material change from what was
presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the city council adopts the amendment.
   B.   Decision; Denoting Specifics: Upon granting or denying an application
to amend this title, the city council shall specify:
      1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   C.   Approval: In the event the city council shall approve an amendment,
such amendment shall thereafter be made a part of this title upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006; amd. Ord. 284,
6-10-2021)
8-13-8: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied by
the city council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form or
with reference to substantially the same premises for the same purpose within
the period of one year from the date of such final action, unless there is an
amendment in a comprehensive plan which results from a change in conditions as
applying to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-13-9: ZONE BOUNDARY CHANGE, PUBLICATION OF NOTICE:
(Rep. By Ord. 284, 6-10-2021)
CHAPTER 14
ANNEXATION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-14-1: Commission Recommendation To Council Required
8-14-2: Public Hearing
8-14-1: COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION TO COUNCIL REQUIRED:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the city council shall request
and shall receive a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission on
the proposed planning and zoning ordinance changes for the unincorporated area.
The city council shall not hold a public hearing, give notice of a proposed
hearing, and not take action upon the plan, amendment or repeal until
recommendations have been received from the planning and zoning commission.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
8-14-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Commission Hearing: The planning and zoning commission shall conduct at
least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity
to be heard. The hearing shall not consider comments on annexation and shall be
limited to the proposed plan and zoning changes.
   B.   Notice Requirements:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time and
place, and a description of the proposed zoning changes for the unincorporated
area shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation within the jurisdiction of the city. Additional notice shall be
provided by mail to property owners and residents within the land being
considered; three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land
being considered; and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed
change as determined by the planning and zoning commission.
      2.   The applicant requesting a zoning map amendment shall sign an
affidavit stating that he has notified in writing the required residents and
property owners as to his purpose of application, time and place of hearing,
residents serviced, and date of service. A copy of notification shall be
attached to the affidavit.
      3.   When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners
or residents, in lieu of the mail notification, three (3) notices in the
official newspaper or paper of general circulation in the city is sufficient;
provided, that the third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing. Following the planning and zoning commission's hearing, if the said
commission makes a material change from what was presented at the public
hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the commission
forwards the proposal with its recommendations to the city council.
   C.   Council Hearing:
      1.   The city council, prior to adoption, amendment or repeal of the plan
or zoning ordinance, shall conduct at least one public hearing using the same
notice and hearing procedures as the planning and zoning commission.
      2.   Following the hearing of the city council, if the city council makes
a material change in the plan or zone, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the city council adopts the plan or zone.
   D.   Amendment Following Annexation: Concurrently or immediately following
the adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the city council shall amend the
planning and zoning regulation as shall be found to be necessary. (Ord. 223, 7-
13-2006)
CHAPTER 15
VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
SECTION:
8-15-1: Petition Procedure
8-15-2: Publication And Filing Costs
8-15-1: PETITION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Petition Required: Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing
subdivision, plat or part thereof, within the city's "area of impact", a public
right of way or easement, or desiring to dedicate a street right of way or
easement shall complete and file a petition with the city clerk.
   B.   Contents Of Petition: The petition for vacation shall set forth the
particular circumstance of the request to vacate; contain a legal description
of the platted area or property to be vacated and the names of the persons
affected thereby. In the case where lots have been sold in a platted area, the
petition should include an acknowledged written statement from each of the
owners of the aforesaid sold lots indicating whether or not they are in
agreement with the proposed vacation.
   C.   Administration Action: Upon receipt of the completed petition, the city
clerk shall affix the date of petition acceptance thereon. The city clerk shall
place the petition on the agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting
of the planning and zoning commission.
   D.   Public Hearing: The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public
hearing and make recommendations on all petitions for vacation of an existing
subdivision, plat or part thereof inside or within the city's "area of impact",
and notice of said public hearing shall be given, by certified mail with return
receipt, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing to all
property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the area
described in the petition. Such notice of public hearing shall also be
published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper
of the city, the last of which shall not be less than seven (7) days prior to
the date of said hearing.
   E.   City Council Recommendation: Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of
the petition for vacation, the planning and zoning commission shall transmit
its recommendation to the city council. Said commission may recommend that the
vacation be granted or it may recommend a modification to the vacation, or it
may recommend that the vacation be denied.
   F.   Action By Council: The city council, prior to approving, modifying or
denying the vacation, shall conduct a public hearing using the same notice and
hearing procedures as the planning and zoning commission. Whenever public
rights of way or lands are vacated, the city council shall provide adjacent
property owners with a quitclaim deed for the vacated rights of way in such
proportions as are prescribed by law.
   G.   Petition For Dedication: Petition for dedication shall set forth the
particular circumstances of the request to dedicate, contain a legal
description of the property to be dedicated and the names of the persons
affected thereby.
   H.   Council Action: When considering a petition for dedication procedures,
the city council may approve, deny or modify the petition. When a dedication is
approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed or a bond
furnished assuring the construction prior to acceptance of any dedication of
the land, the owner shall furnish to the city council a deed describing and
conveying such lands to be recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 223, 7-13-
2006)
8-15-2: PUBLICATION AND FILING COSTS:
All publication and filing costs shall be at the expense of the petitioner.
(Ord. 223, 7-13-2006)
TITLE 9
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Authority
9-1-3: Purpose
9-1-4: Jurisdiction
9-1-5: Interpretation
9-1-6: Administration
9-1-7: Enforcement
9-1-8: Combining Of Permits
9-1-9: Amendments
9-1-10: Severability
9-1-11: Violations And Penalties
9-1-12: Appeals And Request For Rehearing
9-1-13: Filing Fees
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
FAIRFIELD. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-2: AUTHORITY:
The regulations of this title are authorized by Idaho Code title 50, chapter
13; title 67, chapter 65; and Idaho constitution article XII, section 2, as
amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to provide for:
   A.   The harmonious development of the area.
   B.   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with other
existing or planned streets and roads.
   C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air, and recreation.
   D.   Adequate water drainage and sanitary facilities.
   E.   The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services.
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
   F.   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created and improved; and
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections or other
facilities shall be installed as condition precedent to the approval of the
plot.
   G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat.
   H.   The administration of this title by defining the procedures for the
equitable review and approval of all plats and subdivisions covered by this
title. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-4: JURISDICTION:
This title shall apply to the subdividing and developing of all land within the
incorporated territory of the city, including the property within the areas of
impact as defined in
title 8, chapter 7 of this code, and under the requirements of Idaho Code
section 50-1306, as amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   All subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval by
the city council and shall comply with the provisions of this title. This title
shall supplement all other regulations, and where at variance with other laws,
regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive requirements shall
apply.
   B.   This title shall not apply to any subdivision created and forming a
part of any lot or lots forming a part of any subdivision created and recorded
prior to the effective date hereof, except for the further dividing of lots;
nor is it intended by this title to repeal (except as herein provided),
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of
other laws, ordinances or regulations or with private restrictions placed upon
property by deed, covenant or other private agreements, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. (Ord. 165, 7-30-
1992)
9-1-6: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Planning And Zoning Commission: The city council shall appoint a
planning and zoning commission to carry out the provisions as herein specified.
The commission shall receive and make recommendations on all subdivision
applications or other issues related to city planning and zoning.
   B.   Council Action: In the event the commission fails to act or carry out
its responsibilities according to the regulations contained herein, the city
council shall assume all the duties of the commission as herein specified in
relation to the application or issue concerned. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-7: ENFORCEMENT:
No subdivision plat required by this title or the Idaho Code shall be admitted
to the public land records of the county or recorded by the county recorder
until such subdivision plan has received final approval by the city council. No
public board, agency, commission, official or other authority shall proceed
with the construction of any of the public improvements required by this title
until the final plat has received the approval by the council. (Ord. 165, 7-30-
1992)
9-1-8: COMBINING OF PERMITS:
The planning and zoning commission is hereby required to combine all permits
which may be required in this title and previously or subsequently adopted city
ordinances which are relative to land development into one permit application
and processing procedure. In conjunction with a combined permit, the commission
shall coordinate methods of approval with the respective departments for the
purpose of reducing errors, misunderstanding, confusion and unnecessary delay
for everyone involved. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-9: AMENDMENTS:
The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this title in the manner prescribed by Idaho Code
to better serve the city and outlying community. A proposed amendment,
supplement, or repeal may be originated by the council, planning and zoning
commission or by petition from the public at large. In all cases, the proposal
shall be reviewed by the commission with a recommendation made to the council
before any action is taken. Adequate public notice shall be given to obtain
comments from the public, either for or against, prior to any action taken.
(Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of
this title is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall affect only that part so held invalid. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-1-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Penalties for failure to comply with the provisions of this title shall be as
follows: Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense. The landowner,
tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council or
any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or of the Idaho
Code. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992; amd. Ord. 254, 1-15-2015)
9-1-12: APPEALS AND REQUEST FOR REHEARING:
See the provisions of
title 8, chapter 12 of this code. (Ord. 267, 3-17-2016)
9-1-13: FILING FEES:
Those applications referred to in this title may have a fee established for the
processing of the application. The fees shall be paid to the city. No action
can be taken on an application until all applicable fees have been paid in
full. Fees shall be established by resolution passed and adopted by the city
council. (Ord. 267, 3-17-2016)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Interpretation Of Terms
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   The present tense includes the past or future tense, the singular
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular;
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; and the word
"should" is preferred; and
   C.   The masculine shall include the feminine. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ADMINISTRATOR: A person who is legally vested with the right of administration
of this title.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
BUILDING: A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or more
families, or a structure designed or used for occupancy by people for
commercial or industrial uses.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: An imaginary line established by subdivision regulation
and zoning ordinances requiring all buildings to be setback a certain distance
from lot lines.
BUILDING SITE: An area proposed or provided and improved by grading, filling,
excavation or other means for erecting foundations or pads for buildings.
CITY: The city of Fairfield, Idaho, as specified by city ordinance.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission, as appointed by the city
council to administer this title, having jurisdiction over the parcel of land
under consideration.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An adopted document that herein may be referred to as a
comprehensive plan or comprehensive development plan. The document shall show
the general location and extent of present and proposed development, including,
but not limited to: housing, industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks,
schools and other community facilities.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of: a) undivided interest in common real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof; together with b) a separate interest in real property, in an interest
or interests in real property or in any combination thereof.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Fairfield, Idaho.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder.
COVENANT: A written promise or pledge.
CULVERT: A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or driveway.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated either by ordinance, resolution, or entry in the
official minutes, or by the recording of a plat showing such dedication.
DEVELOPER: Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or other structure proposed or built for occupancy
by people.
   Prefab Dwelling Unit: A building or other structure proposed or built for
occupancy by people that is designed for initial transportation on streets and
highways which arrives at a site where it is installed on a permanent
foundation.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to
use land for specific purposes; also, a right acquired by prescription.
ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional
engineering.
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, or watercourse or other body of water which has been or may be
covered by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The floodplain includes the
channel, floodway and floodway fringe, as described below along with other
terms.
   Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
   Designated Floodway: A floodway whose limits have been designated and
established.
   Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by
overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
   Flood Of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   Floodway: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the floodplain
adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
floodwater of any watercourse.
   Floodway Encroachment Lines: The lines limiting a designated floodway.
   Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway
encroachment lines limiting a designated floodway. Such areas will include
those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by a flood of 100-year
frequency but which may be developed for use under land use regulations without
material effect upon the floodwater levels. Such areas are characterized by
shallow flood depths and low velocities of water flow.
GOVERNING BODY: The mayor and city council of the city of Fairfield, Idaho.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or federal
agency.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical construction
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision, the size of which consists of fifty
(50) or more lots or dwelling units.
LOT: A parcel, plot, tract or other land area of suitable size as required in
this title and the existing zoning ordinance; and created by subdivision for
sale, transfer or lease.
LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street, highway,
alley, road or other rights of way.
LOT TYPES: As used in this title, are as follows:
   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
   Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only one
street.
   Reversed Lot: A lot with frontage on a side street or other right of way.
   Through Lot: A lot with frontage on more than one street other than a corner
lot; also known as double frontage lots.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed after June 15, 1976, and in
accordance to HUD/FHA manufactured home construction and safety standards and
section 39-4105, Idaho Code, which is designed to be used as a permanent
residential dwelling. For clarification, this definition excludes mobile homes,
recreational vehicles and park trailers.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed for manufactured home
residential use on individual lots under individual ownership.
MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures generally constructed
prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service connections and
made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on their own running gear
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a permanent
foundation, as defined by Idaho Code section 39-4105.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A park designed and intended for purposes of rental spaces
where residence is in mobile homes exclusively.
OPEN SPACE: An area open to the sky for outdoor recreation activity. Streets,
buildings, or other covered structures are not included in computing these
areas.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat of record on
file in the office of the county recorder, or any unplatted contiguous parcel
of land held in one ownership and of record at the effective date hereof.
OWNER: The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the
subdivider or his surety to the city clerk which guarantees that the subdivider
will perform all actions required by an approved plat, and provides that if the
subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an approved
plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of the
bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the approved plat.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION: A use or a combination of residential,
commercial and industrial uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a
unit under single ownership or control, which is developed for the purpose of
selling or renting individual lots or estates, whether fronting on private or
dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more principal buildings as
governed by the zoning ordinance. The requirements of this title may be
modified by the city council upon recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission to achieve the best possible planned development for the specific
site under consideration.
PLAT: The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite or
other tract of land or a replatting of such, including certifications,
descriptions and approvals.
   A. Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by maps or drawings of a
proposed subdivision as required in this title; and
   B. Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by maps of drawings of an
approved subdivision development, the original and one copy of which is filed
with the county clerk and recorder.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Structure for the use and benefit of the community,
including, but not limited to, a school, hospital, church or cultural building.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A residential development designed for sitting
recreational vehicles on individual spaces that are rented or leased.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a dedicated street or partial street and
adjacent property which is reserved or held in public ownership for future
street extensions or widening.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way,
which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street right of way outside the street surface
which is improved for pedestrian use.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Shall be the specifications as may be specified in
this title or as officially adopted by the city.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also
includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard,
lane, place and other such terms.
   Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
   Arterial: A street designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy
traffic.
   Collector: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from
minor to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
   Commercial: A street designated for the purpose of providing traffic
movement in a commercial area.
   Cul-De-Sac: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not
having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
   Dead End: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not
having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
   Frontage: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street,
which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
   Industrial: A street designated for the purpose of providing traffic
movement in an industrial area.
   Loop: A minor street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.
   Minor: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to
abutting properties.
   Partial: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required
street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.
   Private: A street which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to one or
more properties; however, not accepted for public dedication or maintenance.
   Side Street: A secondary street that provides access to a corner lot of
which the principal building is not oriented toward.
SUBDIVIDER: The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions in this title. The subdivider need not be the owner of the property;
however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient proprietary
rights in the property to represent the owner.
SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract, or parcel
of land into more than two (2) parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership
or development, which shall also include the dedication of public streets and
the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. However, this title shall not
apply to any of the following:
   A.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does not
reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not change the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
   B.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of decedent or a
court decree for the distribution of property;
   C.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined
and allowed in the Idaho Code;
   D.   Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan;
   E.   The acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in
conformance with the comprehensive plan; and
   F.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage of the
properties involved.
SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land surveyor to
do professional surveying.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, stormwater and similar facilities providing services to and used by
the public.
VACATION: When a person desires to vacate any lot, tract, street, alley, road,
highway, common plot or any part thereof, such person shall follow the
procedures found in Idaho Code section 50-1301 et seq.
VARIANCE: A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where
such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing
to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.
VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in
relation to a larger area.
WATERCOURSE: A natural depression or channel which gives direction to a current
of water at any time of the year.
(Ord. 165, 7-30-1992; amd. Ord. 254, 1-15-2015; Ord. 267, 3-17-2016)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Administration
9-3-2: Subdivision Approval Required
9-3-3: Preapplication
9-3-4: Preliminary Plat Procedure
9-3-5: Combined Preliminary And Final Plat
9-3-6: Final Plat
9-3-7: Time Limitations
9-3-8: Reconsideration And Judicial Review
9-3-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The administrator shall have the duty of administering the regulations
contained in this title and shall prepare and require the use of such forms as
are necessary for the reasonable administration of these regulations. (Ord.
259A, 11-19-2015)
9-3-2: SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to subdivide or resubdivide land shall submit the
applications required in this chapter to the administrator. No final plat shall
be filed with the county recorder or improvements made on the property until
the plat has been acted upon by the commission and approved by the council. No
lots or parcels of land described by metes and bounds or otherwise shall be
sold or offered for sale until a final plat has been recorded in the office of
the county recorder. (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
9-3-3: PREAPPLICATION:
   A.   Application: Prior to the filing of an application for a preliminary
plat the subdivider shall submit a sketch plan to the administrator. The sketch
plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision
and shall include the following: (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
      1.   The general layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
      3.   Areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
(Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
   B.   Fee: At the time of submission of the preapplication a fee shall be
paid based on the fee schedule approved by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Administration Action: The administrator shall notify the subdivider
within thirty (30) days from the date of receiving an acceptable preapplication
as to the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal with this
title, and shall provide the necessary forms and checklist, as well as the
additional following concerns: (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
      1.   The compliance of the proposed development with existing local or
state policies, goals and objectives or development plans;
      2.   Determination of additional special permits or ordinance conflicts
such as rezoning, special development permit or variance that may be needed and
the determination of the manner that such requirements can be combined into one
permit;
      3.   Advise the applicant of any unique environmental or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property, such as areas that have been designated by the state as areas of
critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like; and
      4.   Consideration of the other local and state agencies that the
subdivider should contact before preparing a preliminary plat. (Ord. 165, 7-30-
1992)
9-3-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: Upon completion of the preapplication procedures, the
subdivider shall file with the administrator twelve (12) copies of the complete
subdivision application form and preliminary plat data as required in this
title. The applicant shall have the burden of persuasion as to compliance with
each of the applicable standards of this title. The city shall choose a legally
qualified surveyor or engineer to check the plat and comment on whether the
requirements of this code have been met prior to the administrator's
certification of the application for completeness and any subsequent public
hearings. The city shall collect from the applicant the actual fees and costs
billed to the city for the services performed by the surveyor or engineer prior
to noticing a hearing. Mailing cost of preapplication to departments and
agencies for review will also be collected from applicant.
   B.   Certification: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat and all other
required data, the administrator shall certify the application as complete and
affix the date of application acceptance thereon.
   C.   Review By Departments And Agencies:
      1.   Review: After certification of a preliminary plat application, the
administrator shall transmit for review and comment one copy of the application
and preliminary plat to Camas County, the local volunteer fire department, the
city engineer, the city public works director, county weed department, and
other appropriate local, state, and federal departments and agencies such as
the school district, sheriff's department, public health district, utility
companies, soil conservation district, and the state highway department. The
review period shall be forty five (45) days.
      2.   Compilation Of Recommendations: The administrator shall compile the
recommendations received and shall advise the subdivider of any administrative
recommendations for plat changes. The administrator shall also advise the
developer that staking or other identification on site may be required for
boundary lines, corners, centroids, centerlines, etc., of property boundaries,
proposed lots, building envelopes, streets, and other elements of the proposal
in order to better understand the design, neighborhood impact, and other
features of the proposal. (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
   D.   Content Of Preliminary Plat: The contents of a preliminary plat and
related information shall be in such a form as stipulated by the commission;
however, any additional maps or data deemed necessary by the commission may
also be required. The subdivider shall submit to the commission at least the
following:
      1.   Twelve (12) copies of the preliminary engineering plat of the
proposed subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter
stated; each copy of the preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall
have dimensions of not less than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x
24"), shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100'), shall show the drafting date, and shall indicate thereon, by
arrow, the generally northerly direction.
      2.   Twelve (12) sets of preliminary engineering plans including a master
utility map for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other required public
improvement maps; said engineering plans shall contain sufficient information
and detail to enable the commission to make a preliminary determination as to
conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable regulations, ordinances
and standards as outlined in chapter 6, "Special Development Subdivisions", of
this title. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992; amd. Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
      3.   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat on
a form prescribed by the commission.
      4.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development areas, such as hillside, planned
unit development, floodplains, cemetery, mobile home, large scaled development,
hazardous and unique areas of development along with a copy of the filed record
of survey of the real property complying with the current laws and rules
pertaining to the practice of the profession of land surveying in the state of
Idaho.
      5.   A map of and a complete list of the owners of record of all property
within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundary lines of the property
and two (2) sets of stamped envelopes addressed to each such property owner.
      6.   A site report as required by the appropriate health district where
individual wells or septic tanks are proposed.
      7.   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenant, deed restrictions, and/
or articles of incorporation and bylaws of homeowners' association to be filed
with the final plat of the subdivision or if none, a statement that none are
proposed.
      8.   A statement as to whether or not a variance will be requested with
respect to any provision of this title describing the particular provision, the
variance requested, and the reason therefor.
   The preliminary plat, together with all application forms, fees, title
insurance reports, deeds, maps, and other documents and information reasonably
required by the administrator, shall constitute a complete subdivision
application.
   E.   Requirements Of Preliminary Plats:
      1.   The name of the proposed subdivision; which shall not be the same or
confusing with the name of any other subdivision in Camas County, Idaho, along
with the name, phone number and address of the owner(s) of record, the
subdivider, and the engineer, surveyor, or other person preparing the plat;
      2.   The scale, north arrow and date;
      3.   The legal description of the subdivision along with a survey of the
real property;
      4.   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision such as:
residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing; commercial,
industrial, recreational or agricultural; and showing of any sites proposed for
parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
      5.   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed
subdivision is a portion of larger holding intended for subsequent development;
      6.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surround area (1/2 mile minimum radius, scale optional);
      7.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the
adjacent land;
      8.   The location of proposed and existing streets, street names, rights
of way, including adjoining streets or roadways, lots and lot lines, easements,
including all approximate dimensions and including all proposed lot and block
numbering and proposed street names;
      9.   Building envelopes shall be shown on each lot all or part of which
is within a mapped floodplain or any lot that is adjacent to a river channel or
which will be created adjacent to the intersection of two (2) or more streets;
      10.   Contours shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope is
greater than ten percent (10%) and two foot (2') intervals where land slope is
ten percent (10%) or less, with an established bench mark, including location
and elevation;
      11.   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited to,
storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals, ditches, drainage, bridges,
culverts, water mains, fire hydrants, electric power lines, gas lines,
television cable lines, and their respective profiles or indicated alternative
methods;
      12.   Any dedications to the public and/or easements together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such;
      13.   Any additional information, plans and data as may be reasonably
required by the administrator, commission or council during the review process
and any additional information as specified in chapter 4 of this title; and
      14.   The boundaries of any floodplain and floodway shall be clearly
delineated and marked on the preliminary plat.
   F.   Fee: At the time of submission of the application for a preliminary
plat, a nonrefundable application fee shall be paid based on the fee schedule
approved by resolution of the city council. The subdivider shall also pay any
professional fees, including engineering, surveying, legal or other fees,
incurred by the city in reviewing the application. There shall be no additional
fee for the combining of the preliminary and final plat.
   G.   Commission Action: The commission shall hold a public hearing on all
preliminary plat subdivision applications pursuant to the notice and hearing
requirements as required by Idaho Code 67-6512.
      1.   Commission Findings: In determining the acceptance of a proposed
subdivision the commission shall consider the objectives of this title and at
least the following:
         a.   The conformance of the subdivision with the city's zoning
ordinance and comprehensive development plan;
         b.   The availability of public services to accommodate the proposed
development;
         c.   The continuity of the proposed development with capital
improvements;
         d.   The public financial capability of supporting services for the
proposed development; and
         e.   The other health, safety or environmental problems that may be
brought to the commission's attention.
      2.   Commission Action On Preliminary Plat: After the public hearing, the
commission shall review the preliminary plat and supporting data, testimony of
the subdivider and public. The commission shall recommend approval, recommend
with specific conditions, or recommend denial of the preliminary plat and the
commission's findings and reasons for such action shall be stated in writing
and provided to the council and applicant. The preliminary plat application and
plat, along with all other data and a copy of the commission's findings and
recommendations shall be transmitted to the council. Upon granting or denying a
preliminary plat, the commission shall specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for its recommendation of approval, conditional
approval or denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval of the preliminary plat.
   H.   Council Action:
      1.   After receipt of a preliminary plat application from the commission,
the council shall hold a public hearing on the application pursuant to the
notice and hearing requirements as required by Idaho Code 67-6512. The council
shall consider the preliminary plat, subdivision application and information,
the recommendations of the commission, public testimony, and the evaluation
criteria set forth in subsection G1 of this section. In appropriate cases, the
council may table the application or remand the application back to the
commission to request, receive or consider additional information or data. The
council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application and make
written findings of fact and conclusions consistent with law and this title.
Upon granting or denying a preliminary plat application, the council shall
specify:
         a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         b.   The reasons for recommending approval, conditional approval or
denial; and
         c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain
approval of the preliminary plat.
      2.   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the council, the subdivider
shall prepare and receive approval of all final construction drawings, plans
and specifications by the city public works director and appropriate staff
prior to commencement of construction of the required improvements. (Ord. 259A,
11-19-2015)
9-3-5: COMBINED PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Requirements Of Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: The applicant may
request that the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and
final plat if the following exists:
      1.   Each lot meets all requirements of the Fairfield zoning ordinance
and this chapter;
      2.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots;
      3.   At least one lot shall have the required frontage on a dedicated and
improved public street provided each lot has access to dedicated and improved
public street that shall be shown on the face of the plat;
      4.   Each lot can be directly served by existing water and sewer lines;
      5.   The property has not been previously subdivided;
      6.   No streets or utilities need to be installed or improved to the
boundary of each lot and no other improvements required under this title need
to be installed by the subdivider;
      7.   No major special development considerations are involved, such as
development in a floodplain, wetland, hillside development or the like; and
      8.   No waivers may be requested under this chapter for combined
preliminary and final plat approval.
   B.   Application: The subdivider shall file a preliminary and final plat
application as required under sections
9-3-4 through
9-3-6 of this chapter, which shall be deemed the preliminary and final plat
applications under this chapter, together with all information required by this
chapter along with such additional information as deemed necessary by the city
planning administrator, commission or council during the review process.
   C.   Commission Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: The
application shall be placed upon a regular commission agenda and duly noticed
as a public hearing pursuant to the notice and hearing requirements as required
by Idaho Code 67-6512. Upon approval by the commission to accept the
applicant's request for combination preliminary and final plat, the commission
shall review the application and recommend to the city council approval,
conditional approval or denial of the application using the evaluation criteria
set forth in subsection
9-3-4G1 of this chapter. The commission's written recommendation to council
shall include the findings required by subsection
9-3-4G2 of this chapter.
   D.   Council Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: After receipt of
a combined preliminary and final plat application from the commission, the
council shall hold a public hearing on the application pursuant to the notice
and hearing requirements as required by Idaho Code 67-6512. The council shall
consider the plat, subdivision application and information, the recommendations
of the commission, public testimony, and the evaluation criteria set forth in
subsection
9-3-4G1 of this chapter. In appropriate cases, the council may table the
application or remand the application back to the commission to request,
receive or consider additional information or data. The council shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application and make written findings of
fact and conclusions consistent with law and this chapter. The findings of fact
and conclusions of law shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval, conditional approval or disapproval.
      3.   The actions, if any, the applicant could take to gain approval of
the proposal.
(Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
9-3-6: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat and construction of all required improvements, the subdivider
shall cause the subdivision to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and title 50, chapter 13, Idaho
Code. The subdivider shall submit to the administrator the following:
      1.   Required number of sets of the final plat, which quantity shall be
determined by the administrator.
      2.   Three (3) sets of "as constructed" drawings and specifications,
certified as complete by the project engineer of all public streets, water,
sewers, sidewalks and all utilities and required improvements.
      3.   A current title report for the land to be subdivided.
      4.   When submitted to the city clerk for signature, the final plat shall
bear all required certificates, acknowledgments and signatures, except those of
the city and county recorder.
   B.   Content Of Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho
Code. The reverse of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the
drawing. The final plat shall include at least the following:
      1.   Tract boundary lines, property lines, lot lines, street right of way
and center lines, building envelopes as required on the preliminary plat, lot
area of each lot, boundaries of floodplain and floodway, all with bearings and
accurate dimensions in feet and decimals thereof, in degrees and minutes and
radius, arcs, central angles, tangents, and chord lengths of all curves to the
accuracy required by Idaho Code 55-1911;
      2.   Names and locations of all adjoining subdivisions, tax lots and
parcels;
      3.   Location, dimension, and purpose of all easements, public and
private;
      4.   The lots numbered consecutively throughout each block;
      5.   The outline of any property other than a street, alley, or easement
which is offered for dedication to public use, fully dimensioned by distances
and bearings with the area marked "Dedicated To The City Of Fairfield For
Public Use" or similar language, approved by the council, together with any
other descriptive language with regard to the precise nature of the use of the
land so dedicated;
      6.   The title shall include the name of the subdivision, city, county
and state, and the location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, township, and range;
      7.   Scale, north arrow, and date;
      8.   Location, width, names of all existing or dedicated streets, and
other public ways within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
      9.   A provision in the owner's certificate referencing the county
recorder's instrument;
      10.   Instrument number and applicable reference to where the condominium
declaration(s), articles of incorporation of homeowners' association,
declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions or similar documents, if
any, governing the subdivision are recorded;
      11.   Certificate by registered surveyor preparing the map certifying to
the accuracy of surveying plat;
      12.   Certification of owner(s) of record and all holders of security
interest(s) of record with regard to said property;
      13.   Certification and signature of the city clerk verifying that the
subdivision has been approved by the council;
      14.   Notation of any additional restrictions or conditions imposed by
the council on the real property;
      15.   Sanitary restrictions placed upon the lots by the state.
      16.   Other notations reasonably required by the council.
   C.   Fee: At the time of submission of the application for a final plat, a
nonrefundable application fee shall be paid based on the fee schedule approved
by resolution of the city council. The subdivider shall also pay any
professional fees, including engineering, surveying, legal or other fees,
incurred by the city in reviewing the application.
   D.   Commission Review:
      1.   Commission Action: The commission shall be required to act on a
final plat only if the council finds it necessary to remand said final plat to
the commission for a recommendation.
   E.   Council Action: The final plat shall be placed upon a regular council
meeting agenda. The council shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the
final plat application pursuant to the notice and hearing requirements as
required by Idaho Code 67-6512. The final plat shall conform to the approved
preliminary plat, all requirements of this chapter, all conditions placed upon
preliminary plat by the commission and council, and all requirements of Idaho
law. The council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the final plat
and shall make written findings of fact and conclusions consistent with law and
this chapter with regard thereto. The findings of fact and conclusions of law
shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval, conditional approval or disapproval.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to gain approval
of the proposal.
   F.   Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the council,
the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, and the inclusion of the
following signatures on the final plat to the county recorder for recording:
(Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
      1.   Certification and signature of the council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
      2.   Certification and signature of the city engineer verifying that the
subdivision meets the city requirements and has been approved by the council;
and
      3.   Certification and signature of local or state health agency
verifying compliance with all health requirements. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992; amd.
Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
   Two (2) copies of the final plat as approved by the council and signed by
the city clerk shall be retained by the city.
   G.   Conditions: The council may attach conditions to the approval of a
preliminary plat application or a final plat application. The subdivider has
the duty of compliance with such reasonable conditions laid down by the
commission or council for design, dedication or construction of on site or off
site improvements, and restrictive use of land, or other reasonable conditions
in order to conform with the requirements of this chapter or other ordinances,
or the physical and economic development of the city, or the safety and general
welfare of future lot owners within said subdivision, neighboring properties,
or the public at large.
   H.   Acceptance Of Dedications: Approval of the final plat by the council
shall constitute acceptance of all dedications for public streets, rights of
way, easements, and other lands dedicated for public purpose or use as shown
thereon. As a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or required
improvements, the council shall require that the subdivider install said
improvements in accordance with the city of Fairfield or other applicable
standards.
   I.   Improvement Guarantees: In lieu of the actual installation of public
improvements or corner monuments required by this title and/or Idaho Code title
50, chapter 13 prior to signing of the final plat, the council may permit the
subdivider to provide a financial guarantee. The amount shall be not less than
one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of improvement
construction as determined by the registered engineer on the project and shall
be verified by the city engineer. The subdivider shall pay any city engineer
review fees and provide a definite timetable for completion of said
improvements. The financial guarantee shall provide for forfeiture to the city
upon the failure by the developer to construct any or all of the improvements
according to the approved schedule. (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
9-3-7: TIME LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat Approval: The failure to obtain approval of a
preliminary plat application by the council within one year after the said
application is certified by the planning and zoning administrator shall cause
the application to be null and void. An extension of the preliminary plat
approval deadline may be granted by the city council if the following criteria
are met:
      1.   Appropriate extenuating circumstances outside the control of the
applicant must exist;
      2.   The applicant has shown good faith, effort and willingness to work
toward meeting the ordinance requirements; and
      3.   The request for extension must be made to the city council in
writing at least forty five (45) days prior to expiration of said deadline.
Extension of the deadline will be reviewed by the city council on a case by
case basis.
   B.   Final Plat Approval: The final plat shall be filed with the Camas
County recorder within one year after final plat approval by the council.
Failure to file said final plat within that time shall cause all approvals of
said final plat to be null and void. A single one year extension of the filing
deadline may be granted by the council with appropriate conditions provided
written request for such extension is filed with the city planning
administrator prior to the expiration of the original final plat approval.
      1.   No building permit shall be issued with regard to any parcel of land
within a proposed subdivision until the final plat has been recorded and a
certified copy of the final recorded plat filed with the city clerk.
      2.   The failure to obtain final plat approval by the council of an
approved preliminary plat within one year after approval of the preliminary
plat by the council shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to be
null and void. An extension of the preliminary plat approval deadline may be
granted by the city council if the following criteria are met:
         a.   Appropriate extenuating circumstances outside the control of the
applicant must exist; and
         b.   Signs of work and progress on the required improvements must be
evident; and
         c.   The request for extension must be made to the city council in
writing at least forty five (45) days prior to expiration of said deadline.
Extension of the deadline will be reviewed by the city council on a case by
case basis. (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
9-3-8: RECONSIDERATION AND JUDICIAL REVIEW:
   A.   Reconsideration Procedures: Any applicant or affected person may seek
reconsideration of the council's decision on an application for a preliminary
plat, final plat or combined preliminary/final plat by making a written request
for reconsideration to the administrator within fourteen (14) days of the
council's decision. The request must identify the specific deficiencies in the
decision for which reconsideration is sought. The council shall hold a public
hearing on the reconsideration request pursuant to the notice and hearing
procedures as required by Idaho Code 67-6512. Upon reconsideration, the council
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision. The council shall issue a written
decision to the applicant or affected person within sixty (60) days of receipt
of the request for reconsideration or the request shall be deemed denied. A
decision shall not be deemed final for purposes of judicial review unless the
process required by this section has been followed. The twenty eight (28) day
time frame for seeking judicial review is tolled until the date of the written
decision regarding reconsideration or the expiration of the sixty (60) day
reconsideration period, whichever occurs first.
   B.   The city will not sign any final plat for recording until the
reconsideration and judicial review period has expired. In the event a petition
for judicial review is filed, the city will suspend any expiration date set out
in this title. Site improvements and all other expenditures undertaken during
this period are undertaken at the applicant's sole and exclusive risk. The
council, at its discretion and with specific findings, may prohibit site
alteration work prior to the expiration of the reconsideration and judicial
review period. (Ord. 259A, 11-19-2015)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Minimum Requirements
9-4-2: Street Dedication
9-4-3: Street Location
9-4-4: Street Specifications
9-4-5: Street Names
9-4-6: Intersections
9-4-7: Pedestrian Walkways
9-4-8: Easements
9-4-9: Blocks
9-4-10: Lots
9-4-11: Planting Strips And Reserve Strips
9-4-12: Public Sites And Open Spaces
9-4-1: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth hereinafter in this chapter, and chapter 5 of this title; provided,
however, that any higher standards adopted by any highway district, state
highway department or health agency shall prevail over those set forth herein.
(Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-4-2: STREET DEDICATION:
Arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all cases;
in general, all other streets including alleys within any subdivision shall
also be dedicated to public use. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-3: STREET LOCATION:
Street and road location shall conform to the following: (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
   A.   Street Location And Arrangement: When a major street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall
conform to such plans.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
   C.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement
of streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to the
boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said
streets into adjacent areas. A reserve strip may be required and held in public
ownership. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
   D.   Street Continuation And Extension: The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall be such that said streets provide access to adjoining lands
and provide proper traffic circulation through existing or future subdivisions
unless otherwise approved by the council or department having jurisdiction over
such streets. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
   E.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to
topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
   F.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling, commercial and
industrial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and
off street loading and parking. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited in all
cases.
   G.   Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial
street, the council may require a frontage street, planting strip, or similar
design features.
   H.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall have a maximum length of
no greater than five hundred feet (500') from entrance to center of turnaround
and a minimum turnaround radius of eighty feet (80'), unless public access to
public lands or access to adjacent private land is determined appropriate by
the council. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
   I.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with this title and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of
the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street
shall be dedicated within such tract.
   J.   Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited except
within planned unit developments. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-4-4: STREET SPECIFICATIONS:
All streets in the subdivision must be platted and developed with a width,
alignment, and improvements such that the street is adequate to accommodate
existing and anticipated vehicular and pedestrian traffic and meets city
standards for the appropriate functional classification. Streets shall be
aligned in such a manner as to provide through and efficient access from and to
adjacent developments and properties and shall provide for the integration of
the proposed streets with the existing pattern.
   A.   Street Right Of Way Widths: Street and road right of way widths shall
conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive development plan and
the rules of the Idaho transportation department, and the highway district or
other government entity having jurisdiction. Minimum right of way standards are
as follows with those marked with an asterisk (*) to also include an additional
ten foot (10') easement on each side of roadway for snow removal: (Ord. 260,
12-9-2015)
 
Highway And Street Types Width
Expressway or freeway       160 - 260 feet
Major arterial              120 feet
Minor arterial              70 + 10 feet*
Collector street            60 + 10 feet*
Minor street                50 + 10 feet*
 
   B.   Street Grades: Street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%) on
either minor or collector streets, and six percent (6%) for arterial streets.
No street grade shall be less than three-tenths (0.3) per one hundred feet
(100').
   C.   Street Alignment:
      1.   Horizontal alignment: When street lines deflect from each other by
more than ten degrees (10°) in alignment, the centerlines shall be connected by
curve having a minimum radius of five hundred feet (500') for arterial streets,
three hundred feet (300') for collector streets and one hundred fifty feet
(150') for minor streets. Between reverse curves on minor streets, there shall
be a minimum tangent distance of one hundred feet (100') and two hundred feet
(200') on collector and arterial streets. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
      2.   Vertical alignment: Minimum sight distances shall be two hundred
feet (200') for minor streets and three hundred feet (300') for collector and
arterial streets. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-5: STREET NAMES:
The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
   A.   Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name except where
a new street is a continuation of an existing street. Street names that may be
spelled differently but sound the same as existing streets within Camas County,
Idaho, shall not be used.
   B.   All new streets shall be named as follows: streets having predominantly
east-west direction shall have phonetic names; streets having predominantly
north-south direction shall have numerical names; meandering streets shall be
named "Drive", "Lane", or "Path"; and cul-de-sacs shall be named "Circle",
"Court", or "Place". (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-6: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following:
   A.   Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°)
or as closely thereto as possible; in no case shall streets intersect at less
than eighty degrees (80°).
   B.   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another
vehicle when each is one hundred feet (100') from the center of the
intersection.
   C.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   D.   "T" Intersections: "T" intersections may be used wherever such design
will not restrict the free movement of traffic.
   E.   Centerline Offsets: Street centerlines shall be offset by a distance of
at least one hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
   F.   Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A nearly flat grade with
appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat
section shall be extended a minimum of one hundred feet (100') each way from
the intersections. An allowance of two percent (2%) maximum intersection grade
in rolling terrain, and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain, may be permitted.
(Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-7: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Right of way for pedestrian walkways may be required where necessary to obtain
convenient pedestrian circulation to schools, parks or shopping areas. The
pedestrian easement shall be at least ten feet (10') wide and extend throughout
the entire block. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-8: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines,
rear lot lines and side lot lines when deemed necessary. Total easement width
shall not be less than twelve feet (12') where lots adjoin. Unobstructed
drainageway easements shall be provided as required by the council.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, including, but not
limited to, drainageways, channels, or streams there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right of way which substantially conforms to
the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both,
as will be adequate for that purpose. The commission/council may require
additional setbacks from watercourse, applicable not only to buildings, but
also to any disturbance of the watercourse banks and edge to protect the
natural vegetation and other habitats while also protecting structures from
damage or loss due to erosion.
   C.   Provisions for adequate snow storage and drainage may be required by
the commission/council. If such provision is deemed necessary wherever public
parking, public or private streets, or other uses requiring the removal of snow
are identified, the developer shall provide specific site locations protected
for the storage of snow and the consequences of melt water. If an off site
location is identified, developer shall provide evidence of commitment, to be
so designated on the plat, to allow the storage of snow. Snow storage areas
shall not be less than thirty three percent (33%) of parking, sidewalk, and
driveway areas. This area shall not be designated between any property line and
setback line. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-9: BLOCKS:
   A.   Every block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots,
except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural feature or subdivision
boundary. Blocks shall not be less than three hundred feet (300') long in all
cases, nor exceed four hundred feet (400') in length.
   B.   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to adequate sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated; the zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; the need
for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and
the limitations and opportunities of topography. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-4-10: LOTS:
Lots shall conform to the following:
   A.   Zoning: The lot width, depth and total area shall conform to the
minimum standards for lots in the zoning district in which the subdivision is
planned.
   B.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both streets.
   C.   Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to
straight streets and shall conform to the radius of curved streets.
   D.   Width Related To Length: Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided.
   E.   Uninhabitable Areas: Land subject to flooding or which shall otherwise
be deemed to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential purposes or
for any other uses that may increase or create a danger to health, life, or
property or which may increase or create a flood hazard. Such land within a
subdivision shall be set aside for other uses such as parks, greenbelts or
other open space. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-11: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following: (Ord. 260,
12-9-2015)
   A.   Planting Strips: Planting strips shall be required to be placed next to
incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial, or industrial
uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screens shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') wide, and shall not be a part of the normal
roadway right of way or utility easement.
   B.   Reserve Strips:
      1.   Private: Privately held reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
      2.   Public: A one foot (1') reserve may be required to be placed at or
along "stub", "dead end", or "half" streets which terminate at subdivision
boundaries. These reserves shall be deeded in fee simple to the city for future
street widening. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-4-12: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following:
   A.   Public Uses: Where a proposed park, playground, undeveloped open space,
school or other public use shown on the comprehensive development plan is
located in whole or part within a subdivision, a suitable area for this purpose
shall be dedicated to the public or reserved for public purchase. If within two
(2) years of plat recording, the purchase is not agreed on, the reservation
shall be canceled or shall automatically cease to exist. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
   B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the subdivision. (Ord. 165,
7-30-1992)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Purpose
9-5-2: Responsibility For Plans
9-5-3: Required Public Improvements
9-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be constructed by the subdivider as
conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the procedures and
responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and
agencies concerned with the administration, planning, design, construction, and
financing of public facilities and to further establish procedures for assuring
compliance with these requirements. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-5-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision
to have prepared by an engineer licensed in the state of Idaho, a complete set
of construction plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications, and
other supporting data, for all required public streets, utilities and other
facilities. Such construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which
have been approved with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in
conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by
the city engineer and other responsible public agencies. All construction plans
shall be prepared in accordance with the public agencies' standards or
specification. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
9-5-3: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
   A.   Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with section 50-1303,
Idaho Code.
   B.   Streets And Alleys:
      1.   All streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications adopted by the council. Vertical curbs and gutters
shall be constructed on collector and arterial streets. The following items are
relative to street improvements within the boundaries of the subdivision:
         a.   Route for boundary surveys of the dedicated right of way;
         b.   Construction survey of line and grade;
         c.   Installation of sidewalks, if applicable;
         d.   Installation of curbs and gutters, if applicable;
         e.   Preparation of the subgrade;
         f.   Inspection of the roadway base course;
         g.   Inspection of all phases of construction to assure compliance
with applicable standards and specifications.
      2.   Curbs and gutters shall be required on minor streets and shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the
council.
      3.   Streets may be required to provide access to adjoining lands and
provide proper traffic circulation through existing or future neighborhoods.
      4.   Street signs shall be installed by the subdivider as a required
improvement of a type and design approved by the administrator and shall be
consistent with the type and design of existing street signs elsewhere in the
city.
   C.   Bridges: Whenever a proposed subdivision requires construction of a new
bridge, or will create substantial additional traffic which will require
construction of a new bridge or improvement of an existing bridge, said
construction or improvement shall be a required improvement by the subdivider.
Said construction or improvement shall be in accordance with adopted standard
specifications therefor.
   D.   Drainage Improvements: The subdivider shall submit with the preliminary
plat application such maps, profiles, and other data prepared by an engineer to
indicate the proper drainage of the surface water to natural drainage courses
or storm drains, existing or proposed. The location and width of the natural
drainage courses shall be shown as an easement to all owners within the
subdivision and the city on the preliminary and final plat. All natural
drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or be improved in a manner that will
increase the operating efficiency of the channel without overloading its
capacity. An adequate storm and surface drainage system may be a required
improvement in all subdivisions and shall be installed by the subdivider.
Culverts shall be required where all water or drainage courses intersect with
streets, driveways, or improved public easements and shall extend across and
under the entire improved width thereof including shoulders.
   E.   Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities are recommended
and may be required by the council in areas where overhead facilities would not
be compatible with the surrounding properties. Adequate provision for expansion
of such services within the subdivision or to adjacent lands including
installation of conduit pipe across and underneath streets shall be installed
by the subdivider prior to construction of street improvements.
   F.   Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the
public works department, highway district or state highway department.
   G.   Building Numbers Required: All principal dwelling units or buildings
shall have house or building numbers not less than four inches (4") tall, of a
color contrasting with the color of the background and visible by day and night
from the street at the point of driveway or other access from the street, or
directly in front of the building.
   H.   Water Supply System: When a proposed subdivision is to be serviced by a
public water supply system the subdivider shall perform, install, construct, or
otherwise complete at his sole expense installation of the water distribution
system within the subdivision, including water lines, control valves, meter
vaults, fire hydrants, and appurtenant facilities. Connections to the water
mains shall conform to the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction" and
be in accordance with existing procedures and policies of the city; and the
subdivider shall be liable for the payment of water assessment and hookup
charges as provided by city ordinances. The extension of water lines shall be
at the developer's expense and shall have the capacity and placement necessary
to serve property beyond the development. If the city requires a larger water
main to accommodate future development than the size of the line required for
the subdivision or development, the developer shall install the larger line
size required by the city. If there is no existing or accessible public water
supply system, the subdivider shall be required to install a water supply
system for the common use of the lots within the subdivision as approved by the
Idaho department of environmental quality, city council, and city engineer.
Individual wells may be permitted in accordance with the appropriate health
district standards.
   I.   Sanitary Sewer System: When a proposed subdivision is to be served by a
public sanitary sewage system the subdivider shall perform, install, construct,
or otherwise complete at his sole expense installation of the sanitary sewage
system within the subdivision, including sewers, manholes and other
appurtenances, and, if applicable, sewage pumping stations. Connections to the
sewers shall conform to the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction" and
be in accordance with existing procedures and policies of the city; and the
subdivider will be liable for the payment of sewer assessment and hookup
charges as provided by city ordinances. The extension of sewer lines shall be
at the developer's expense and shall have the capacity and placement necessary
to serve property beyond the development. If the city requires a larger sewer
main or increased lift station capacity to accommodate future development than
the size of the line required for the subdivision or development, the developer
shall install the larger line and/or lift station required by the city.
   Where it is determined that the subdivision cannot be feasibly connected
with an existing public or private sewer system or that a public or private
sewer system cannot be provided for the subdivision, then an approved disposal
system approved by the Idaho department of environmental quality, city council,
and city engineer will be authorized which shall comply with the appropriate
health district requirements.
   J.   Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be a required improvement at
intersections throughout the subdivision and within industrial parks and
commercial zones. All street lighting is to be in accordance with title 8 of
this code.
   K.   Private Improvements And Public Utilities: It shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to arrange and provide for the development,
installation, construction, or other improvements of private facilities and
public utilities within and for the subdivision in accordance with applicable
standards and requirements.
   L.   Construction Of Public Works:
      1.   The scope of this section is to define the respective areas of
responsibility of the subdivider and the city relative to the installation,
construction, or other improvements of public works en route to and within the
boundaries of a subdivision.
      2.   In certain instances, the city may require formal written agreement
with the subdivider that they more fully and specifically describe their
respective obligations and responsibilities.
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to complete at his
sole expense all the development and construction of public works for and
within his subdivision, except as specifically provided otherwise, to be the
obligation and responsibility of the city, or as may be accepted by the city as
being within the spirit and intent of its responsibilities.
      4.   The subdivider shall complete the installation or construction of
all different phases of public works for which he is responsible before the
city will accept any of them. This requirement may be satisfied by completion
of a phase if a phased development is called for in the approved development
plan.
   M.   Guarantee Of Completion: Prior to final plat approval the subdivider
shall have constructed all required improvements and secured a certificate of
completion from the city engineer. However, in cases where the required
improvements cannot be constructed due to weather conditions or other factors
beyond the control of the subdivider, the city council may accept in lieu of
any or all of the required improvements a performance bond filed with the city
clerk to ensure actual construction of the required improvements as submitted
and approved. Said performance bond shall be issued in an amount not less than
one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated costs of improvements as
determined by the city engineer. The subdivider shall pay any city engineer
review fees and provide a definite timetable for completion of said
improvements. The financial guarantee shall provide for forfeiture to the city
upon the failure by the developer to construct any or all of the improvements
according to the approved schedule.
   N.   Evidence Of Completion: Prior to final plat approval and acceptance by
the council of any improvements installed by the subdivider, two (2) sets of
"as constructed" plans and specifications certified by the subdivider's
engineer as complete and accurate shall be filed with the city engineer. The
city engineer shall certify the completion of the improvements and the
acceptance thereof and shall submit a copy of said certification to the
administrator and subdivider.
   O.   Reimbursement For Oversizing: In the event the city requires the
subdivider to install oversized pipelines or other excess facilities to make
provisions for present or future service needs in excess of the requirements
for the subdivision, the city shall reimburse the subdivider for the additional
costs of material and installation resulting therefrom.
   P.   Building Line Setback: In all new subdivisions the building line
setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the eaves drip line to the
property line. In the event that a new subdivision is located along a street
with existing residences, the setback line shall be not less than other
structures along the street and preferably should be set back as an average of
the existing structure.
   Q.   Side And Rear Lot Line Clearance: In all new subdivisions no building
of any nature shall be placed or constructed nearer than ten feet (10') from
eaves drip line to the property line. Where utility rights of way or other
easements are provided along property lines and lot lines, no structure of any
nature shall be permitted in such rights of way or easements, except for the
purpose provided.
   R.   Off Site Improvements: Where off site improvements are necessary to
provide required improvements or adequate infrastructure to a proposed
subdivision or where a subdivision is found by the council to create
substantial additional traffic or other off site impacts, such off site
improvements shall be constructed by the subdivider as a required improvement
for preliminary plat approval and final plat approval. Such improvements may
include, but are not limited to, bridges, intersections, streets, traffic
control devices, water mains and facilities, and sewer mains and facilities.
All such improvements shall be constructed prior to final plat approval and in
accordance with the applicable standard specifications of the city or the
governmental entity having jurisdiction there over. (Ord. 260, 12-9-2015)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Planned Unit And Condominium Subdivisions
9-6-3: Manufactured Home Subdivisions
9-6-4: Mobile Home Parks And Other Mobile Home/Manufactured Unit Regulations
9-6-5: Recreational Vehicle Parks
9-6-6: Large Scale Development Subdivisions
9-6-7: Cemetery Subdivisions
9-6-8: Subdivision Within Floodplain
9-6-9: Subdivision Within Area Of Critical Concern
9-6-10: Environmental
9-6-11: Violations And Penalties
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify the various types of special
developments that normally pose special concerns to the planning and zoning
commission and elected city officials when reviewing and acting upon
subdivision requests. Therefore, this outlines the general plan, submittal
requirements and design standards that shall be taken into consideration when
acting on special developments. The provisions herein are in addition to the
plan requirements and design standards that are required in chapters 3 through
5 of this title. The required information shall be submitted to the commission
with the preliminary plat. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-2: PLANNED UNIT AND CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
Planned unit and condominium developments are permitted in all zones and shall
be subject to requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance and also subject
to all provisions within this title.
   A.   Minimum Area: A planned unit development for the following principal
uses shall contain an area of not less than:
      1.   Two (2) acres or one city block for residential use, or for
manufactured home subdivision or mobile home parks. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
      2.   Three (3) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or
industrial use.
      3.   Seven (7) acres for commercial use and/or industrial use. (Ord. 165,
7-30-1992)
   B.   Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the commission with
a colored rendering of adequate scale to show the completed development that
will include at least the following: (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
      1.   Architectural style and building design;
      2.   Building materials and color;
      3.   Landscaping and drainage;
      4.   Screening; (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
      5.   Garbage areas; (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
      6.   Parking;
      7.   Open space; and
      8.   Any other pertinent feature of the proposed project. (Ord. 165, 7-
30-1992)
   C.   Private Streets: Private street construction standards shall be based
upon recommendations from the city engineer and commission. Adequate
construction standards may vary depending on the size of the development and
the demands placed on such improvements. Private streets may be utilized within
the project, subject to the requirements of chapter 4 of this title, when the
following requirements are met:
      1.   The commission, after recommendation from city staff and the fire
chief, finds that the design of the proposed streets, pedestrianways and off
street parking is adequate to protect public health, safety and welfare and
will adequately accommodate anticipated uses within the development, as well as
appropriately contribute to the city's need for a connected street network.
      2.   Private streets shall be owned by a homeowners' association and all
future repair and maintenance costs, including reconstruction, shall be borne
by the homeowners.
      3.   If the owners in the future should request that the private streets
be changed to public streets and no lots are rendered substandard as a result,
the owners do fully agree that, before acceptance of such streets, the owners
will bear full expense of reconstruction in making such streets conform to the
requirements applicable at that time. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
   D.   Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated
needs of boats, campers and travel trailers. For typical residential
development, one adequate space shall be provided every three (3) living units.
This may be reduced by the city council if there is a showing that the needs of
a particular development are less and upon the recommendation of the
commission.
   E.   Parking Space: Two (2) motor vehicle parking spaces shall be provided
for each living unit, plus one additional motor vehicle parking space shall be
provided for each three (3) living units.
   F.   Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size
and location to be determined by the type and service needed for the necessary
repair and maintenance of all common areas.
   G.   Open Space: The proposed development shall include not less than ten
percent (10%) of the gross area of the development, less city rights of way.
The open space shall be appropriate to the development and shall be of such
shape and area to be usable and convenient to the residents of the development
for individual family and/or group recreational activities.
   H.   Control During Development: Single ownership or control during
development shall be required and shall be built and constructed as planned.
The development must be completed within twelve (12) months of the date the
principal permit is issued. If additional time is required for construction of
the development, the additional time is to be requested as part of the original
application to the commission. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
   I.   Performance And Assurance: The developer shall provide a performance
bond or another form of assurance of the completion of project which is deemed
acceptable by the commission and the council. In the event the developer is
unable to complete the project as approved the proceeds of the bond may be used
as deemed appropriate by the council to either return the property to its
original condition or complete the project. Performance bond or another form of
assurance shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in subsection
9-5-3M of this title.
   J.   Fee: Based on fee schedule.
   K.   Lighting Plan: An outdoor lighting plan shall be provided and in
accordance with title 8, chapter 10, "Outdoor Lighting", of this code.
   L.   Approval Criteria: A PUD may be allowed in any zone; provided, that the
decision body makes the following findings:
      1.   The underlying zoning and other applicable regulations under this
title are met, except as the applicant has specifically requested modifications
to the standards as part of the PUD.
      2.   The proposed uses shall not be detrimental to present and potential
surrounding uses; nor shall they be detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the public. The physical features of the site, public
facilities, and existing adjacent developments and uses shall be considered.
      3.   The final development plan must be in conformance with the
preliminary plan.
      4.   The PUD must meet the general objectives of the city of Fairfield's
comprehensive plan.
      5.   A development agreement is required between the developer and the
city which delineates commitments of the developer to the city and of the city
to the developer including, but not limited to, assurances for public and
private improvements and maintenance of the same.
      6.   A PUD may be proposed in conjunction with an application to amend
the zoning map and the comprehensive plan.
   M.   Preapplication Review: The city staff and fire chief shall review said
plans and data as submitted and advise the developer as to the general
conformance or nonconformance of the proposed development with chapter 3,
"Subdivision Approval Procedure", of this title.
   N.   Preliminary Development Plan:
      1.   Application: Upon completion of the preapplication review, if the
developer elects to proceed with the PUD process, they shall pay all fees and
file with the city an application for a preliminary development plan and any
other required application with the following required information:
         a.   All necessary information as specified for a preliminary plat
under chapter 3, "Subdivision Approval Procedure", of this title.
         b.   If the applicant is requesting preliminary subdivision plat
approval concurrently with the preliminary PUD approval, a preliminary
subdivision plat shall be submitted.
         c.   A development schedule indicating to the best of applicant's
knowledge the approximate date on which construction of all phases of the
entire project can be expected to begin, the anticipated rate of development,
and completion date. The schedule, if approved by the commission, shall become
a part of the final development plan and shall be adhered to by the owner of
the property in the PUD and his successors in interest.
         d.   Any additional information required by the city staff or
commission.
      2.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review: The commission shall review
the plans for conformance with this chapter and set the date for a public
hearing. When a preliminary plat is to be considered as a part of the PUD, the
public hearings may be combined to fulfill the requirements of chapter 3,
"Subdivision Approval Procedure", of this title. After the public hearing, the
commission shall recommend to the city council approval, approval with
conditions, or disapproval of the PUD preliminary plat, if applicable.
      3.   Council Review: The council shall hold a second public hearing and
shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the PUD application. The
council shall also approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a
preliminary plat at this time, where applicable. Council's approval of the plan
shall be subject to the findings of this section.
   O.   Final Development Plan:
      1.   Submission: Within one year after approval of the preliminary
development plan, the applicant shall submit to the city a final development
plan for the entire PUD or a final development plan for the first phase of
development if the PUD has been approved for phased development. The applicant
shall submit final development plans for any subsequent phases within the time
limit specified in the approval of the preliminary development plan.
   The final development plan may be submitted to the commission upon approval
by the city with detailed improvement plans, including private street
construction, utility locations, drainage, dedications of easements and public
facilities, along with a proposed schedule for phasing. Any necessary
agreements for maintenance, etc., shall be prepared and submitted for review
and approval at this time. Items that shall be included in the final
development plan in addition to that required by the preliminary development
plan, or otherwise specified by law, and the following information may be
required to be shown on the plan:
         a.   Other plans and studies as required at preliminary approval such
as a grading plan, soils engineer report, traffic study, detailed landscaping
and buffering plans where required.
         b.   All necessary information and certificates as specified for a
final plat under chapter 3, "Subdivision Approval Procedure", of this title.
      2.   Commission Recommendations On Final Plan: The commission shall
recommend to the council approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval
of the final development plan. The commission shall base an approval on
evidence that the final development plan fulfills the requirements of the
preliminary PUD approval and all applicable requirements of the subdivision
title and of this code have been met.
      3.   Council Action On Final Plan: The council shall approve, approve
with modifications, or disapprove the final PUD plan and the final subdivision
plat or phasing proposal, where applicable. Approval of the final plan shall
constitute the requirements for the land in the PUD. Any subsequent changes
from the final plan shall be subject to approval by the commission and the city
council. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-3: MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   General: Manufactured home subdivisions shall in general be treated the
same as any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set
forth in the zoning ordinance and also subject to the following special
requirements. Review of such subdivision applications shall be in accordance
with the procedures and requirements specified in chapter 3 of this title.
   B.   Special Requirements: Manufactured home subdivisions shall be subject
to the following special requirements:
      1.   Development as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area
for the planned development of two (2) acres. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
      2.   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided.
      3.   The site shall be suitable for residential development, and not be
subject to hazards or nuisances such as objectionable smoke, noxious odors,
unusual noise or the possibility of flooding or erosion.
      4.   Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste
disposal.
      5.   Protection of existing ground cover.
      6.   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas, and
existing natural or manmade barriers.
      7.   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for
the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
      8.   It is recommended to consider the inclusion of a special building,
either separate from or a part of project facilities, which shall be available
to park occupants for meetings or recreational purposes.
   C.   Definition Of Manufactured Home:
      1.   "Manufactured home" means a structure, constructed after June 15,
1976, and in accordance with the HUD/FHA manufactured home construction and
safety standards and section 39-4105, Idaho Code, which is designed to be used
as a permanent residential dwelling.
   D.   Building Permit:
      1.   No manufactured home may be moved in without having first an
approved building permit and presenting a building plan to the city planning
administrator and building official. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
      2.   The building permit fee shall be based on the fee schedule in effect
at the time the building permit is issued. The building permit fee shall be
established by the council and may be adjusted from time to time. (Ord. 165, 7-
30-1992)
   E.   Placement Standards: Manufactured homes placed in manufactured home
subdivision shall be placed in conformance with the following standards:
      1.   The manufactured home shall have a continuous perimeter skirting
which meets one of the following standards:
         a.   Metal skirting of the same or similar appearance as the exterior
of the manufactured home. If metal skirting is used, the wooden supporting
members shall be separate from the ground by at least two inches (2") using
galvanized stakes or similar metal members. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
         b.   If three-eighths inch (3/8") exterior grade plywood skirting is
used, any wood shall be separated from the ground by three inches (3") of metal
or concrete.
         c.   Continuous concrete or masonry block. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
      2.   All plumbing, electric and gas service connections shall be made in
accordance with applicable Idaho state codes, and inspected by the proper
authorities.
      3.   Upon removal of the manufactured home, the owner of the property
shall remove all accessory structures and additions to the manufactured home,
permanently disconnect sewer, water and other utilities unless otherwise
authorized by the city. In the event the owner fails to accomplish said work
within thirty (30) days from the date on which the manufactured home is moved
from its foundation, the city may perform such work and place a lien against
the property for the cost of such work. Said lien may be initiated by the city
council. This condition shall not apply in the event the manufactured home is
replaced on the original foundation, by another approved manufactured home
within thirty (30) days of the original unit's removal.
   F.   Setback Standards: The minimum lot size for a manufactured home or
constructed home shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet with an eighty foot
(80') minimum frontage width, excluding any preexisting city lot of lesser
dimension. There shall be no less than a five foot (5') space from foundation,
including any part of attachment of said foundation to property line in rear
and no less than fifteen feet (15') in front and no less than fifteen feet
(15') on either side including add ons or attachments. The setback from any
abutting public street right of way shall be at least twenty feet (20') from
the property line.
   G.   Fee: Based on the fee schedule. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-4: MOBILE HOME PARKS AND OTHER MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED UNIT REGULATIONS:
Mobile home parks shall in general be treated the same as any residential
subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth in the zoning
ordinance and also subject to the same special requirements as the manufactured
home subdivisions in addition to the following stipulations. Review of mobile
home park applications shall be in accordance with the procedures and
requirements specified in chapter 3 of this title.
   A.   General:
      1.   Porch Or Deck: Each mobile home shall have a porch or deck at least
six feet by eight feet (6' x 8'). Such deck or porch shall provide a safe
access to the mobile home and shall be maintained in a safe condition.
      2.   Billing For Utility Service: Each mobile home in the mobile home
park shall be billed separately for utility service provided by the city unless
the owner of the mobile home park chooses to receive a single bill for services
provided to each mobile home.
      3.   Distance Requirements: Each mobile home shall be no less than five
feet (5') between the mobile home and the property line in the rear of the unit
and not less than fifteen feet (15') between the mobile home and the property
line in the front of the unit, including any part of the mobile home or an
attachment thereto. The setback from any abutting public street right of way
shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the property line. No detached
accessory structure may be located closer than three feet (3') from the rear or
side lot line or any lot line abutting a property line or another mobile home
lot.
      4.   Screening: Screening from adjacent areas, other than parks of the
same type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas and
existing natural or manmade barriers.
      5.   Access To Public Street: A mobile home park must have two (2) points
of access to a public street or streets having not less than sixty feet (60')
of right of way width. Each park shall have not less than sixty feet (60') of
frontage on a public street, except as authorized by the commission. No mobile
home space shall be located in such a manner that a public street must be used
to maneuver the mobile home into that space.
      6.   Service Buildings: Service buildings which house sanitation
facilities shall be permanent structures, complying with all applicable city
ordinances and state statutes regulating building, electrical installations and
plumbing and sanitation systems.
      7.   Skirting: Skirting of mobile homes is required within thirty (30)
days of installation.
      8.   Fee: Based on the fee schedule.
   B.   Definition Of Mobile Home: A "mobile home" means a factory assembled
structure generally constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the
necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or
units on their own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or
units with or without a permanent foundation. Mobile homes require HUD
approval.
   C.   Site Requirements: The following shall be considered the minimum site
requirements for a new mobile home park or the expansion of an existing mobile
home park:
      1.   Electricity: Installation of meter bases to serve each mobile home
shall comply with provisions of the electrical code. An electrical permit must
be obtained from the state for inspection of any placement or replacement of
mobile homes in the park.
      2.   Sewage Disposal: All plumbing in the mobile home park must connect
to the public sewer system and shall comply with the most current version of
the international plumbing code. A plumbing permit must be obtained from the
state for inspection of the placement or replacement of each mobile home in the
park.
      3.   Water Supply: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of
water shall be furnished in each mobile home park, capable of furnishing a
minimum of five (5) gallons per minute per mobile home space. All water piping
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state of Idaho
regulations for public drinking water systems.
      4.   Hydrants: Hydrants will be installed in accordance with the
international fire code.
      5.   Setbacks: Setbacks from adjacent developments or properties shall be
in accordance with the setback requirements of those properties.
      6.   Roadways And Sidewalks: Roadways within mobile home parks shall be
constructed to the city's standard.
      7.   Underground Wires To Light Poles: Wires for service to light poles
and mobile home spaces shall be underground.
      8.   Drainage: The mobile home park shall be well drained.
   D.   Other Mobile Home/Manufactured Unit Regulations:
      1.   Prohibition: Mobile homes are prohibited on individual lots outside
of mobile home parks.
      2.   Use Of Mobile Homes And Other Manufactured Units At Construction
Sites: A commercial coach, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other licensed
vehicle used for office purposes or the temporary housing of tools, equipment,
etc., during the duration of construction shall be permitted by a special use
permit in any zone.
      3.   Use Of Mobile Home Or Commercial Coach As Temporary Office: A mobile
home or commercial coach may be used for a temporary office in commercial,
central business and industrial zones by special use permit granted by the
commission. The unit must be connected to the city water and sewer systems, if
restroom facilities are provided. A building permit must be obtained prior to
installation.
      4.   Commercial Coach For Temporary Classroom: A commercial coach or unit
specially designed for classroom purposes may be used as a temporary classroom
for schools in any zone where schools are permitted. The unit must be connected
to the city water and sewer systems if restroom facilities are provided. A
building permit must be obtained prior to installation.
      5.   Nonconforming Mobile Homes: A mobile home which has been placed upon
an individual lot and maintained prior to January 1, 2016, shall be a legal
nonconforming use. Such mobile home shall not be relocated within the city
without conforming to all applicable provisions contained herein. Likewise, a
nonconforming mobile home shall not be replaced for any reason, including
damage due to weather or other factor, with another nonconforming mobile home,
even if new, larger, or otherwise different. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-5: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
   A.   General: Recreational vehicle parks shall in general be treated the
same as any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set
forth in the zoning ordinance and also subject to the following requirements.
Such park applications shall be in accordance with the procedures and
requirements specified in chapter 3 of this title.
   B.   Special Requirements:
      1.   Lot Area: Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot
area for planned development of one acre;
      2.   Community Facilities: Essential community facilities and services
for the type of development under consideration is available, or provisions
shall be made to assure that these facilities will be provided:
         a.   Water Supply: An adequate supply of water approved by South
Central public health district for drinking and domestic purposes to meet the
requirements of the park shall be supplied. The water supply shall be obtained
from faucets only, no common drinking vessel shall be permitted.
         b.   Waste Disposal: Waste disposal facilities for recreational
vehicles shall be provided in an isolated, screened service area in a manner
and method acceptable to the building official and/or health officer.
         c.   Garbage Receptacles: Tightly covered garbage cans shall be
provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish;
      3.   Drainage: Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters;
      4.   Ground Cover: Protection of existing ground cover;
      5.   Screening: Screening from adjacent areas, other than parks of the
same type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas and
existing natural or manmade barriers;
      6.   Access Streets: The width and construction of access streets shall
be suitable for the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No
lot within the development shall have direct vehicular access to a street
bordering the development. Pull through design spaces are strongly recommended
for the majority of the spaces in the park;
      7.   Fire Protection: Frostproof exterior potable water supply hydrant.
No open fires shall be permitted at any place which would endanger life or
property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time;
      8.   Structures Within Space Prohibited: Any space occupant shall not be
permitted to erect, install or place any structure or facility upon the space;
      9.   Utilities: All utilities shall be underground;
      10.   Recreation Space: Recreation space is to be provided at five
percent (5%) of total RV park space; and
      11.   Recreational Vehicle Spaces: Minimum requirements for each space:
         a.   Dimensions: Twenty five feet (25') wide (minimum).
         b.   Outdoor Area: Masonry or concrete patio, or a landscaped area of
a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet.
         c.   Parking Area: Parking area must be paved or graveled.
   C.   Application For Permit: To obtain a permit for construction of a
recreational vehicle park, the applicant shall:
      1.   Application; Fee: Submit an application with two (2) sets of plans
and specifications to the city for review by the building official and other
departments to check compliance with applicable laws or ordinances. The
application will be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be established by
resolution of the city council and the matter scheduled before the commission
for public hearing.
      2.   Submissions: The material submitted shall include a plot plan and
building plans and specifications for all buildings, improvements and
facilities, such as electrical, plumbing, gas and sewerage system to be
constructed within the park. If the building official is satisfied that the
proposal, as submitted, or subject to corrections, meets the requirements as
set forth in this chapter, he shall then issue the permit to the applicant
based upon the true valuation of construction.
      3.   Investigation: The city council shall investigate, or cause to be
investigated, the location and, if it is found to be in compliance with all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the
application may be approved.
      4.   License Transfer: All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to
the licensee and be nontransferable without the written consent of the council
first having been obtained.
      5.   Posting Of Permit: The permit shall be conspicuously posted in the
office of, or on the premises of, the recreational vehicle park at all times.
   D.   Revocation Of License Or Permit:
      1.   The council may revoke any permit to maintain and operate a
recreational vehicle park when the person covered has been found guilty of
violating any provisions of this section.
      2.   After such revocation, a permit may be reissued if the circumstances
leading to the revocation have been remedied and the recreational vehicle park
is maintained and operated in full compliance with this section or any other
ordinance pertaining thereto.
   E.   Domestic Animals Or Pets: No domestic animals or house pets shall be
allowed to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of a
recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-6: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Required Information: Due to the impact that large scale development
(any development which requires a planned unit development process) would have
on public utilities and services, the developer shall submit the following
information along with the preliminary plat:
      1.   Identification of all public services that would be provided to the
development that will occur as a result of the subdivision (re: fire
protection, police protection, central water, central sewer, road construction,
recreation, maintenance, schools and other);
      2.   Estimate the public service costs, or required expansion in these
services, to provide adequate service to the development;
      3.   Estimate the tax revenue that will be generated from the
development; and
      4.   Suggested public means of financing the services for the development
if the cost for the public services would not be offset by tax revenue received
from the development. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-7: CEMETERY SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Function: The developer shall provide the commission with written
documentation that will sufficiently explain if the proposed cemetery will be
used for either human or animal remains and the functions that are anticipated
on the property.
   B.   Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written
statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the
compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural management requirements
that are outlined in Idaho Code title 27. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
9-6-8: SUBDIVISION WITHIN FLOODPLAIN:
   A.   Flood Areas:
      1.   For any proposed subdivision that is located within or partially
within a floodplain, the developer shall provide the commission with a
development plan of adequate scale and supporting documentation that will show
and explain at least the following:
         a.   Location of all planned improvements, including building
envelopes;
         b.   The location of the floodway and the floodway fringe per
engineering practices as specified by the federal emergency management agency
(FEMA);
         c.   The location of the present water channel;
         d.   Any planned rerouting of waterways;
         e.   All major drainageways;
         f.   Areas of frequent flooding; and
         g.   Means of floodproofing and anchoring buildings and structures.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures within the floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood and, for new
construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to or above the level of
the 100-year flood, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall be floodproofed up to the level of the 100-year flood. (Ord.
261, 2-11-2016)
   B.   Justification For Development:
      1.   Upon the determination that buildings are planned within the
floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated within the
floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the developer shall
demonstrate conclusively to the commission that such development will not
present a hazard to life, limb or property; will not have adverse effects on
the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel or the natural
environment.
      2.   Subdivisions shall be reviewed to assure that:
         a.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
         b.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
         c.   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      3.   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and require
on site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them
or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
   C.   Fee: Based on the fee schedule.
   D.   Commission's Findings: In determining the appropriateness of
subdivision for land located within a floodplain, the commission shall consider
the objectives of this title, and at least the following:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to the increased flood heights
or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads, and intended uses;
      2.   The danger that intended uses may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
      3.   The adequacy of proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions under flood conditions;
      4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      5.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed subdivision and land use;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for the area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in times
of flood;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-9: SUBDIVISION WITHIN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
   A.   General: Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as an area of
critical concern by the council or by the state. Special considerations shall
be given to any proposed development within, or contiguous with, an area of
critical concern to assure that the development is necessary and desirable and
in the public interest in view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous or
unique areas that may be designated as areas of critical concern are as
follows:
      1.   Sanitary landfills, dumps; (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
      2.   Earthquake locations;
      3.   Unstable soils;
      4.   Unique animal life;
      5.   Unique plant life;
      6.   Scenic areas;
      7.   Historical significance; (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
      8.   Floodplain, wetlands, or intermittent streams; and
      9.   Other areas of critical concern.
   B.   Plan Submission: The developer shall prepare and submit an
environmental assessment along with the preliminary plat application for any
development that is proposed within an area of critical concern. (Ord. 261, 2-
11-2016)
   C.   Content Of Environmental Assessment: The content of the environmental
assessment shall usually be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of
professionals that shall provide answers to the following questions:
      1.   What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a
result of the proposed development?
      2.   What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur
so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
      3.   What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
      4.   What beneficial or detrimental effect would the development have on
the environment such as animal life, plant life, social concerns, economic,
cultural, resources, noise, visual, hazardous waste and others? (Ord. 165, 7-
30-1992)
   D.   Fee: Based on the fee schedule. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-10: ENVIRONMENTAL:
   A.   The applicant is required to submit a noxious weed plan to be approved
by the county noxious weed superintendent. Applicant is responsible for the
identification and the proper treatment or removal of noxious weed infestations
before significant infrastructure work commences. These costly infestations are
easily transported to other areas by construction vehicles.
   B.   Collect and conserve water through simple and ingenious methods and
incorporate them into the design of buildings and neighborhoods.
   C.   Provide native, drought resistant, trees, shrubs, ground cover, and
grasses, or provide and maintain landscaping, so as to cover all areas not
actually used for structures, drives, walks, usable yard, improved off street
parking, or lawful open storage.
   D.   Wetland and riparian areas. Development in these sensitive areas must
take into account applicable federal regulations and guidelines. All structures
should be placed so as to have minimal impact, both visually and structurally
on these areas. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
9-6-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person or corporation, whether owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or permits any
such violation or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not
exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00), or by both. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a
separate additional violation. (Ord. 261, 2-11-2016)
CHAPTER 7
VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Application Procedures
9-7-1: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Filing Of Application: Any property owner desiring to vacate an
existing subdivision, public right of way, or easement shall complete and file
an application with the planning and zoning commission and also file such other
applications as shown in the comprehensive development plan, for the dedication
of streets, rights of way or easements to be shown on the recorded plat of a
subdivision.
   B.   Commission Recommendation: The commission shall review the request and
all agency responses and make a recommendation to the city council for either
approval, conditional approval or denial.
   C.   Council Action; Hearing And Notice:
      1.   When considering an application for vacation procedures, the council
shall establish a date for a public hearing and give such public notice as
required by law. The council may approve, deny or modify the application.
Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated, the council shall provide
adjacent property owners with a quitclaim deed for said vacated rights of way
in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
      2.   When considering an application for dedication procedures, the
council may approve, deny or modify the application. When a dedication is
approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed or a bond
furnished assuring the construction, prior to acceptance of the dedication. To
complete the acceptance of any dedication of land, the owner shall furnish to
the council a deed describing and conveying such lands to be recorded with the
county recorder. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
CHAPTER 8
VARIANCES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Recommendation For Variance
9-8-2: Topographical Variance Limitation
9-8-1: RECOMMENDATION FOR VARIANCE:
   A.   The planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city council a
variance from the provisions of this title on a finding that undue hardship may
result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of this
title or the application of such provisions or requirements is impracticable.
   B.   The commission shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary
to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the commission
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of persons to reside or work in
the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision
upon traffic condition in the vicinity.
   C.   No variance shall be recommended unless the commission finds after a
public hearing:
      1.   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property that the strict application of the provisions of this title would
clearly be impracticable, or unreasonable; in such cases, the subdivider shall
first state his reasons in writing to the specific provisions or requirements
involved;
      2.   The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said
property is situated;
      3.   Such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code; and
      4.   Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of this title and the comprehensive development plan. (Ord. 165, 7-
30-1992)
9-8-2: TOPOGRAPHICAL VARIANCE LIMITATION:
Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, other
physical conditions, or other such conditions which are not self-inflicted, or
that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the
objectives of this title, the planning and zoning commission may recommend to
the city council that variance modifications or a waiver of these requirements
be granted. (Ord. 165, 7-30-1992)
TITLE 10
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-1-1: Statutory Authority
10-1-2: Statement Of Purpose
10-1-3: Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-5: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
10-1-6: Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas
10-1-7: Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit
10-1-8: Compliance
10-1-9: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-1-10: Interpretation
10-1-11: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
10-1-12: Penalties For Violation
10-1-13: Designation Of Floodplain Administrator
10-1-14: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
10-1-15: Floodplain Development Application, Permit And Certification
Requirements
10-1-16: Corrective Procedures
10-1-17: Variance Procedures
10-1-18: General Standards
10-1-19: Specific Standards
10-1-20: Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations
10-1-21: Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance
10-1-22: Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits
10-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code sections 46-1020
through 46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain management
ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development
standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health, and
property. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life, health, and property;
   B.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
   C.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
   D.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   E.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   F.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   G.   Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
   H.   Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-3: OBJECTIVES AND METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and
provisions to:
   A.   Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
   C.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
   D.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
   E.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers which carry and store flood waters. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE): A structure on the same lot or
parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate
to the principal structure.
ADDITION (To An Existing Building): An extension or increase in the floor area
or height of a building or structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation
of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three feet
(3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of special flood hazard area
(SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): A determination by the Federal Insurance
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area,
it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or
other source using FEMA- approved engineering methodologies. This elevation,
when combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of structure.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or
critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a
flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation,
police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the
flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials
facility, power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment
plant.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum
currently adopted by the Federal government as a basis for measuring heights is
the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit; such as: the construction of
buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial
improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and
pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of
materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has
its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The Elevation Certificate is an important administrative
tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood insurance premium
rate; it is used to document elevation information necessary to ensure
compliance with community floodplain management regulations; and it may be used
to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map
Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F).
ENCLOSURE: An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed
when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or
partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below
the BFE/FPE is not considered an enclosure.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings,
structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the
flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A
manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the original floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community, March 18, 1985.
EXISTING STRUCTURES: See definition of existing construction.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION: See definition of base flood elevation (BFE).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: See definition of Flood Insurance Study (FIS).
FLOOD FRINGE: Shall have the meaning set forth in Idaho Code section 46-1021,
as may be amended: "Flood fringe" is that portion of the floodplain outside of
the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the
Federal Insurance Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been
designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been
made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood- related erosion hazards.
FLOOD OR FLOODING:
   A.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
      1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
      2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
      3.   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding
as defined in subsection A2 of this definition and are akin to a river of
liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when
earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current.
   B.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents
of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in subsection A1 of this definition.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The base flood elevation plus the freeboard.
   A.   In "special flood hazard areas" where base flood elevations (BFEs) have
been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot (1') of
freeboard; and
   B.   In "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been established, this
elevation shall be at least one foot (1') above the highest adjacent grade.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD ZONE: A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or type of flooding
in the area.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
Building Codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and
other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. The base flood elevation
(BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the flood protection elevation (FPE).
Freeboard shall be one foot (1').
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation
information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
      1.   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or
      2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): A general term used to refer to the several types
of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter.
They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F):
   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as
to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with
the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of
special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon submission and
approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)
may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building permits and/or
flood development permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR, because a CLOMR
does not change the NFIP map.
   Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to an
effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a
property's location in relation to the special flood hazard area (SFHA). LOMAs
are usually issued because a property has been inadvertently mapped as being in
the floodplain but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood
elevation.
   Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or a Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) or both.
LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that
affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area
(SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the
modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the
affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
   Letter Of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. The
LOMR-F does not change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
LEVEE: A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Shall have the meaning set forth in Idaho Code section 46-
1021, as may be amended: "Local government", in the context of this chapter,
means any county or city having planning and zoning authority to regulate land
use within its jurisdiction.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to building
elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR section 60.3 and this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE: The building value, not including the land value and that of any
accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP),
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum (such as
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which base flood elevations
(BFEs) shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
MITIGATION: Shall have the meaning set forth in Idaho Code section 46-1021, as
may be amended: "Mitigation" means any action taken which will reduce the
impact, damage, or cost of the next flood that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW): Describes a condition where there is a river, flow,
or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide
is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if the
mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program
of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): The NFIP is a Federal program created
by Congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide through sound,
community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to
affordable, Federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after March 18, 1985
and before the effective start date of this chapter is subject to the ordinance
in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction
was within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations
adopted by the City of Fairfield, which date is March 18, 1985.
PERSON: Shall have the meaning set forth in Idaho Code section 46-1021, as may
be amended: "Person" means any individual, group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, political subdivision, public or private agency, or
entity.
POST-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
PRE-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before March 18, 1985, the effective date of the initial
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis, and
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, and
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD: Shall have the meaning set forth in Idaho Code section 46-
1021, as may be amended: "Regulatory flood" is a flood determined to be
representative of large floods known to have occurred in Idaho and which may be
expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical
characteristics. The regulatory flood is based upon a statistical analysis of
stream flow records available for the watershed or an analysis of rainfall and
runoff characteristics in the watershed. In inland areas, the flood frequency
of the regulatory flood is once in every one hundred (100) years. This means
that in any given year there is a one percent (1%) chance that a regulatory
flood may occur or be exceeded.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: See definition of floodway.
REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into compliance
with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not
possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be
reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE: An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least two
(2) paid flood losses of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each in any
10-year period since 1978.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. See
definition of "substantial improvement". Substantial damage also means flood-
related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a
10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications
which have been identified by the local Code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure" and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this
chapter.
TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS: FEMA publications that provide
guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP, which are
contained in title 44 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations section 60.3. The
bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by State and local
officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by
members of the development community, such as design professionals and
builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing bulletins, are issued
periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create regulations. Rather they
provide specific guidance for complying with the minimum requirements of
existing NFIP regulations.
   It should be noted that Technical Bulletins and Technical Fact Sheets
provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design
professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more
restrictive State or local regulations apply to the building or site in
question. All applicable standards of the State or local Building Code must
also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED: Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Governing Body from a requirement of this
chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse
includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may
occur. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-5: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs within the City of Fairfield. Nothing in
this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise
prohibited by the City's zoning regulations set forth in title 8 of this Code.
(Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-6: BASIS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The SFHAs identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) FIRM
dated March 18, 1985, and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and
declared a part of this chapter. The FIRM is on file at the Office of the City
Clerk, 407 Soldier Road, Fairfield, Idaho. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-7: ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within SFHAs in accordance with the provisions of section 10-1-15 of
this chapter. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-8: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered,
or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-9: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other laws, ordinances, regulations,
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, etcetera. However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or
greater restrictions shall control. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-10: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State
Statutes. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of Fairfield or by any officer or employee thereof for flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-12: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or
altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure
to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special
exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for
not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or both. Each day the violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the City of Fairfield from taking such other lawful actions as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-13: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The building inspector, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain
Administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-14: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   A.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within SFHAs to assure that the requirements of this
chapter have been satisfied.
   B.   Review all proposed development within SFHAs to assure that all
necessary local, State, and Federal permits have been received, including those
required by section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments
of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
   C.   Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources
State Coordinator for the NFIP prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   D.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   E.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 10-1-15C of this chapter.
   F.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of subsection
10-1-15C of this chapter.
   G.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-1-15C of this
chapter.
   H.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of subsections
10-1-15C and
10-1-19B of this chapter.
   I.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the SFHAs, floodways, or flood fringe areas (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this chapter.
   J.   When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions
of section
10-1-6 of this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data,
along with floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal,
State, or other source, including data developed pursuant to subsection
10-1-20B of this chapter, in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
   K.   When BFE data is provided but no floodway or flood fringe area data has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-6 of this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway
data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State, or other source
in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   L.   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in an SFHA is above the BFE, advise the
property owner of the option to apply for a LOMA from FEMA. Maintain a copy of
the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
   M.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended, or the Idaho Public Records Act, chapter 1, title 74, Idaho Code.
   N.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a
floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of this chapter and the terms of
the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
   O.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof
is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this
chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately
stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person
doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition
(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order
constitutes a misdemeanor.
   P.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may
also be revoked.
   Q.   Make periodic inspections throughout the SFHAs within the City of
Fairfield. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his or her
Inspections Department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of
the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.
   R.   Follow through with corrective procedures of section
10-1-16 of this chapter.
   S.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   T.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-1-6 of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including Letters of
Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of your
community's mapping needs.
   U.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map
Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs). (Ord.
269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-15: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application Requirements: Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within SFHAs. The following items shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
      1.   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         a.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         b.   The boundary of the SFHA as delineated on the FIRM or other flood
map as determined in section
10-1-6 of this chapter, or a statement that the entire lot is within the SFHA;
         c.   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
10-1-6 of this chapter;
         d.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as
determined in section
10-1-6 of this chapter;
         e.   The BFE where provided as set forth in sections
10-1-6,
10-1-7, or
10-1-20 of this chapter;
         f.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         g.   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      2.   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within an
SFHA including but not limited to:
         a.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone A will be floodproofed; and
         c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      3.   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      4.   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation,
or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with subsection
10-1-19D of this chapter when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zone
A.
      5.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      6.   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      7.   Certification that all other local, State, and Federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      8.   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of
subsections
10-1-19F and G of this chapter are met.
      9.   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when
applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood- carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and
      10.   A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
   B.   Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      1.   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials, etcetera).
      2.   The SFHA determination for the proposed development in accordance
with available data specified in section
10-1-6 of this chapter.
      3.   The FPE required for the reference level and all attendant
utilities.
      4.   The FPE required for the protection of all public utilities.
      5.   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      6.   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as
applicable.
      7.   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A.
      8.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
start of construction of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A
floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance unless the permitted activity has commenced as per the start of
construction definition.
      9.   A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if
applicable (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
      10.   A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood
resistant materials.
   C.   Certification Requirements:
      1.   Elevation Certificates:
         a.   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         b.   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after
the reference level is established. Within seven (7) calendar days of
establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done
within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
         c.   A final as-built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate
(FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all
attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
      2.   Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, a Floodproofing
Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan,
and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start
of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to
construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold
the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
      3.   Manufactured Home: If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A
and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty six inches (36") in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance
with the provisions of subsection
10-1-19C of this chapter.
      4.   Altering Or Relocating Watercourse: If a watercourse is to be
altered or relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit
applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit:
         a.   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; and
         b.   A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
         c.   A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration
or relocation; and
         d.   An Idaho stream channel alteration permit approval shall be
provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
      5.   Certification Exemptions: The following structures, if located
within Zone A, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification
requirements specified in subsections C5a and C5b of this section:
         a.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection
10-1-19E of this chapter;
         b.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection
10-1-19F of this chapter; and
         c.   Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square feet
meeting requirements of subsection
10-1-19G of this chapter.
   D.   Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the building
official, shall:
      1.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      4.   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho
Building Code and this chapter is required. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-16: CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Violations To Be Corrected: When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   B.   Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating that:
      1.   The building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      2.   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      3.   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   C.   Order To Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor
more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   D.   Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected Governing Body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten (10)
days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the
order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local Governing Body
shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and
affirm, or revoke the order.
   E.   Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the Governing Body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-17: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Appeal Board: The City Council, hereinafter referred to as the "Appeal
Board", shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
   B.   Issuance: Variances may be issued for:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      2.   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the
definition as stated in section
10-1-4 of this chapter, provided provisions of subsection I of this section,
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      3.   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   C.   Considerations: In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under section
10-1-4 of this chapter as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
Floodplain Management Program for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
   D.   Written Report: The applicant shall include a written report addressing
each of the above factors in subsection C of this section with their
application for a variance.
   E.   Purpose Of Board: Upon consideration of the factors listed above and
the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.
   F.   Written Notice: Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the BFE and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
   G.   Maintenance Of Records: The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the
records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the State of Idaho upon request.
   H.   Conditions For Variances:
      1.   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   I.   Issuance Of Variance: A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal
facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and
chemical storage facilities that are located in SFHAs provided that all of the
following conditions are met.
      1.   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      2.   No feasible location exists for the use outside the SFHA.
      3.   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the FPE.
      4.   The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local
laws.
   J.   Notification Of State: The City of Fairfield will notify the State NFIP
Coordinator of the Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to
grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the
variance.
   K.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal such decision to the court, as provided in Idaho Code section 67-6535.
(Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-18: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all SFHAs the following provisions are required:
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure.
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements,
and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   C.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   D.   All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   F.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   G.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   H.   A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved
structures, which is below the lowest floor shall:
      1.   Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the
FPE; and
      2.   Include, in Zone A, flood openings to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by
a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
design criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         b.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         c.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area
must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
         d.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than
one foot (1') above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         e.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         f.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   I.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.
   J.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, flood fringe
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
FPE in the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements
of this chapter.
   K.   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in section
10-1-17 of this chapter. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage
incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or
wastewater treatment facility may be located in an SFHA only if the structure
or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the FPE and certified in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-1-15C of this chapter.
   L.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   M.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   N.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   O.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
   P.   When a structure is partially located in an SFHA, the entire structure
shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements.
   Q.   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest BFE shall apply.
   R.   Fill is prohibited in the SFHA, including construction of buildings on
fill. This includes not approving Conditional Letters or Letters of Map
Revision (CLOMR-F or LOMR-F). (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-19: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all SFHAs where BFE data has been provided, as set forth in section
10-1-6 of this chapter, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions
of section
10-1-18 of this chapter, are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the FPE, as defined
in section
10-1-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Non-Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
FPE, as defined in section
10-1-4 of this chapter. Structures located in Zone A, may be floodproofed to
the flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of
the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below
the FPE are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in subsection
10-1-15C of this chapter, along with the operational plan and the inspection
and maintenance plan.
   C.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the
reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the FPE, as defined
in section
10-1-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety's "Idaho Manufactured
Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code section 44-2201(2).
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis
thirty six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation
of the chassis is above thirty six inches (36") in height, an engineering
certification is required.
      3.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of subsection D of this section.
      4.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents
of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured home
parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be
filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency
Management Coordinator.
   D.   Additions/Improvements:
      1.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         a.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure; or
         b.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      2.   Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement
with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in
the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards
for new construction.
      3.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         a.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
         b.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      4.   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a one year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started,
must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or
structure, the one year period begins on the date of the first improvement or
repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are
considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
         a.   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
         b.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be either:
      1.   Temporary Placement: Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and
has no permanently attached additions); or
      2.   Permanent Placement: Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction, as set forth in section 10-1-18 of this chapter.
   F.   Temporary Non-Residential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval:
      1.   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one
year;
      2.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      3.   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
      4.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      5.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the
SFHA, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   G.   Accessory Structures: When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within an SFHA, elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all accessory structures in accordance with
subsection 10-1-15C of this chapter, and the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
      2.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      3.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      4.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      5.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the
provisions of subsection
10-1-18A of this chapter;
      6.   All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
10-1-18D of this chapter; and
      7.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below FPE in conformance with the provisions of
subsection D4 of this section.
   An accessory structure with a footprint less than two hundred (200) square
feet, costs two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less to construct,
and satisfies the criteria outlined in this subsection is not required to meet
the elevation or floodproofing standards of subsection B of this section.
   H.   Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within an
SFHA, the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of
buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
      2.   Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be attached
to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
      3.   Not elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation
requirements of subsection B of this section shall be permitted in flood hazard
areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects
of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
      4.   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
         a.   At or above the FPE or fitted with covers designed to prevent the
inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions
of the base flood; and
         b.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
   I.   Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
      1.   The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE and
must not be more than two feet (2') below the exterior lowest adjacent grade
(LAG).
      2.   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point.
      3.   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained
within a reasonable time after a flood event.
      4.   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet
(5') per second for any crawlspace.
      5.   See Technical Bulletin 11 for further information.
   Caution: Buildings that have below-grade crawlspaces will have higher flood
insurance premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawlspace
construction, with the interior elevation of the crawlspace soil at or above
the BFE. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-20: STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
Within the SFHAs designated as Zone A (also known as Unnumbered A Zones) and
established in section
10-1-6 of this chapter, where no BFE data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section 10-1-18 of this
chapter, shall apply. The BFE used in determining the FPE shall be determined
based on the following criteria:
   A.   When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction and
substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with standards in sections
10-1-18 and
10-1-19 of this chapter.
   B.   When floodway or flood fringe data is available from a Federal, State,
or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway and flood fringe areas shall also comply with the requirements of
section
10-1-19 of this chapter.
   C.   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development
proposals shall provide BFE data if development is greater than five (5) acres
or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such BFE data shall
be adopted by reference in accordance with section
10-1-6 of this chapter and utilized in implementing this chapter.
   D.   When BFE data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source
as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (non-
residential) to two feet (2.0') above the highest adjacent grade (HAG) at the
building site or to the FPE whichever is higher, as defined in section
10-1-4 of this chapter. All other applicable provisions of section
10-1-19 of this chapter shall also apply. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-21: EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE:
This chapter, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted July 13, 2006, as amended, and
it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding
instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance
of City of Fairfield enacted on July 13, 2006, as amended, which are not
reenacted herein are repealed. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
10-1-22: EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a
floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator
or his or her authorized agents before the effective date of this chapter.
Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding
permit within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 269, 12-14-2016)
 
