CITY CODE
of
HAGERMAN, IDAHO
2010
Code current through:
Ord. 1106, passed 6-18-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
      This code of the City of Hagerman, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 1106, passed June 18, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE #1051
AN ORDINANCE FOR CODIFYING AND COMPILING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
HAGERMAN;
BE IT ORDAINED by the city council of the city of Hagerman, Idaho, Gooding
County, state of Idaho, that;
SECTION 1; From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code
of the city of Hagerman, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under the
direction of the governing body of the city, containing all ordinances of a
general nature in effect at the time of such codification, shall be accepted in
all courts without question as the official code and law of the city enacted by
the mayor and city council.
SECTION 2; There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose leaf type of binding together with continuous supplemental service
whereby each ordinance amending the code shall be inserted in the proper place
in each of the official copies.
SECTION 3; At least one (1) official copy of said municipal code of the city of
Hagerman shall be at all times on file and available for inspection in the
office of the city clerk.
SECTION 4; All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 5; This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after passage and approval in accordance with the
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the mayor and city
council.
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL this 6th day of October,
2010.
/s/   
Mike Winther, Mayor      ATTEST:
      /s/   
      Margaret Pedrow, City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
HAGERMAN CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Hagerman. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the HAGERMAN CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the council, and shall be kept up to date as provided
in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the attorney for the city, acting
for the city council. Any reference made to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal document. (1996 Code §
1-1-1; amd. 2010 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1996 Code §
1-1-2)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be prepared for insertion in their
proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city
code. (1996 Code §
1-1-3)
   B.   Any additions or amendments to this code, when passed as ordinances
amending this code, and which indicate the intention of the council to make the
same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so that a
reference to the code shall be understood as including them. (1996 Code § 1-2-
5)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Altering Or Defacing Code: It shall be deemed unlawful for any person
to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this
code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or
omitted.
   B.   Insertion Of Replacement Pages:
      1.   Clerk-Treasurer: Replacement pages may be inserted according to the
official instructions when so authorized by the city council. The city clerk-
treasurer shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the
official copies maintained in the office of the clerk-treasurer.
      2.   Individuals: Any person having in his custody an official copy of
this code shall make every effort to maintain said code in an up to date and
efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the
office of the city clerk-treasurer. Said code books and subsequent replacement
pages shall be available from the office of the city clerk-treasurer at a fee
set by resolution. (1996 Code § 1-1-5)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Sales and use tax ordinances;
   B.   Tax levy ordinances;
   C.   Appropriation ordinances;
   D.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   E.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   F.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   G.   Salary ordinances;
   H.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   I.   Improvement ordinances;
   J.   Bond ordinances;
   K.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   L.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city; and
   M.   All special ordinances. (1996 Code §
1-2-1; amd. 2010 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1996 Code §
1-2-2)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1996 Code §
1-2-3; amd. 2010 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any
codes or portions of codes adopted herein is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted
by reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1996 Code §
1-2-4; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Hagerman".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2010 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings as herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
AGRICULTURE: The use of five (5) acres of land or more for farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, aquaculture,
animal or poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that:
   A.   The operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities.
   B.   The above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of animals,
fish or poultry in penned enclosures within one hundred feet (100') of any
residential zoning district. "Agriculture" does not include the operation or
maintenance of a commercial stockyard or feed yard where large numbers of
livestock or poultry are fed concentrated feeds particularly for the purpose of
fattening for market.
CITY: The city of Hagerman, county of Gooding, state of Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Hagerman.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Hagerman.
COUNTY: The county of Gooding, state of Idaho.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the city shall commence on October 1 of each
year 1 .
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
incarceration may be imposed 2 .
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under state law
3 .
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability
partnership, trust, association, limited liability company, organization,
government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines
of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include highways or roads, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1996 Code §
1-3-2; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-1001.
2 2. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113A.
3 3. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2010
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Interpretation Regarding Offenses
1-4-4: Liability Of City Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Except in cases where a different punishment is hereafter
prescribed by city ordinance, every offense declared to be a misdemeanor is
punishable by imprisonment in the county detention center not exceeding six (6)
months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
both. These punishments shall comply with Idaho Code section 18-113, as
amended.
   B.   Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no incarceration may be
imposed.
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months, or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses. (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113A, 50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2010 Code)
1-4-3: INTERPRETATION REGARDING OFFENSES:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code, the
following rules shall be observed:
   A.   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   B.   Liability Of Employees And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1996 Code §
1-1-4)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF CITY OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1996 Code
§ 1-4-5)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Depository
1-5-2: Corporate Seal
1-5-3: Official Newspaper
1-5-4: Corporate Limits And Annexations
1-5-5: Records Retention Schedule
1-5-1: CITY DEPOSITORY:
   A.   Designation: A state or federal chartered bank as selected by the city
council by ordinance is hereby designated as the depository for the city. The
city clerk-treasurer is hereby ordered, required and directed to keep monies
belonging to or in the care of the city coming into the hands of the clerk-
treasurer, in said depository. (1996 Code § 1-12-1)
   B.   Bond Of Depository: Such depository shall be insured to save the city
from any loss in the sum not less than the estimated maximum amount on deposit
at any one time. Such bond and collateral shall be approved by the city council
1 . (1996 Code § 1-12-2)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 1013.
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Adoption: The city council shall adopt a corporate seal of the city.
(1996 Code § 1-13-2)
   B.   Design Of Seal: The corporate seal of the city shall be circular in
form with an inner and outer circle. The outer circle shall be one and seven-
eighths inches (17/8") in diameter and it shall bear upon the space between the
two (2) circles the words "City of Hagerman, Gooding County, Idaho", and upon
the space within the inner circle the words "Incorporated January 16, 1918",
and across the center of the seal the word, "Seal". (1996 Code § 1-13-1)
   C.   Custodian: The clerk-treasurer shall be custodian of the corporate seal
and shall affix said seal's imprint upon all official documents, records,
licenses, warrants and/or checks 1 . (1996 Code § 1-13-3)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  1-7A-2A of this title.
1-5-3: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Times News newspaper of Twin Falls, Idaho, is hereby appointed, designated
and constituted the official newspaper of the city, and such ordinances,
notices and official documents requiring publication under and by virtue of
state statutes and the city council shall be given publication in said
newspaper 1 . (1996 Code § 1-11-1; amd. Ord. 1027, 2-2-2005; 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-213.
1-5-4: CORPORATE LIMITS AND ANNEXATIONS:
   A.   Official City Limits Map: The limits and boundaries of the city is as
designated on the official city limits map to be kept at city hall for public
reference. (1996 Code § 1-10-1)
   B.   Recording Of Annexations:
      1.   Any ordinance annexing territory to the city shall be filed, by the
city clerk-treasurer, with Gooding County and with the Idaho state tax
commission within ten (10) days following the effective date of such ordinance
in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-223. (1996 Code § 1-10-4; amd. 2010
Code)
      2.   City boundary changes will be recorded within a reasonable period on
the official city limits map. (1996 Code § 1-10-4)
1-5-5: RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE:
   A.   Permanent: Records identified as permanent shall not be destroyed, but
shall be retained by the city in perpetuity or transferred to the Idaho State
Historical Society's permanent records repository for permanent retention, upon
resolution of the city council.
   B.   Not Permanent: Records that are not considered permanent shall be
retained for the period specified in the retention schedule and until
destruction is approved by resolution of the city council pursuant to the
provisions of Idaho Code section 50-907. (Res. 2006-06, 12-6-2006)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Council Election; Terms; Duties
1-6-2: Mayor Election; Term; Powers And Duties
1-6-3: Council President
1-6-4: Vacancy In Office
1-6-5: Council Meetings
1-6-6: Payment Of Bills
1-6-7: Salaries
1-6-1: COUNCIL ELECTION; TERMS; DUTIES:
   A.   Election And Terms Of Office: The corporate powers and duties shall be
vested in four (4) council persons who shall be elected to serve four (4) year
terms. Two (2) council persons shall be elected biennially during the general
city election. (1996 Code §
1-6-1)
   B.   Administrative Powers And General Duties: The city council shall be the
administrative and legislative power in control of the city. The council shall
ensure that records are kept accurately and shall authorize the collection and
distribution of all monies 1 . (1996 Code §
1-6-3)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-701.
1-6-2: MAYOR ELECTION; TERM; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Election; General Duties:
      1.   The mayor shall be elected for a period of four (4) years, and shall
take office at the time and in the manner provided for installation of council
members and shall have the qualifications as prescribed by the laws of the
state of Idaho.
      2.   The mayor shall be the chief administrative official of the city,
preside over the meetings of the city council and determine the order of
business subject to such rules as the council may prescribe, have a vote only
when the council is equally divided, have the superintending control of all the
officers and affairs of the city, preserve order and take care that the
provisions of this code are complied with and enforced 1 . (1996 Code §
1-5-1)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Contracts: The mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name
officially for and in behalf of the city on all contracts, documents and papers
to which the city is a party, and to require that the conditions in any
instrument are faithfully performed when so authorized by the city council. He
may borrow money on the credit of the city when so authorized by the council.
(1996 Code §
1-5-2)
      2.   Veto Power: The mayor shall have power to veto or sign any ordinance
passed by the council; provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the mayor may be
passed over his veto by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the
council, and should the mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance, the same
shall become law without his signature after the next regular meeting of the
council. (1996 Code §
1-5-4; amd. 2010 Code)
      3.   Accounts Of Officers: The mayor shall have the power to require any
officer of the city to exhibit his accounts or other papers and to make reports
to the council in writing on any subject or matter pertaining to the office.
(1996 Code §
1-5-5)
      4.   Police Power: The mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places
within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the city for the enforcement
of any health or quarantine ordinance and regulation, and shall have
jurisdiction in all matters, excepting taxation, within one mile of the
corporate limits of the city. (1996 Code § 1-5-6)
      5.   Request For Aid: The mayor is hereby authorized to call on every
resident of the city over the age of twenty one (21) years to aid in enforcing
the law. (1996 Code § 1-5-7; amd. 2010 Code)
      6.   Other Powers: The mayor shall have all other powers provided by
state statute or by specific provisions of this code. (1996 Code § 1-5-8)
 
Notes
1 2. IC § 50-602.
1-6-3: COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
   A.   Appointment; Salary: There shall be a president of the council to be
appointed by the mayor and approved by the council after each election. (1996
Code §
1-6-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Duties: The president of the council shall preside at all meetings of
the council and perform the duties of the mayor in the absence of the mayor.
(1996 Code §
1-6-7)
1-6-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In the event of a vacancy occurring on the city council, due to death, moving
out of the city limits or for any other cause, it shall be filled by
appointment by the mayor, with the consent of the council, until the next
general city election, at which time the vacancy shall be filled for the
remainder of the term by the electors 1 . (1996 Code §
1-6-5; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-704.
1-6-5: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   The city council meetings shall be held on the first and third
Wednesdays of each month. Meetings shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
This time and date shall be in effect beginning July 1, 2005. The meetings will
be held at the Hagerman city hall located at 191 State Street North, Hagerman,
Idaho. (Ord. 1030, 6-1-2005; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   The council shall by ordinance fix the time and place of holding
their regular meetings. (1996 Code §
1-6-2)
   B.   Special Meetings:
      1.   A special meeting of the council may be called by one-half (1/2)
plus one of the council or the mayor at any time. Notice of the special meeting
and agenda shall be given, unless the cause for the meeting is deemed an
emergency by the council or mayor at least twenty four (24) hours before the
time of such meeting, whether in person or by letter properly sealed, stamped
and addressed and deposited in the Hagerman post office not less than twenty
four (24) hours before the time set for the meeting 1 . (1996 Code §
1-6-2; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   The notice required under this subsection shall include at a minimum
the meeting date, time and place. The city clerk- treasurer shall maintain a
list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall make a
good faith effort to provide advance notification to them of the time and place
of each meeting. (2010 Code)
   C.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a
quorum 2 . (1996 Code §
1-6-4)
   D.   Open Meetings: Meetings of the city council shall be open to the
public, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-2341 et seq. (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. IC § 67-2343(2).
2 3. IC § 50-705.
1-6-6: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
Any two (2) members of the city council shall have authority to pay bills if no
present objection is presented by other members of the council. (1996 Code §
1-6-6)
1-6-7: SALARIES:
Salaries for the mayor and city council shall be set by ordinance in accordance
with Idaho Code section 50-203. (1996 Code §§ 1-5-9, 1-6-8)
CHAPTER 7
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointments And Removals
1-7-2: Bonds Of Officers
1-7-3: Salaries
1-7-1: APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS:
   A.   Appointments: The mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the city
council, a clerk-treasurer, chief of police and public works superintendent.
The mayor may appoint, subject to approval by the council, such other officers
as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the
city. All other employees who are not appointed shall be hired by the mayor 1 .
(1996 Code § 1-9-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Removal From Office: Any appointed officer may be removed from office
by the same authority and in the same manner as he/she was originally
appointed. (1996 Code § 1-9-2)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-204.
1-7-2: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The following officers shall be bonded by the city: the clerk-treasurer and
city council members. (1996 Code § 1-9-3)
1-7-3: SALARIES:
The city council shall approve salaries for appointed officers as necessary
with salaries payable as set by the annual budgeting process. (1996 Code § 1-9-
4)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK-TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Duties
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT 1 :
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a clerk-
treasurer. (1996 Code §
1-7-1; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 1-7-2 of this chapter for bonding requirement.
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Keep Seal: The clerk-treasurer shall be custodian of the city seal and
affix the same to documents as provided 1 .
   B.   Attend Meetings Of Council, Keep Minutes: The clerk- treasurer shall
attend all sessions of the city council, keep a correct journal and shall keep
in a separate book a record of ordinances passed by the council and the titles
of such ordinances; and all ordinances not published in book form shall be
carefully indexed alphabetically. The clerk- treasurer shall see that each
ordinance is published as required by law, and he/she shall keep on file the
proof of such publication. (1996 Code §
1-7-2)
   C.   Report To Council: The clerk-treasurer shall prepare and present to the
city council at its regular meeting each month a full and complete statement of
the financial transactions of his office during the month preceding, which said
statement shall set forth all receipts for licenses issued; monies received
with applications for licenses which are to come before the council, and all
other funds received by the clerk-treasurer. Said report shall give a detailed
explanation of disbursements redeemed including a statement of the aggregate of
checks of each fund issued, of checks redeemed during the month and checks
outstanding against each fund at the close of each month. He/she shall also
arrange for the auditor for the city, at the close of each fiscal year, to
present to the council an annual report covering the operations of the year,
which report shall contain a description of the bonds issued and sold during
the year, and the terms of sale; and shall itemize each and every expense
thereof. The clerk-treasurer shall also make such additional reports and
furnish such other data from the records and files of his office as may be
required by the council. (1996 Code §
1-7-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   D.   Keep Books And Records:
      1.   The clerk-treasurer shall keep such books and permanent records of
the transactions and business of his office as may be necessary to accurately
disclose all transactions and business of his office.
      2.   The clerk-treasurer shall furnish any city officer with a certified
copy of any record, paper or public document on file in his office or in his
custody for the use of such officer in the discharge of his official duties,
and he shall also furnish a certified copy of any such record, paper or
document to any person not an officer of the city upon payment of a fee as set
by resolution in accordance with the public records act 2 .
      3.   The clerk-treasurer shall keep records of outstanding bonds of the
city, showing the number and amount of each, for what and to whom said bonds
were issued; and when any of said bonds are purchased or paid or canceled, said
record shall show the fact; and in the clerk-treasurer's report at the close of
each fiscal year, the clerk-treasurer shall particularly describe the bonds
issued and sold during the year, the terms of sale, and itemize each and every
expense thereof.
   E.   Issue Licenses: The clerk-treasurer shall issue all licenses, a
duplicate of which shall be kept on file, but no license shall be issued to any
person unless fees and charges fixed by resolution shall have first been paid,
for which payment the clerk-treasurer shall issue a receipt in duplicate.
   F.   Claims Against City:
      1.   All claims against the city must be filed with the clerk- treasurer,
in writing.
      2.   All claims for damages against the city must be filed with the
clerk-treasurer within one hundred eighty (180) days after the time when such
claim for damages shall have accrued, specifying the time, place, character and
cause of said damages. No action shall be maintained against the city for any
claim for damages until the same has been presented to the council, and until
ninety (90) days have elapsed after such presentation 3 .
   G.   Receive And Safely Keep Funds: It shall be the duty of the clerk-
treasurer to receive and safely keep in designated depositories 4 , as required
by law, all monies or funds belonging to the city which may come into the
clerk- treasurer's hands; to disburse the same upon an appropriation by
ordinance or resolution of the council. Securities belonging to the city,
incapable of deposit in a checking account, shall be kept by the clerk-
treasurer in a safety deposit box in some banking institution designated by the
council.
   H.   Keep Proper Books And Records: The clerk-treasurer shall keep in a
suitable book or books a full and accurate account of city monies and funds
received by the clerk-treasurer, showing the date of the receipt thereof, the
person from whom received, on what account and to whom disbursed, on what
account and against what fund.
   I.   Issue Duplicate Receipts For Monies Received: The clerk- treasurer
shall execute and deliver to every officer or other person paying monies or
funds into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment and
the amount thereof.
   J.   Deliver Books And Papers To Successor: The clerk-treasurer shall
deliver to the clerk-treasurer's successor in office all books, monies, papers
and other property pertaining to the clerk-treasurer's office.
   K.   Collect All Monies: The clerk-treasurer shall receive, and all officers
or other persons shall forthwith pay to the clerk-treasurer, except as
otherwise provided by this code, all monies due to the city on any account
whatsoever.
   L.   Make Monthly Report To Council: The clerk-treasurer shall, at each
council meeting and at such other times required by the council, render an
account, under oath, showing the condition of the treasury at the date of such
account, including in said statement the balance of money in the treasury. Any
member of the council shall have free access to any and all books or papers in
the office of the clerk- treasurer for the purpose of inspection or
examination. (1996 Code §
1-7-2)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  1-5-2C of this title.
2 1. IC § 9-338.
3 1. IC § 50-219.
4 2. See section
  1-5-1 of this title.
ARTICLE B. LAW ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-2: Duties
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
   A.   Chief Of Police: The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall
appoint a police chief, who shall hold office until such time as he may be
removed by the council.
   B.   Special Police Officers: The police chief may, with the consent of the
council, appoint such special police officers as may be required to properly
enforce the laws. (1996 Code § 1-9-5)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
   A.   General Duties: The police chief, under the direction of the city
council, shall direct and control the police of the city. He/she shall preserve
the peace and good order of the city, quell all riots, arrest and bring all
violators of this code before the proper magistrate for trial, either with or
without process, serve all processes and enforce all orders and judgments
directed to him/her, and take such measures as shall secure the peace and good
order of all public meetings.
   B.   Call For Assistance: The police chief, in execution of his/her duty,
with or without warrant, in arresting any person accused or suspected of crime
or in the suppression of any riot or unlawful assembly, or in the prevention of
violation of this code, shall have power to call upon any citizen or bystander
to assist him/her in the execution of his/her duty.
   C.   Report Violations; Arrest Violators: He/she shall inquire into and
report to the proper magistrate all violations of this code and criminal laws
of the state, and cause all city ordinances to be enforced. He/she shall take
into custody, with or without process, any person found violating this code and
cause such person to be dealt with according to law.
   D.   Keeping Records: The police chief shall keep a record in a book
provided for that purpose, of all monies belonging to the city which may come
into his/her hands from whatever source, stating from whom and on what account
received, and pay the same into the city treasury. He/she shall also record the
name, if known, of every person arrested, the date and cause of arrest, and
such other facts as may be deemed important, and report an abstract thereof to
the council quarterly or more often if required. (1996 Code § 1-9-5)
ARTICLE C. PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment
1-7C-2: Duties
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a public works
superintendent, who shall hold office until such time as the public works
superintendent may be removed by the mayor, with the approval of the council.
(1996 Code § 1-9-6; amd. 2010 Code)
1-7C-2: DUTIES:
The public works superintendent shall have charge of the superintending of all
city work, as follows:
   A.   Streets And Alleys: The superintendent shall supervise the grading,
surfacing, repairs and maintenance of all city streets and alleys.
   B.   Sewers: The superintendent shall supervise the installation and
maintenance of all sewer lines in the city, except the installation of sewer
projects which are accomplished by contract.
   C.   Water: Said superintendent shall supervise the installation and
maintenance of all city water mains and water service, except the installation
of water mains so accomplished by contract.
   D.   Equipment: Said superintendent shall have charge of and supervise the
repair and upkeep of all city public works equipment.
   E.   Employment And Supervision: The superintendent may recommend, with the
consent of the council, such help as is necessary to carry out the work of the
city, such help to be directly under said superintendent's supervision.
   F.   Other Duties: The superintendent shall be responsible for the
accomplishments of such other work of the city which the council may from time
to time assign to the superintendent.
   G.   Report To Council: The superintendent shall present to the council at
its regular meetings a report of the work accomplished the preceding period and
also, as far as can be foreseen, the work planned for the current period. (1996
Code § 1-9-6)
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Area Described
1-8-2: Application Of Provisions
1-8-1: AREA DESCRIBED:
The area of city impact of the city is fixed as follows:
Commencing at the center of Section 24, Township 7 South, Range 13 E.B.M.,
thence North to the center of Section 12, Township 7 South, Range 13 E.B.M.,
thence West to the West quarter corner of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range
13 E.B.M., thence South to the West quarter corner of Section 23, Township 7
South, Range 13 E.B.M., thence East to Point of Beginning.
(1996 Code § 4-3-1)
1-8-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Comprehensive Plan: The plan of the city planning and zoning
commission, and all amendments and supplements thereto, are hereby made
applicable to the area defined in section
1-8-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Zoning And Subdivision Ordinances: The zoning and subdivision
ordinances, and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by the
city, shall apply to the area of city impact as defined in section
1-8-1 of this chapter. (1996 Code § 4-3-1)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Name And Authorization
2-1-2: Purpose
2-1-3: Membership; Terms; Vacancies
2-1-4: Organization; Meetings; Expenditures
2-1-5: Responsibility
2-1-6: Conflict Of Interest
2-1-1: NAME AND AUTHORIZATION:
The name of the organization shall be "City of Hagerman planning and zoning
commission", referred to in this chapter as "commission". Authority has been
delegated by the city council. (Per bylaws dated 8-8-2009)
2-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the commission shall be to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the people in the incorporated area of the city, as set
forth in Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq., and the city zoning ordinance.
(Per bylaws dated 8-8-2009)
2-1-3: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Membership: The commission shall consist of three (3) to twelve (12)
members. They shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city
council. All members must meet the residency requirements as set out in Idaho
Code section 67-6504.
   B.   Terms: The terms of office for the appointive members shall be for a
minimum of three (3) years and a maximum of six (6) years commencing October 1
of that particular year. The six (6) year term shall begin at the expiration of
the original appointed term.
   C.   Selection; Compensation: Members shall be selected without respect to
political affiliations, and shall serve with the following reimbursements or
compensation: Mileage based on existing city rates.
   D.   Vacancies: All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments. Members may be removed after public hearing by a majority vote of
the governing body. (Per bylaws dated 8-8-2009)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Officers Of Commission:
      1.   The commission shall choose its chairperson and vice chairperson on
an annual basis by majority vote. This shall be done during the regular meeting
in October, the beginning of the fiscal year.
      2.   The chairperson shall preside at all commission meetings and have
the powers generally assigned such office in conducting the meetings. It shall
be the chairperson's responsibility to see that the transaction of commission
business is in accord with the law and with this chapter.
      3.   The chairperson shall liaison with the city clerk- treasurer on all
land use planning issues and/or business while implementing the procedure for
processing zoning permits.
      4.   The chairperson may vote on any question but shall cast his or her
vote in the event of a tie vote, provided no one has a conflict of interest.
The chairperson may propose actions to the commission in motion or resolution
form.
      5.   The chairperson shall submit notice and agenda for all meetings to
the city clerk-treasurer for posting at least forty eight (48) hours prior to
the planning and zoning commission meeting, weekends not included.
      6.   The vice chairperson shall assume the duties and the powers of the
chairperson in the absence of the chairperson.
      7.   The commission may establish any additional officers it may deem
necessary.
      8.   The commission may establish subcommittees, advisory committees or
neighborhood groups to advise and assist in carrying out the responsibilities
of the commission.
      9.   The commission may appoint nonvoting ex officio advisors as may be
deemed necessary.
   B.   Meetings; Quorum:
      1.   A record of meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies, findings,
permits and action taken shall be maintained. All meetings and records shall be
open to the public and meet the requirements of the Idaho open meeting laws 1 .
      2.   At least one regular meeting shall be held each month for not less
than nine (9) months of the year.
      3.   A member of the commission shall be required to attend two-thirds
(2/3) of regularly scheduled meetings, or have excused absences from the
chairperson of the commission.
      4.   A majority of commission members shall constitute a quorum.
   C.   Expenditures:
      1.   With the approval of the city council, the commission may receive
and expend funds, goods, information and services from the federal government,
agencies and instrumentalities of the state and local governments, or civic or
private sources.
      2.   Any expenditures of the commission (exclusive of gifts) shall be
within the amounts appropriated and set aside by the governing board for the
purpose of the commission as set forth in the city planning and zoning
ordinances. Within such limits, the commission is authorized to hire such
employees and technical advisors as it deems necessary for the accomplishment
of its authorized purposes and work. (Per bylaws dated 8-8-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-2341 et seq.
2-1-5: RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The commission shall hold public meetings, hearings, work sessions, or
use other means, to obtain input to the planning and zoning process. The
commission will primarily deal with matters set forth in the local planning act
1 , and members should familiarize themselves of those state laws as well as
the city ordinances.
   B.   The commission may also solicit information from and conduct meetings
to consult with public officials and agencies and civic or professional
organizations. As a result of such meetings, the commission may submit
recommendations to the city council concerning the planning and zoning process.
   C.   Further, the commission is empowered to, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Conduct a planning process designed to prepare, implement, review
and update a comprehensive plan that includes all lands within the governing
city council's jurisdiction to be ratified by the city council.
      2.   Hold public hearing prior to recommending the comprehensive plan,
changes to the plan and ordinances.
      3.   Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the
planning process.
      4.   Recommend subdivisions and zoning ordinances.
      5.   Recommend changes to comprehensive planning and zoning ordinances
prior to annexation of unincorporated area.
      6.   Recommend a map, a governing plan and ordinances for an area of city
impact that is within the unincorporated area of a county.
      7.   Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in
administration of ordinances.
      8.   Prepare a procedure for processing zoning permits; namely special
use permits, rezone applications, planned unit development proposals, and
variance applications.
   D.   The commission shall have the right to seek judicial process, as may be
necessary, to enable it to fulfill its functions.
   E.   The commission shall review and update the comprehensive plan and all
ordinances and make recommendations to the city council.
   F.   Any and all maps, plats, and replats of lands which require approval of
a governing board or an officer or employee shall first be submitted to the
commission for its suggestions within the time frame specified within the city
subdivision ordinance and zoning ordinance. (Per bylaws dated 8-8-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-6501 et seq.
2-1-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   A member of the commission shall not participate in any proceeding or
action when the member or employee or his/her employer, business partner,
business associate, or any person related to him/her by affinity or
consanguinity within the second degree has an economic interest in the
procedure or action.
   B.   Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be disclosed
at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or considered.
   C.   Any member with a conflict of interest shall not participate in any
proceeding or action as a commission member. (Per bylaws dated 8-8-2009)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIREWORKS SALES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Retail Sales; Permit Requirements; Fee
3-1-3: Public Display; Permit Requirements; Fee
3-1-4: Hours For Selling And Discharging
3-1-5: Temporary Fireworks Stands
3-1-6: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CITY CLERK-TREASURER: The duly appointed and acting clerk-treasurer of the city
of Hagerman or her authorized deputy.
FIRE CHIEF: The duly appointed and acting chief of the city of Hagerman fire
department or his authorized deputy.
FIREWORKS: Shall be as defined in Idaho Code section 39-2602(3) as it now
exists or as it may hereafter be amended.
NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS: Shall be as defined in Idaho Code section 39-2602
(6) as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended.
PERMIT: An authorization given by the fire chief or the city clerk-treasurer.
SPECIAL FIREWORKS: Shall be as defined in Idaho Code section 39-2602(8) as it
now exists or as it may hereafter be amended. (2010 Code)
3-1-2: RETAIL SALES; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE 1 :
   A.   Permit For Retail Sales: No person shall sell at retail within the city
any nonaerial common fireworks without a permit first having been issued to
that person by the city clerk-treasurer.
   B.   Required Information: Any person seeking a permit to sell nonaerial
common fireworks at retail shall be required to complete and file an
application on a form to be provided by the city clerk-treasurer, approved by
resolution of the city council. The application shall contain, without
limitation, the following:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, including the names of all
partners if a partnership, the names of all officers and directors if a
corporation and the names of all members if a limited liability company;
      2.   The primary location of the applicant;
      3.   Specific street address for each location at which fireworks to be
sold under the permit are to be stored; and
      4.   If applicable, the seller's Idaho sales tax seller's permit number.
   C.   Insurance Requirements: Each application shall be accompanied by a
valid certificate showing public liability and property/casualty insurance in
force with minimum coverage of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
the activities to be conducted by the applicant.
   D.   Nonrefundable Fee: Each application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee in such amount as set by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Issuance; Permit Nontransferable: The fire chief and the city clerk-
treasurer shall review each application and, if it is complete and complies
with the terms of this chapter, and the provisions of Idaho Code section 39-
2601 et seq., shall issue a permit allowing retail sales in accordance with
this chapter, and Idaho Code section 39-2601 et seq., which permit shall not be
transferable.
   F.   Display: Every permit issued shall be displayed prominently in public
view at the location listed on the permit. (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 39-2604.
3-1-3: PUBLIC DISPLAY; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEE:
   A.   Application For Permit: Any person seeking authority for the public
display of nonaerial common fireworks outside the sales period permitted in
section
3-1-4 of this chapter, or of fireworks other than nonaerial common fireworks at
any time, may file an application with the city clerk-treasurer on a form
approved by the city council for such activity.
   B.   Information Required: Any such application shall contain the same
information required by section
3-1-2 of this chapter and shall also set forth the site for the public display
and all security arrangements for the protection of persons and property in
connection with such public display. Types of fireworks and uses in connection
with the public display shall also be set forth in the application.
   C.   Liability Insurance Required: Every such application shall be
accompanied by a valid certificate of public liability and property/casualty
insurance providing for coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
injury to persons and/or damage to property within time for the public display
of the fireworks.
   D.   Application Fee: Every such application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee as set by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Council Consideration; Permit Issuance Or Denial: The fire chief shall
consider the application and, if he determines it to be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter, and Idaho Code section 39-2601 et seq., shall make
a recommendation to the city council. The city council shall issue a permit or
not, in its sole discretion.
   F.   Permit Nontransferable: Any permit issued shall not be transferable by
the applicant.
   G.   Conduct Of Public Display: The applicant may conduct public display of
fireworks in accordance with the application and permit on the date therein
provided. (2010 Code)
3-1-4: HOURS FOR SELLING AND DISCHARGING 1 :
No fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale or discharged within the city
except as follows: a) beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight June 23 and
ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight July 5; and b) beginning at twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight December 26 and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight January 1. (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 39-2606.
3-1-5: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS 1 :
   A.   Requirements And Conditions: Temporary fireworks stands, and the use
thereof, shall be in compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   Temporary stands shall meet the minimum structural stability
requirements for temporary buildings as required by applicable local or state
building codes. Stands shall be constructed in a safe manner and of such
materials as will ensure the safety of the attendants, patrons and other
persons. If wired for electricity, the wiring must conform to the electrical
code of the city.
      2.   A stand shall not be erected before May 5 nor remain after July 20
for the first sales period, nor shall it be erected before December 7 or remain
after January 16 for the second sales period. The premises on which the stand
is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris no later than July 20
or January 16, respectively.
      3.   Each stand shall have at least two (2) exits at least thirty inches
(30") wide which shall be unobstructed at all times and one additional exit for
each thirty two feet (32') of rear wall area in excess of thirty two feet
(32'). All doors shall open outward and shall be kept unlocked and unlatched
during the hours of operation and shall be free and clear at all times.
      4.   Each stand shall have at least two (2) fire extinguishers with a 2-
A minimum rating, in good working order, with a current inspection tag in
place, located near the exits in a visible and readily accessible manner.
      5.   "No smoking within 25 feet" signs shall be prominently displayed on
all four (4) sides of each stand. Smoking shall not be permitted inside the
stand.
      6.   All flammable weeds, grass and other combustible material shall be
cleared from the fireworks stand and for a distance of not less than twenty
feet (20') on each side of the stand. The stand operator shall not allow any
rubbish to accumulate in or around the stand causing a fire nuisance. Only
noncombustible waste containers shall be permitted within the stand.
      7.   Fireworks stands shall not be located within twenty five feet (25')
of any other building or structure, nor within fifty feet (50') of the property
line of any gasoline station, oil storage tank or premises where inflammable
liquids are kept or stored, nor within one hundred feet (100') of fuel
dispensing devices.
      8.   Each fireworks stand shall have an adult supervisor in attendance at
all times. No child or children under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be
allowed inside any fireworks stand at any time, nor shall any child under the
age of sixteen (16) years be allowed to sell fireworks.
      9.   Fireworks stands shall be located only in those areas within the
city where business or commercial activities are authorized.
      10.   Fireworks shall not be discharged, ignited or exploded within one
hundred feet (100') of any fireworks stand, gasoline station, oil storage tank
or premises where inflammable liquids are kept or stored.
      11.   No fireworks stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven
hundred fifty (750) square feet.
      12.   If merchandise is left in the stand when not open for business, an
adult night watchman shall be present at the location and a self-contained
living unit or recreational vehicle that includes toilet facilities must be
provided for the watchman. No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted
to remain inside any stand when it is not open for business.
   B.   Additional Permit Fee: The applicant for a permit to sell nonaerial
common fireworks from a temporary fireworks stand shall submit an additional
fee, as set by resolution of the city council, for inspection of the temporary
fireworks stand, in addition to the fee required for the application to sell as
otherwise provided herein. (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. IC § 39-2607.
3-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR, BEER AND WINE
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Licensed Liquor Sales
3-2A-2: Application For License
3-2A-3: Licensee And Premises Requirements
3-2A-4: License Fees; Term Of License
3-2A-5: License Nontransferable
3-2A-6: Limited Number Of Licenses Issued
3-2A-7: Catering Permit; Filing Fee
3-2A-8: Premises Requirements
3-2A-9: Access To Premises
3-2A-10: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-11: Sale To Minors Or Intoxicated Persons
3-2A-12: Gambling Prohibited
3-2A-13: Revocation Of License; Hearing
3-2A-1: LICENSED LIQUOR SALES:
It shall be lawful to sell liquor by the drink as provided in Idaho Code title
23, chapter 9, as amended, provided a license shall first be obtained as
provided in this article and the rules, regulations and provisions concerning
the licensing and operation of a place of business for the sale of liquor are
adhered to as herein provided. (1996 Code § 2-4-1)
3-2A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Filing Of Application: Before there shall be any lawful sale of liquor
by the drink, an application by the proposed licensee must be made for such
license and filed with the clerk-treasurer in form and manner herein provided.
   B.   Information Required: Such application shall provide for the name of
the applicant, the location of the proposed business, and such other
information as may be prescribed and required by the governing body.
   C.   Proof Of State And County Licenses: At the time said application is
filed, the applicant shall also present a copy of an application for a state
license and also the license issued by the state for the sale of liquor by the
drink at retail, and no license will be issued until a license is first
obtained from the state of Idaho and the county of Gooding.
   D.   Approval By Governing Body: All applications filed with the clerk-
treasurer shall be referred to the governing body for final approval. The
clerk-treasurer shall receive the license fee hereinafter provided at the time
of filing of an application; and upon approval of the application by the
governing body, the license will be issued and delivered to the applicant.
(1996 Code § 2-4-2)
3-2A-3: LICENSEE AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor by the drink to any person
not qualified for a license under Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as amended,
nor upon any premises in any neighborhood which is predominantly residential,
nor within three hundred feet (300') of any school, church or other place of
public worship. (1996 Code § 2-4-3)
3-2A-4: LICENSE FEES; TERM OF LICENSE:
   A.   Fee Imposed: The license fee required of an applicant for the sale of
liquor by the drink shall be in the sum of two hundred twenty five dollars
($225.00) per calendar year or portion thereof, payable in advance. The payment
shall be made with said application for the balance of the calendar year in
which the license is issued.
   B.   Expiration Date: All licenses issued shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 of each calendar year.
   C.   Renewal Of License: Renewals may be granted upon application, if the
record of the applicant is satisfactory to the city council and in accordance
with the provisions of the law and this article, and upon payment of two
hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) for the ensuing year.
   D.   Operation Under Expired License: Any operation under an expired license
shall constitute a violation of this article for each day of operation. (1996
Code § 2-4-4)
3-2A-5: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall be
nontransferable, and if the licensee named in said license shall cease to
personally supervise, conduct and operate said business described in said
license, the sale shall terminate, and no part of the license fee paid shall be
refunded. The licensee may, however, with the consent of the council, move from
the place of business to some other place which may meet the requirements of
this article; provided, application therefor be made to the council and
permitted by it; and if such transfer of the place of business shall be made,
the fee paid shall be operative with like effect as if no change had been made.
(1996 Code § 2-4-5)
3-2A-6: LIMITED NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be limited to not
more than two (2) according to the provisions and restrictions contained in
Idaho Code section 23-903; provided, however, that any license now existing may
be continuously renewed each year upon compliance with all of the other
provisions of this article. (1996 Code § 2-4-6)
3-2A-7: CATERING PERMIT; FILING FEE:
   A.   Obtaining Permit; Term Limited: Liquor catering permits may be obtained
from the city by any person holding an Idaho retail liquor license to serve and
sell liquor retail by the drink at a party or convention not to exceed three
(3) consecutive days in accordance with Idaho Code sections 23-934A and 23-
934B.
   B.   Filing Fee; Nonrefundable: A filing fee in the amount of twenty dollars
($20.00) for each day the permit is to be effective shall be paid to the city
clerk-treasurer and is nonrefundable. (1996 Code § 2-4-11)
3-2A-8: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conformance Required: The premises of every licensee must be in
conformance with all regulations and laws of the state of Idaho and the
provisions of this article. (1996 Code § 2-4-9; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   View Inside Premises: Full and unobstructed view of the inside of the
premises where liquor by the drink is sold shall always be maintained by said
licensee, and no obstructions whatever shall be placed upon the windows or the
doors that are located on said premises, and no coloring shall be placed upon
the glass in order that a full view from the sidewalk or street may be had into
the interior of said premises.
   C.   Lighting; Sanitation: All premises shall be adequately lighted and
subject to periodic sanitary inspection. (1996 Code § 2-4-9)
3-2A-9: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All peace officers appointed by the state, the city, or the county shall have
free access at all times to the licensed premises, and any information touching
the manner and method of the operation of said premises or the sale of said
liquor may be submitted to the city council upon any investigation made of said
licensee. (1996 Code § 2-4-8)
3-2A-10: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   Hours Specified: No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given
away upon any licensed premises, and all liquor not in sealed bottles must be
locked in a separate room or cabinet during the following hours:
      1.   Sunday, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas from one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day; provided, however,
that on any Sunday not otherwise being a prescribed holiday, it shall be lawful
for a licensee having banquet area or meeting room facilities, separate and
apart from the usual dining area (barroom) and separate and apart from a normal
public dining room unless such dining room is closed to the public, to therein
dispense liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. to bona fide participants of banquets, receptions or conventions
for consumption only within the confines of such banquet area or meeting room
facility.
      2.   On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M.
      3.   When any city or county has any ordinance further limiting the hours
of sale of liquor by the drink, then such hours shall be fixed by such
ordinance.
   B.   Exceptions: The county or city may, however, by ordinance, allow the
sale of liquor by the drink on a Sunday, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving, and may
also extend until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. the hours of the sale of liquor by
the drink 1 . (1996 Code § 2-4-12; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 23-927.
3-2A-11: SALE TO MINORS OR INTOXICATED PERSONS:
No sale of liquor shall be made to any minor, nor to any intoxicated person who
may engage in disorderly or improper conduct, and no disorderly or improper
entertainment shall be permitted upon said premises, and any violation of the
provisions of this article shall be considered and shall likewise be grounds
for the cancellation of the license. (1996 Code § 2-4-10)
3-2A-12: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
No gambling of any kind or character shall be operated upon the premises and no
gambling devices shall be maintained thereon. (1996 Code § 2-4-9; amd. 2010
Code)
3-2A-13: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Hearing: If any licensee or employee of a liquor
by the drink establishment violates any of the provisions of this article or is
convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 9, as amended, the city council is hereby authorized and empowered to
revoke the license issued to said licensee; provided, however, that in the
event it is brought to the attention of the council that a violation has taken
place, before revoking such license, the council shall cause notice to be
served upon the licensee, setting forth in general terms the violation or
violations claimed to have been committed, and such notice shall provide a time
for hearing thereon by the council. The date of hearing shall be not less than
five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the service of the
notice that the provisions of this article or the provisions of the laws of the
state or county have been violated. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city
council shall revoke such license theretofore issued and no refund of any
unused portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee.
   B.   Automatic Revocation: Upon revocation by the director of the Idaho
state police of any license theretofore issued by the state, the city shall
automatically revoke the license issued by the city and no refund of any fee
therefor paid shall be made. (1996 Code § 2-4-7; amd. 2010 Code)
ARTICLE B. BEER SALES
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Definitions
3-2B-2: License Required
3-2B-3: Application For License
3-2B-4: Qualifications For License
3-2B-5: License Fees
3-2B-6: Transfer Of License; Fee
3-2B-7: Hours Of Sale
3-2B-8: Restrictions Concerning Minors
3-2B-9: Revocation Of License; Notice; Hearing
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be construed to have
the meanings herein given:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
RETAILER: A person licensed to sell beer to consumers at premises described in
the license. (1996 Code § 2-3-1; amd. 2010 Code)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense beer without first obtaining a
proper license. Upon application for such license, the applicant must produce
proof of state and county licenses. (1996 Code § 2-3-2)
3-2B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made under oath to the clerk-
treasurer, and the application shall show that the applicant possesses all of
the qualifications required by this code. Each application shall be forwarded,
after proper and adequate investigation by the designated representative of the
city, to the city council for approval or disapproval. (1996 Code § 2-3-3)
3-2B-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Qualifications: No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
      1.   Is not the bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of
the United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the state for a
period of one year prior to the date of application; provided, that if the
applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens, and at least
one thereof, or the actual manager therefor, shall have been such resident; and
if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be qualified to do
business in the state, and the manager of such business place shall be such
citizen and shall have been such resident.
      2.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer, employee or spouse
of which has been convicted of the violation of any laws of the state or of the
United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic
beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years forfeited or
suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer charges of any
such violation.
      3.   Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer of which has, been
convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed
any sentence of confinement therefor within five (5) years.
   B.   Continued Conformance: A retail licensee must continue throughout the
license period to have all of the foregoing qualifications and none of the
foregoing disqualifications; and for failure therein, upon proof thereof to an
issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued, and, in
writing sent by United States registered mail, notify each of the other issuers
of a retailer's license to such licensee, stating sufficient facts for
identification of the licensee and the grounds and date of revocation. (1996
Code § 2-3-4)
3-2B-5: LICENSE FEES:
The fees for the sale of beer shall be as follows:
   A.   Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the sale of bottled or canned beer not
consumed on the premises.
   B.   Seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the sale of bottled or canned beer
consumed on the premises.
   C.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the sale of bottled, canned or draft
beer consumed on the premises. (1996 Code § 2-3-5)
3-2B-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Application For Transfer: No license transferred by process of law or
otherwise shall authorize the transferee, including any executor, administrator
or trustee in bankruptcy of the estate of the licensee, to retail beer
thereunder until the transferee shall have filed under oath an application
therefor containing substantially the same information required of an applicant
for a license, and if the transferee possesses the qualifications and none of
the disqualifications for a license as herein provided, the city shall approve
such transfer and amend the license so to show.
   B.   Fee: Such transferee shall accompany each such application for transfer
with, and shall pay, the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (1996 Code § 2-3-9)
3-2B-7: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. (1996 Code § 2-3-6;
amd. 2010 Code)
3-2B-8: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer beer to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years, and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to frequent, loiter in or about or patronize any beer
dispensary, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any owner of such beer
dispensary or his employees to permit any such person under the age of nineteen
(19) to be in or to be employed in such dispensary. (1996 Code § 2-3-7; amd.
2010 Code)
3-2B-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; NOTICE; HEARING:
   A.   Revocation: The governing body shall retain the right at all times to
revoke and cancel any license for just cause. When any license is revoked, the
licensee shall have the privilege of appearing before the governing body to
appeal such revocation. Any conduct or act on the part of the licensee which
may be sufficient cause for revocation of the license must be brought to the
attention of the governing body. (1996 Code § 2-3-8)
   B.   Cancellation: The right shall at all times be and remain vested in the
city council and said council shall revoke and cancel any license for fraud
and/or misrepresentation in its procurement, or for the violation of any of the
provisions of this article, any city ordinance, laws of the state or the United
States, or for any conduct or act permitted by the licensee on the premises
where beer is sold or in connection therewith or adjacent thereto tending to
render said premises a public nuisance, or a menace to the health, peace and
safety or general welfare of the city. (1996 Code § 2-3-10)
   C.   Notice Of Hearing: Whenever information shall come to the clerk-
treasurer or any other officer of the city that any licensee has committed any
act rendering that licensee's license subject to revocation, it shall be the
duty of the officer having such information to forthwith submit the facts to
the city council. Should it appear to the council from such report or from
other information that there is a possible cause for the revocation of such
license, a copy of such report shall be served upon the licensee, together with
a notice citing him to appear before the council for investigation of said
complaint, at a time and place fixed and stated in such notice. In case
personal service cannot be made upon the licensee, the notice shall be mailed
to the licensee, addressed to that person's last known business address. No
further pleading shall be necessary. Such hearing and investigation shall be
informal. If upon such hearing and investigation, the council finds that cause
exists for revocation of such license, the same may be revoked by the council.
(1996 Code § 2-3-11)
ARTICLE C. WINE SALES
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Definitions
3-2C-2: License Required; Application
3-2C-3: Qualifications For License
3-2C-4: License Fee; Term
3-2C-5: Issuance Of License
3-2C-6: Transfer Of License
3-2C-7: Consumption On Premises
3-2C-8: Possession; Transportation Of Open Container
3-2C-9: Restrictions Concerning Minors
3-2C-10: Revocation Of License
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this article, are hereby defined as follows:
DIRECTOR: The director of the Idaho state police.
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation
or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well
as the singular, unless the intent to give to a more limited meaning is
disclosed by the context in which it is used.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the director of the Idaho state police
authorizing a person to sell table wine and/or dessert wine at retail for
consumption off the licensed premises.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
WINE: Includes table wine and dessert wine, unless the context requires
otherwise. (1996 Code § 2-5-1; amd. 2010 Code)
3-2C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   License Required: It shall be lawful for any person to sell wine at
retail within the corporate limits of the city after having first procured a
license therefor. (1996 Code § 2-5-2)
   B.   Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing,
signed and sworn to by the applicant upon application forms furnished by the
clerk-treasurer. Such application shall be filed by the clerk-treasurer, along
with proof of equivalent state and county licenses, and presented to the mayor
and council at a meeting of the city council for their approval, rejection or
further consideration. (1996 Code § 2-5-3)
3-2C-3: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
The applicant for license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary to
obtain a license from the director of the Idaho state police, and maintain such
qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The
possession of licenses regularly issued by the said state department and the
county, in addition to a city beer license, shall be prima facie evidence of
the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder. (1996 Code § 2-
5-4; amd. 2010 Code)
3-2C-4: LICENSE FEE; TERM:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per year. Such license year shall be from one minute past twelve
o'clock (12:01) A.M. January 1 through December 31. Such fee shall be imposed
and collected for all or any portion of the year. (1996 Code § 2-5-5)
3-2C-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence, as
required by section
3-2C-3 of this article, as to the qualification of the applicant and by payment
of the required license fee, the clerk-treasurer shall, upon approval of the
city council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail within
the city for such calendar year or the remainder thereof. (1996 Code § 2-5-6)
3-2C-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The assignment or transfer of a wine license shall be the same as provided by
city ordinance providing for the assignment or transfer of a beer license as
provided in section
3-2B-6 of this chapter. (1996 Code § 2-5-7)
3-2C-7: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor by
the drink shall not permit consumption of wine on the licensed premises and may
sell the wine only in its original unbroken, sealed container. Wine sold for
consumption on the retailer's premises may be sold only during hours that
liquor by the drink may be sold pursuant to the laws of the state. Wine sold by
the retailer for consumption off the premises of the retailer may be sold only
during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the laws of the state. (1996
Code § 2-5-8)
3-2C-8: POSSESSION; TRANSPORTATION OF OPEN CONTAINER:
No person may, while operating in or upon a motor vehicle upon a public street
of the city, have in his possession any wine in an open or unsealed container
of any kind. (1996 Code § 2-5-9)
3-2C-9: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
   A.   Consumption Or Possession:
      1.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may consume or
possess wine.
      2.   No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years.
   B.   Misrepresentation Of Age:
      1.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall, by any
means, represent to any retailer or distributor or to any agent or employee of
such retailer or distributor that he is twenty one (21) years or more of age
for the purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor, or his agent or
employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
      2.   No person shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or
distributor, or the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor, that any
other person is twenty one (21) years or more of age, when in fact such other
person is under the age of twenty one (21) years, for the purpose of inducing
such retailer or distributor to sell, serve or dispense wine to such other
person. (1996 Code § 2-5-10)
3-2C-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the mayor and city
council, and the mayor and city council may, as hereinafter provided, revoke or
cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement, or for
violation of any of the provisions of this article, or for any conduct or act
of the licensee or his employees, or any conduct or act permitted by him or
them on the premises where such business is conducted, or in connection
therewith, or adjacent thereto, tending to render such business or such
premises where the same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the
health, peace, safety or general welfare of the city; provided, that revocation
or suspension of the state license by the director of the Idaho state police
shall be deemed prima facie evidence for revocation or suspension of the
license issued herein. (1996 Code § 2-5-11; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS AND SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: License And Insurance Required
3-3-2: Mechanical Rides, Location
3-3-3: Circuses And Carnivals
3-3-4: License Fees For Rides
3-3-5: Concessionaires And Special Affairs Producers
3-3-1: LICENSE AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required; Posting: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate, engage in or carry on any business, amusement or device as referred to
in this chapter without first obtaining a city license therefor. Such license
shall be posted on the site during the operation of such. (1996 Code §
2-1-1)
   B.   Insurance Required: Before a license shall be issued, proof of
insurance shall be shown, naming the city as an additional insured. Such
insurance shall be no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
occurrence. (1996 Code §
2-1-4; amd. 2010 Code)
3-3-2: MECHANICAL RIDES, LOCATION:
Any person who shall make application to the clerk-treasurer for a license to
conduct or operate any merry-go-round or mechanical device giving rides to
people shall, at the same time of making such application, file with the clerk-
treasurer a written statement, particularly describing the location of the
place where the person desires to conduct or operate such mechanical rides.
(1996 Code §
2-1-2)
3-3-3: CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS:
   A.   Deposit Required: Before a license shall be issued to a manager, owner
or operator of a circus, menagerie or carnival, if such activity is to take
place inside the city park, such person shall be required to deposit with the
clerk-treasurer a cash deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), such
deposit to be a guarantee that after the period during which the circus,
menagerie or carnival is operated, the grounds used for each operation shall be
cleaned of all trash, paper and other debris caused to be deposited thereon by
said circus, menagerie or carnival. (1996 Code §
2-1-3; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Cleanup; Refund Of Deposit: Before returning said deposit to the
depositor, the clerk-treasurer shall have such grounds, street or streets
inspected for the purpose of ascertaining that such cleaning has been done.
(1996 Code §
2-1-3)
3-3-4: LICENSE FEES FOR RIDES:
There shall be a minimum license fee for up to and including four (4) rides,
with an additional charge per ride over the initial four (4). Said license
fees, to be set by resolution by the city council, shall be paid to the city
clerk- treasurer prior to operation of a circus, menagerie or carnival. (1996
Code §
2-1-5)
3-3-5: CONCESSIONAIRES AND SPECIAL AFFAIRS PRODUCERS:
   A.   Concessionaires:
      1.   Deposit Required: Before a license shall be issued to any person to
operate a concession in the limits of the city, any such applicant shall be
required to deposit with the clerk- treasurer a sum as set by resolution to
guarantee that, after the period the special affair is operated, the grounds
shall be cleared of all trash, paper and other debris.
      2.   Cleanup; Refund Of Deposit: The clerk-treasurer shall cause the
premises to be inspected and if the clerk-treasurer finds the same to be
cleared and cleaned of such trash and debris, shall refund the deposit to such
applicant, otherwise said deposit shall be and remain the property of the city.
   B.   Special Affairs Producers:
      1.   Deposit Required: Before a license shall be issued to any person to
conduct or produce any fundraising special affairs on the public parks of the
city, any such applicant shall be required to deposit with the clerk-treasurer
a sum as set by resolution to serve as a user fee and to guarantee that, after
the period the special affair is operated, the grounds will be cleared of all
trash, paper and other debris.
      2.   Waiver: Such fee cannot be waived except by special request to the
city council from youth oriented, not for profit groups.
      3.   Cleanup; Refund Of Deposit: The clerk-treasurer shall cause the
premises to be inspected and if the clerk-treasurer finds the same to be
cleared and cleaned of such trash and debris, shall refund the deposit to such
applicant, otherwise said deposit shall be and remain the property of the city.
(1996 Code §
2-1-6; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 4
POOL, BILLIARD HALLS AND CARD ROOMS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Licenses Required; Fees
3-4-2: Minors Restricted
3-4-1: LICENSES REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   Licenses Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or conduct
a billiard, pool or bagatelle or pigeonhole table open to the public without
having first obtained a license therefor as is herein required.
      2.   All applications for such licenses shall state thereon the intended
location of the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein.
(1996 Code § 2-2-1)
   B.   Fees; License Nontransferable:
      1.   Before a license shall be issued to any person to operate or open a
billiard or pool hall or card room, said person shall pay to the clerk-
treasurer a license fee. Fees shall be set by resolution of the city council on
an annual basis. Such license shall expire on the last day of each year.
      2.   The license under this chapter shall be nontransferable. (1996 Code
§ 2-2-2)
3-4-2: MINORS RESTRICTED:
Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall, under no circumstances,
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any hall licensed hereunder at any time if
alcohol is on the premises, unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent under
the direction and the consent and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other
person having custody of such minor, and it shall be unlawful for the
proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to
frequent, loiter or remain within the hall in violation of this section. (1996
Code § 2-2-3)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definition
3-5-2: License Required; Term; Fee
3-5-3: Application For License
3-5-4: Exhibition Of License
3-5-5: License Nontransferable
3-5-6: Loud Noises And Loudspeakers
3-5-7: Uninvited Peddlers Declared Nuisance
3-5-8: Revocation Of License
3-5-1: DEFINITION:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, a "transient merchant", "itinerant
merchant", or "itinerant vendor" is defined as any person, whether as owner,
agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who
engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and
merchandise within the city; and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires,
leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad
boxcar or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any
place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
   B.   The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any
local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient
business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer.
   C.   This definition shall not include any nonprofit or public organization
as determined by the state. (1996 Code § 2-6-1)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; TERM; FEE:
   A.   License Required; Term: It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant,
itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the
city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and all such licenses issued under the provisions
hereof shall expire ninety (90) days after the date of issuance thereof unless
a prior date is fixed therein. (1996 Code § 2-6-2)
   B.   License Fee: Licensees under this chapter shall pay a fee as set by
resolution. (1996 Code § 2-6-3; amd. 2010 Code)
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applicants for a license under this chapter, whether a person, firm or
corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant if
an individual, by all partners if a partnership and by the president if a
corporation, with the clerk-treasurer, showing:
   A.   The name of the person having the management or supervision of the
applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be
carried on in the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such
business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such
person will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name
and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if
any; and if a corporation, under the laws of the state the same is
incorporated.
   B.   The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's
business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business
shall be conducted.
   C.   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city.
   D.   Credentials from the person for whom the applicant proposed to do
business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
   E.   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or
the method or plan of doing such business as the clerk-treasurer may deem
proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the public
good. (1996 Code § 2-6-4)
3-5-4: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the
place of business named therein. In the event that such person applying for
said license shall desire to do business in more than one place within the
city, separate licenses shall be issued for each place of business, and shall
be posted conspicuously in each place of business. (1996 Code § 2-6-5)
3-5-5: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license shall be transferred. (1996 Code § 2-6-6)
3-5-6: LOUD NOISES AND LOUDSPEAKERS:
No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make an
outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device, including any
loudspeaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public places or upon any private premises in the city where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly
heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public places for the
purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such
licensee proposes to sell. (1996 Code § 2-6-7)
3-5-7: UNINVITED PEDDLERS DECLARED NUISANCE:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The practice of going in and upon private residences
in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient
vendors of merchandise not having been requested or invited so to do by the
owner or occupant of said residences for the purpose of soliciting orders for
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or
hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance
as a misdemeanor.
   B.   Posting Of Sign: Any property posting a sign restricting peddlers shall
constitute a withdrawal of permission or invitation. (1996 Code § 2-6-8)
3-5-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Causes For Revocation: The licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may
be revoked by the city council, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
      2.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
      3.   Any violation of this chapter.
      4.   Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall
be given, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. (1996 Code § 2-6-9)
CHAPTER 6
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARDS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: Operation Or Expansion Prohibited
3-6-3: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
An "automobile wrecking yard" is defined as a place of business where one or
more unserviceable, discarded, worn out, or junked automobiles or bodies,
engines, tires, parts, or accessories are gathered together and stored. (1996
Code §
7-2-2)
3-6-2: OPERATION OR EXPANSION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Operation: It is in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city that the operation of automobile
wrecking yards be prohibited and controlled within the city limits. (1996 Code
§
7-2-1)
   B.   Establishment Or Commencement: From and after the effective date
hereof, it shall be unlawful to establish or commence the operation of an
automobile wrecking yard within the city limits. (1996 Code §
7-2-3)
   C.   Expansion: From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be
unlawful for any existing automobile wrecking yard to expand or enlarge its
area of operation. (1996 Code §
7-2-4)
3-6-3: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be and constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code §
7-2-5)
CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS LICENSING
SECTION:
3-7-1: Applicability
3-7-2: License Required
3-7-3: Exemptions
3-7-4: Business License Application
3-7-5: Additional Requirements For Mobile Food Businesses
3-7-6: Business License Denial, Suspension, Revocation; Hearing; Appeal;
Penalties
3-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all businesses. A
"Business" is defined as any wholesale and retail businesses and all
activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits or professions that conduct
business from a location within the City of Hagerman with the object of gain,
profit, benefit or advantage. Each business location shall be deemed a separate
business unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the business.
This chapter is not intended to repeal any license or franchise provisions of
any other ordinance of the City of Hagerman, nor is the license issued pursuant
to this chapter to be considered a waiver of any other requirements of
compliance with any federal, state or local laws. (Ord. 1104, 7-2-2025)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in any business within the City of Hagerman for which
licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a Business
License Application (as hereinafter defined) to the City Clerk and receiving a
license from the City of Hagerman to operate the business ("Business License")
in accordance with the provisions of this title. The business license shall be
in addition to any other requirements of this chapter or the other provisions
of this chapter. A business license shall be valid for the remainder of the
calendar year in which it is granted so long as the ownership, management,
nature of the business or location of business remains unchanged or is not
otherwise suspended or revoked as provided for herein. (Ord. 1104, 7-2-2025)
3-7-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Persons participating in charitable activities within the meaning of
Section 501(C)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. Possession of a
certificate of such status from the Internal Revenue Service shall be required
to qualify for this exemption.
      2.   Any agency of the United States Government and any political sub-
division of the State of Idaho.
      3.   Persons who occupy space at a flea market, including the operator of
the flea market.
      4.   Persons who make occasional sales of their own household property
not more than twice each calendar year.
      5.   Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual labor not including
temporary employees of a regularly conducted business.
      6.   Mobile food businesses located on private property for a period of
less than twenty four (24) hours in commercially zoned areas where an existing,
permanent business operates in a building with a certificate of occupancy.
      7.   Landlords of any residential property having one (1) or two (2)
family units. (Ord. 1104, 7-2-2025)
3-7-4: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION:
   A.   To obtain a business license, the applicant ("Applicant") must submit
an application ("Business License Application") to the City Clerk.
   B.   Business license applications can be obtained from the City Clerk's
Office or found on the City of Hagerman's website.
   C.   Business license application shall include such information as may be
required by the City Council including, but not limited to:
      1.   Name (owner and manager).
      2.   Applicant address (owner and Manager).
      3.   Applicant phone number (owner and manager).
      4.   Physical and mailing address and phone number of the business.
      5.   Nature of the business being conducted.
   D.   Every business license application shall be accompanied by a fee as may
be established by the City Council from time to time ("Business License Fee").
   E.   Every business license application shall be signed by the owner of the
Business or his agent and submitted to the City Clerk's Office within ten (10)
business days of the opening of the business.
   F.   Any changes in the business as directed in subsection
3-7-4C shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office within ten (10) business
days of the changes.
   G.   Irrespective of the date of the business license application, the
initial business license shall be valid from the date of the approval of the
business license until the end of the calendar year.
   H.   The business license fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council
and must be paid at the time the business license application is submitted to
the City Clerk's Office and prior to the issuance of a business license. City
services, where applicable, will not be turned on until the business license is
approved.
   I.   Every business required under this chapter to obtain a business license
shall display such license in a prominent location upon the business premises.
No business shall loan, sell, give, or assign to any other person or allow any
other person to use or display, destroy, damage or remove a business license,
or to have in his possession any business license which was not issued to that
business.
   J.   Whenever the ownership of a business, nature of the business or
location of any business within the City of Hagerman is changed, a new business
license application reflecting the change shall be presented to the Clerk's
Office within ten (10) business days of said change. The issuance of the new
business license shall be valid until the end of the calendar year in which it
was issued.
   K.   Whenever the management of the business changes, the Clerk's Office
shall be notified in writing of the new manager's name, address and phone
number within ten (10) business days of said change.
   L.   The holder of a business license ("Business Licensee") shall comply
with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
   M.   A business license may be denied, suspended, or revoked for failure of
the business licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
1104, 7-2-2025)
3-7-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE FOOD BUSINESSES:
   A.   In addition to the requirements for a business license, a mobile food
business which is defined as a business that serves food or beverages from a
self-contained unit or in a trailer with wheels and conducts all or part of its
operations on premises other than its own shall provide annually to the City of
Hagerman at the beginning of each year:
      1.   Written permission from the property owner to allow the operation of
a mobile food business.
      2.   Confirmation of permission from the property owner allowing
employees and customers access to a commercially plumbed public restroom on
site.
      3.   Provide site plan depicting the location of the mobile food business
on the property in compliance with the restrictions listed herein. A site plan
must be provided for each location to be utilized by the mobile food business.
      4.   Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. Water must be
supplied from an internal tank attached to the mobile food business.
      5.   Electricity shall be from a generator or an electrical outlet that
is in compliance with the electrical code enforced by the State of Idaho,
Electrical Bureau, Division of Public Safety.
      6.   A copy of the electrical permit issued by the State of Idaho must be
presented to the City of Hagerman prior to a business license for a mobile food
business being issued.
      7.   Applicant must provide a copy of the plan for the removal of gray
water from the mobile food business location. Connection to the City of
Hagerman sewer system is prohibited. The plan for removal of the gray water
from the location must be approved by the City of Hagerman Public Works
Administrator.
      8.   A fire inspection must be completed annually for licensing. The
mobile food business must meet and maintain all current Fire Code requirements.
      9.   Applicant must provide a copy of the health permit issued by the
South-Central Health District annually.
      10.   Applicant must provide a State of Idaho Tax Identification Number
annually.
      11.   Applicant must provide current proof of public liability insurance
in an amount not to exceed the single-limit coverage of at least five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the mobile food business.
      12.   Mobile food businesses must provide a garbage container capable of
holding all trash and garbage generated by the operation of said business. The
container must be emptied periodically as necessary. The immediate areas
surrounding the mobile food business must be kept free of litter, grease and
other debris at all times.
      13.   A drive through is not permitted in conjunction with any mobile
food business.
      14.   All signage must be securely attached to the mobile food business
unit.
      15.   Only canopies which are part of the mobile food business itself and
supported only by the mobile food business unit will be allowed.
   B.   A Mobile Food Business:
      1.   Shall be located on private property in commercially zoned areas
where an existing, permanent business operates in a building with a certificate
of occupancy.
      2.   Are not allowed on any City of Hagerman property or right-of-way
unless approved by the City of Hagerman.
      3.   Shall not be located in the following areas:
         a.   Within six feet (6') from the edge of any public sidewalk,
driveway, utility box, vaults, handicap ramps, or emergency call boxes.
         b.   Within ten feet (10') of any doorway, building entrance/exit, or
other building structure.
         c.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         d.   In any area that obstructs the movement/visibility of vehicles or
bicycles using the appropriate public right-of-way, access easements, drive
aisle, or interferes with pedestrian use of the same.
         e.   Likewise, no associated outdoor seating, or other items related
to the mobile food business shall violate the restrictions above.
      4.   Mobile food businesses shall not use or attach any items to public
amenities (trees, streetlights, street furniture, railing, etc.) for any
reason.
         a.   A mobile food businesses which is readily movable without
disassembling for transport to another location shall provide annual proof of
mobility by physically driving the mobile food business to city hall for a
physical inspection by the City Clerk, or their designee, at a scheduled time
designated by the City Clerk. (Ord. 1104, 7-2-2025)
3-7-6: BUSINESS LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; HEARING; APPEAL;
PENALTIES:
   A.   If the City Clerk determines that facts exist for denial, suspension,
or revocation of a business license under this chapter, the City Clerk shall
notify the applicant or business licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent
to deny, suspend or revoke the business license, including the grounds
therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be
directed to the most current business address on file with the City Clerk.
Within five (5) working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may
provide to the Mayor and City Council in writing a response that shall include
a statement of reasons why the business license or permit should not be denied,
suspended, or revoked. Within five (5) days of the receipt of respondent's
written response, the Mayor shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing
date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
   B.   Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written
response, the Mayor and City Council shall conduct a hearing at which
respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present
evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not received by
the Mayor and City Council in the time stated or, if after the hearing the City
Council finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial,
suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall
become final five (5) days after the Mayor sends, by certified mail, written
notice that the business license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such
notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or business licensee of
the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   If the City Council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension,
or revocation of a business license, then within five (5) days after the
hearing, the Mayor shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the
business license and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified
mail of such action and shall contemporaneously therewith issue the business
license.
   D.   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a business license becomes
final, the applicant or business licensee (aggrieved party) whose application
for a business license has been denied or whose business license has been
suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of
competent jurisdiction as allowed by law. Upon the filing of any court action
to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the City of Hagerman's
enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the City of Hagerman
shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional business license. The
provisional business license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue
operation of the business licensee's business and will expire upon the court's
entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge,
restrain or otherwise enjoin the City of Hagerman's enforcement.
   E.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be assessed a fixed penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding court costs and fees. A second and any
subsequent conviction for a violation of the provisions of this chapter within
five (5) years shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a
county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both. Each day such violation is committed, or
permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
   F.   Instead of, or in addition to the penalties or relief provided above,
the City of Hagerman may take such other available legal action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter. A civil action may be
commenced and pursued in the Gooding County Court for the purpose of enforcing
or correcting any violation of this chapter, including but not limited to an
order enjoining or preventing operation of the business in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 1104, 7-2-2025)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Defined; Enumerated
4-1-2: Offensive Deposits; Obstructions On Public Ways
4-1-3: Noises
4-1-4: Noxious Weeds
4-1-5: Offensive Premises; Cleanup
4-1-6: Keeping Junk
4-1-7: Dead Animals
4-1-8: Abandoned Vehicles, Equipment And Personal Property
4-1-9: Abatement Procedures
4-1-10: Charges For Abatement Of Weeds And Other Nuisances
4-1-11: Penalty For Violation
4-1-1: DEFINED; ENUMERATED:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "nuisance" is defined to mean any
condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to
the property of others, or which causes or tends to cause substantial
diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such
premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the
depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following:
   A.   Useless lumber, junk, trash or other debris.
   B.   Abandoned, inoperable, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
automobiles, implements and/or equipment, machinery, appliances and personal
property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for
which it was manufactured, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or
containers.
   C.   Any compost pile or liquid/semi-liquid waste which is of such nature as
to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract
rodents, vermin or other disease carrying pests, animals or insects; provided,
that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a
nuisance, nor shall a properly maintained garden compost facility.
   D.   Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any
person to keep or permit another to keep upon any premises deleterious or
septic material which causes adverse effects upon the occupancy or use of
neighboring lands. Such materials must generally be retained in containers or
vessels which deny access by humans, flies, insects, rodents and animals.
   E.   All offensive and noxious weeds or plants, within the limits of the
city, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed, cut and
destroyed by the owner or agent of the ground or premises on which the same are
located. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or person having charge of
any property within the city limits where offensive or noxious weeds or plants
are growing to remove, cut and/or destroy the same. This shall include all
rights of way abutting the property which they own, for which they are an
agent, or for which they have charge. (1996 Code §
7-1-1; amd. Ord. 1106, 6-18-2025)
4-1-2: OFFENSIVE DEPOSITS; OBSTRUCTIONS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Rubbish Deposits: Any person who shall wilfully or negligently throw,
dump, store or deposit upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place, or any
portion thereof, any glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans, barbed wire, boards, or
any other substance or material which would be likely to injure any horse,
stock, vehicle or person traveling thereon, or which obstructs or impedes the
free passage of pedestrians or public travel upon such sidewalk, street, alley
or public place or any portion thereof, shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
   B.   Water Flowing Or Fires On Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any
person to:
      1.   Wilfully or negligently allow irrigation water to flow upon the
street in such a manner that it stands in pools or continuously flows upon said
streets.
      2.   Allow overflow water from air conditioners to run across or stand
upon the sidewalks or streets.
      3.   Burn leaves, grass or other materials upon the streets.
   C.   Obstructing Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
display, sign, merchandise or other obstruction upon any public sidewalk. (1996
Code §
7-1-2)
4-1-3: NOISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a radio, television set,
loudspeaking or other noisome device in such a manner that it disturbs the
peace and quiet of nearby residents. (1996 Code §
7-1-4; amd. 2010 Code)
4-1-4: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared; Cutting Or Removal Required: All offensive and
noxious weeds or plants are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
be cut, removed and destroyed by the owner or agent of the ground or premises
on which the same are located, when notified to do so by the mayor or the city
council. (1996 Code §
7-1-3; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Failure To Remove Weeds; Violation: Any person owning or controlling
any such property upon whom notice has been served to remove said noxious
weeds, who fails to comply with said notice within the time specified in said
notice shall be violating the provisions of this code. (1996 Code §
7-1-3)
4-1-5: OFFENSIVE PREMISES; CLEANUP:
   A.   Refuse, Stagnant Water; Cleanup:
      1.   No person shall permit or suffer to be in or accommodate in or upon
any yard, lot, place or premises or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent to or
abutting upon any lot, block, place, premises or in any building or shed owned
or occupied by said person or for which he may be the agent within the limits
of the city any stagnant or impure water, refuse, vegetable decay or decaying
substance, garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer such yard, lot, place,
building or premises to be or to remain in such condition as to cause or create
a nuisance or offensive smell or to pollute or render unhealthful the
atmosphere or premises or thereby to be, become, cause or create a public
nuisance. (1996 Code §
7-1-5)
      2.   Any person violating this provision shall clean up said premises and
abate such nuisance within forty eight (48) hours after having received notice
of said condition from the city council. (1996 Code §
7-1-5; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Offensive Matter: It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon
property, or to allow to remain upon any property within said person's control,
any matter which is offensive to the senses or injurious to health as
determined by the city council. (1996 Code §
7-1-5)
4-1-6: KEEPING JUNK:
   A.   Definition: "Junk" is hereby defined to be any used material or any
parts of material units which have become useless for the purpose for which
said material was originally fabricated or manufactured and shall include, but
not be limited to, automobiles not licensed for the current year and any
unsightly accumulation of garbage, rubbish or debris.
   B.   Keeping Junk On Premises: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for
any person to keep, permit to be kept or to place or cause to be placed any
junk upon premises owned or occupied by said person or upon any of the streets
or alleys or other public grounds.
   C.   Nuisance Declared; Abatement By City:
      1.   The keeping by any person of junk on premises owned or occupied by
said person or the placing thereof on streets, alleys or public places is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      2.   The city may remove or abate such nuisance at the expense of the
property upon which the same exists after giving the owner thereof notice to
remove the same within fifteen (15) days, and the failure of said owner to
remove or cause to be removed said nuisance within said time, and the expense
thereof to the city may be certified to the proper officer of Gooding County
for collection with other taxes as provided by law. (1996 Code §
7-1-6)
4-1-7: DEAD ANIMALS:
Any dead animals or parts of animals on premises in a residential area/district
shall be removed within a twenty four (24) hour period. If such is not removed,
the city shall cause its removal. (1996 Code §
7-1-7)
4-1-8: ABANDONED VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONAL PROPERTY:
No person in charge of or in control of any premises, whether as owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked,
junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating and unlicensed motor vehicle,
machinery, farm implement, equipment and/or personal property of any kind,
which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was
manufactured, to remain on such property longer than twenty eight (28) days,
unless such vehicle, equipment or other property, is maintained in an enclosed
building or so located within a fenced or screened enclosure of at least six
feet (6') in height, in accordance with, and as defined by, the zoning
ordinance and building codes of the city, such that the materials are not
readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property.
Allowing such materials to remain unenclosed or unscreened shall constitute a
nuisance, This section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle. equipment or
other personal property on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place, other than in a residential district, and operated in a lawful
manner, when the keeping or maintenance of such vehicle equipment or other
damaged and abandoned personal property is necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise and is not in violation of other provisions of law. (Ord.
1106, 6-18-2025)
4-1-9: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Prior to initiating prosecution for violation of this chapter, city
staff shall attempt to provide notice to the owner of the real property upon
which the nuisance is located. Additional notice shall be attempted to the
occupant/tenant or agent if one is known. Said notice shall describe the
location of the property as accurately as possible and shall specify the nature
of the nuisance and the time by which the nuisance must be abated. Said notice
shall be mailed to the owner, agent, person in charge of such property, if such
owner, agent or person in charge can be found. If an owner, agent or person in
charge cannot be found, then notice shall be provided by posting a notice in a
conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of said notice by
certified mail to the owner or agent of the same at such owner's or agent's
last known address.
   B.   The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lands upon
which a nuisance is located may thereafter store such nuisance vehicles,
equipment or materials into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used
for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or
otherwise remove the vehicles, equipment or materials to a lawful storage
location outside the corporate limits of the city. If the nuisance consists of
weeds or other vegetative materials, it shall be removed and disposed of
lawfully so as to eliminate the fire hazard created and/or the risk of spread
of weed infestation.
   C.   The provisions of this chapter shall not compromise or otherwise
adversely affect the applicability of provisions of Idaho law regarding the
designation of nuisances and their abatement. (Ord. 1106, 6-18-2025)
4-1-10: CHARGES FOR ABATEMENT OF WEEDS AND OTHER NUISANCES:
   A.   Charges Imposed: Charges for mowing of weeds on private property or
eliminating other nuisances described in this chapter shall be the actual cost
to the city for such removal. (1996 Code §
7-1-8)
   B.   Failure To Pay Bill: Lien: The property owner shall be billed, and if
debt is not paid in a timely fashion. the city shall cause a lien to be placed
on the property in the amount of the debt. (1996 Code §
7-1-8; amd. 2010 Code; Ord. 1106, 6-18-2025)
4-1-11: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   If the owners, tenants or occupants allow said nuisance to exist or
fail to abate the nuisance, they, and each of them, shall be guilty of an
infraction and upon being found liable therefore shall be subject to an
infraction penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day that a violation
of this chapter exists may be charged as a separate infraction or misdemeanor
violation, as appropriate. Any nuisance which violates this chapter and which
constitutes an immediate hazard to the public health or which continues to
exist after a finding of guilt or liability in two (2) or more prior infraction
proceedings, shall constitute a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for up to one hundred eighty (180)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   B.   In the event the property owner fails, refuses or neglects to abate
such nuisance as identified by the city for a period of more than thirty (30)
days; the city shall cause the same to be abated and such costs shall be placed
upon the tax rolls of the property owner pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-317.
(Ord. 1106, 6-18-2025)
CHAPTER 2
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-2-1: Burning, Incineration Regulated
4-2-2: Types Of Fires Allowed
4-2-3: Prohibited Types Of Open Burning
4-2-4: Penalties; Enforcement
4-2-1: BURNING, INCINERATION REGULATED:
No person shall burn or incinerate any rubbish or garbage, except as
hereinafter provided:
   A.   Incinerators:
      1.   Any person may use an incinerator (as defined by the Department of
Environmental Quality in IDAPA 16.01.01) in the interior of a building or on
the exterior of a building, provided such incinerator meets the requirements of
the Building and Fire Codes, planning and zoning requirements and meets the
approval of Idaho Department of Environmental Quality on emissions.
      2.   The hours of operation of such incinerator shall be between seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and sunset.
   B.   Outdoor Fireplaces, Barbecue Pits: Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit the use of outdoor fireplaces, barbecue pits or grills in
preparing food or for recreational purposes, except as listed hereafter. (2010
Code)
4-2-2: TYPES OF FIRES ALLOWED:
No person shall build, ignite, or maintain any outdoor fire of any kind or
character, or for any purpose whatsoever, except as provided herein. The
following types of fires are allowable and shall not require a permit:
   A.   Firefighting personnel for the purpose of combating fires.
   B.   Barbecues or other fires used in the preparation of food.
   C.   Campfires, or fires used for recreational or ceremonial purposes. Fire
extinguishing equipment, such as a water hose connected to a water supply,
shall be readily available. (2010 Code)
   D.   The time for all allowed open burning shall be from seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. to sunset. (Ord. 1074, 6-7-2017)
4-2-3: PROHIBITED TYPES OF OPEN BURNING:
No person shall allow, suffer, cause, or permit burning of any of the following
types of materials at any time:
   A.   Burn barrels of any kind.
   B.   Household solid waste or garbage.
   C.   Junked motor vehicles or any material resulting from a salvage
operation.
   D.   Tires or other rubber materials or products.
   E.   Insulated wire.
   F.   Plastics.
   G.   Existing structures.
   H.   Asphalt, tarpaper, waste, or heavy petroleum products.
   I.   Lumber or timbers treated with preservatives, lawn clippings.
   J.   Other construction materials such as sheetrock, flooring, insulation.
   K.   Dead animals or parts thereof, except upon the order of a Public Health
Officer to dispose of diseased animals.
   L.   Paint, solvent, or other chemicals including motor oils, diesel,
gasoline, etc.
   M.   Trade waste.
   N.   Pathogenic wastes or infectious wastes, except under order of a Public
Health Officer.
   O.   Hazardous waste, except when burned under order of a public or military
fire chief to dispose of materials (including military ordnance) which present
a danger to life, valuable property, or the public welfare, or for the purpose
of the prevention of a fire hazard when no practical alternative method of
disposal or removal is available.
   P.   Any types of materials that emit large volumes of smoke, particulates,
or odors including wet materials.
   Q.   Any other material that would otherwise be allowed under this chapter,
but is determined to be a nuisance, hazard, or source of air pollution.
   R.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any section of this chapter, any
material which violates and causes an air pollution alert.
   S.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any section of this chapter, any
material that is restricted as specified in IDAPA Rules for the Control of Air
Pollution 16.01.01. (2010 Code)
4-2-4: PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Penalties Imposed: Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall be a violation of this chapter, and will permit the City to initiate one
or more of the following actions:
      1.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction. An infraction shall be punishable as by civil penalty as
provided in subsection
1-4-1B of this Code.
      2.   Legal proceedings to obtain an injunction against the owner of the
property upon which open burning was conducted.
   B.   Enforcement By State: Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the
Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) from enforcing the provisions of the
"Rules for the Control of Air Pollution in Idaho" (IDAPA) 16.01.01, the
Environmental Protection and Health Act, or the Hazardous Waste Management Act
1 . (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 39-101 et seq., and § 39-4401 et seq., respectively.
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: General Offense
5-1-2: Concealing Knowledge
5-1-3: Assault And Battery
5-1-4: Disorderly Conduct
5-1-5: Disturbing The Peace
5-1-6: Weapons, Discharge
5-1-7: Drunkenness
5-1-8: Obscene Conduct; Prostitution
5-1-9: Window Peeping
5-1-10: Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of Admission Fees
5-1-11: False Pretenses
5-1-12: Petit Theft
5-1-13: Swindling
5-1-14: Burglar Tools
5-1-15: Offenses Against Public Authority
5-1-16: Offenses Concerning Assemblages; Riot
5-1-17: Property Related Offenses
5-1-18: Vehicles; Noise Related Offenses
5-1-1: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such laws
are applicable to municipal government. (1996 Code §
8-1-17)
5-1-2: CONCEALING KNOWLEDGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission of
any offense or to conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this
code. (1996 Code §
8-1-8)
5-1-3: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   Assault: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" which
is hereby defined as any conduct which places another in reasonable
apprehension of receiving a battery. (1996 Code §
8-1-2)
   B.   Battery: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A
person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal
justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an individual or makes
physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (1996
Code §
8-1-4)
5-1-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Indecent Or Insulting Language Or Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in any illegal or improper diversion or to use insulting,
indecent or immoral language, or to be guilty of any indecent, insulting or
immoral conduct or behavior.
   B.   Violent, Noisy Or Disorderly Conduct: Any person who shall be guilty of
any violent, noisy, riotous or disorderly conduct, or who shall use any
profane, abusive or obscene language, or in any way commit a breach of the
peace or do anything that shall be offensive to the senses or dangerous to the
peace of the inhabitants of the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   C.   Acts Constituting Disorderly Conduct: Every person shall be guilty of
disorderly conduct when he:
      1.   Solicits anyone to engage in, or engages in, lewd or dissolute
conduct in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to
public view.
      2.   Accosts other persons in any public place or in any place open to
the public for the purpose of begging or soliciting alms.
      3.   Loiters in, about or upon any street, alley or other public way or
public place, or in any place open to the public, without lawful business and
conducts himself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior.
      4.   Has upon his person or in his possession any instrument, tool or
other implement for picking locks or pockets or any implement that is usually
employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have been designed to be
employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any
ordinance, and who shall fail to account for the possession of same.
      5.   Loiters, remains, or wanders upon the streets or from place to place
without apparent reason or business and who refuses to identify himself and to
account for his presence when requested by a police officer so to do, if the
surrounding circumstances are such to indicate to a reasonable man that the
public safety demands such identification.
      6.   Occupies, lodges or sleeps in any building, structure or place,
whether public or private, or any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
similar vehicles or equipment without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession or in control thereof. (1996 Code §
8-1-9)
      7.   Is found in any public place or in any place open to the public view
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug or any substance defined
as a poison and regulated as a poison, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code
title 37, chapter 27, or under the influence of any combination of any
intoxicating liquor, drug or substance, in such a condition that he is unable
to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others, or by reason of
his being under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any drug or the
influence of any substance as defined and regulated by said Idaho Code title
37, chapter 27, or under the influence of any combination of any intoxicating
liquor, drug or any such substance, interferes with or obstructs the free use
of any street, sidewalk or other public way or any place open to the public or
exposed to public view.
      8.   Loiters, prowls or wanders upon the private property of another,
without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupants thereof.
      9.   Loiters or remains in or about a school, not having any reason or
relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil or student, or
any other specific, legitimate reason for the same. (1996 Code §
8-1-9; amd. 2010 Code)
5-1-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully, maliciously, intentionally or
unnecessarily, to disturb the peace and quiet of another or of any neighborhood
or family or religious congregation or other assembly by loud or unusual noises
or indecent behavior or by offensive or unbecoming conduct, or for any person
to threaten, quarrel, fight or provoke an assault or battery or curse or swear
or utter any obscene or vulgar or indecent language in the presence of another.
(1996 Code §
8-1-10)
5-1-6: WEAPONS, DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any weapon, air gun, sparrow
gun, flipper, firearm or any similar device or contrivance within the limits of
the city, unless otherwise provided for by law. (1996 Code § 8-1-44)
5-1-7: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or under the
influence of intoxicating liquor upon any public thoroughfare, highway, or upon
any public sidewalk. (1996 Code §
8-1-11; amd. 2010 Code)
5-1-8: OBSCENE CONDUCT; PROSTITUTION:
   A.   Indecent Exposure: It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a
state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public
place, or in any such place to make any indecent exposure of his or her person
or private parts thereof or the private parts of another, or to conduct himself
in a lewd or lascivious manner. (1996 Code §
8-1-18; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or
advertise in any manner his or her vocation as a prostitute or for any person
to advertise the profession of a prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. (1996
Code § 8-1-35)
5-1-9: WINDOW PEEPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or to be found
loitering around or within view of, any window not on his property with the
intent of watching or looking through said window. (1996 Code § 8-1-43)
5-1-10: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of
the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
entertainment or amusement. (1996 Code §
8-1-1)
5-1-11: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or
merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or
depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received the
food, goods, wares and merchandise. (1996 Code §
8-1-15)
5-1-12: PETIT THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit theft" which is hereby
defined as a theft when the property taken is of a value of less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (1996 Code § 8-1-29; amd. 2010 Code)
5-1-13: SWINDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by color, or aid or any trick or sleight
of hand performance or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or device,
to win for himself or for another any money or property or a representative of
either. (1996 Code § 8-1-39)
5-1-14: BURGLAR TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any
nippers of any description known as burglar's nippers, pick lock, skeleton key,
jimmy, or other burglar's instrument or tool of any description, unless it be
shown that the possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose. (1996 Code §
8-1-5)
5-1-15: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY:
   A.   Refusal To Assist Police Officers: It shall be unlawful for any person
over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to render assistance
to any police officer when called upon for such assistance or aid in the
suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage, or in the arrest of any
person who has committed an offense. (1996 Code § 8-1-32; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   False Representation: It shall be unlawful for any person to represent
falsely himself to be an officer of the city or to attempt to impersonate any
such officer or to, without authority, perform any official act therein on
behalf of an officer. (1996 Code §
8-1-16)
   C.   Resisting An Officer: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere
wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any
officer of the law in the exercise of his official duties. (1996 Code § 8-1-37)
   D.   Escapes:
      1.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any
offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. (1996
Code §
8-1-13)
      2.   Aid: It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person
to escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the
custody of any peace officer. (1996 Code §
8-1-12)
   E.   Removal Of City Barricades, Signs And Notices:
      1.   Removal Of Barricades: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove
or change the placement of any safety or traffic barricade placed on any
sidewalk, alley, street or on any public property or placed lawfully on private
property by a city employee or its agents.
      2.   Removal Of Signs Or Notices: It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove, alter or change any sign or notice posted by the city or its agents
which has been placed lawfully on any public or private property.
      3.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Any person violating provisions of this
subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1008, 3-22-2000)
5-1-16: OFFENSES CONCERNING ASSEMBLAGES; RIOT:
   A.   Unlawful Assembly: It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons
to assemble together for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose
of committing an unlawful act and not to disperse upon the command of an
officer so to do. (1996 Code §
8-1-3)
   B.   Collecting Crowds: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect
within the city a crowd of people to the annoyance of the citizens thereof or
to the annoyance or injury of the public. (1996 Code §
8-1-7)
   C.   Riot: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately
to disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two (2) or more
persons are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the
purpose of committing any unlawful act. (1996 Code § 8-1-38)
5-1-17: PROPERTY RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Malicious Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person
wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down, break
or in any manner interfere with or molest or secrete or destroy any real or
personal property belonging to or under the control of any person. (1996 Code §
8-1-34)
   B.   Letting Premises For Unlawful Purposes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to rent, use or allow to be used any building or property owned by him,
for any purpose whereby riotous or disorderly persons are gathered. (1996 Code
§
8-1-21)
   C.   Storage Of Junk Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to
store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk
adjacent to or in close proximity to any schoolhouse, church, public parks,
public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper
and tight buildings for the storage of the same. (1996 Code §
8-1-20)
   D.   Streets:
      1.   Injurious Materials On Thoroughfares: It shall be unlawful for any
person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public thoroughfare
any material or substance injurious to persons or property. (1996 Code §
8-1-19)
      2.   Obstructing Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct
or cause to be obstructed any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys without first
having obtained permission to do so from the chief of police or street
superintendent. (1996 Code § 8-1-27; amd. 2010 Code)
      3.   Water Flowing Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to
allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. (1996 Code § 8-1-
42)
   E.   Injury To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to
individually, or in association with one or more others, wilfully break,
injure, tamper with or remove any part or parts of any vehicle for the purpose
of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, or temporarily or permanently
preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without
the consent of the owner of such vehicle, or to in any other manner wilfully or
maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle.
(1996 Code § 8-1-41)
   F.   Expectorating: It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or
spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any public building or room used
for public assemblies. (1996 Code §
8-1-14)
   G.   Trespassing: Covered under Idaho Code section 18-7008. (1996 Code § 8-
1-40)
5-1-18: VEHICLES; NOISE RELATED OFFENSES 1 :
   A.   Vehicles Using Loudspeakers; Sound Trucks: It shall be unlawful to
play, operate or use any devices known as a sound truck, loudspeakers or sound
amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loud and raucous noises and which is
attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person in charge of such vehicle
shall have first applied to and received permission from the city to operate
any such vehicle so equipped. (1996 Code §
8-1-22)
   B.   Mufflers, Unnecessary Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped with a muffler
upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant operation to
prevent excessive or unusual noise, and it shall be unlawful for any person
operating any motor vehicle to use a cutout, bypass or similar muffler
elimination appliance. (1996 Code §
8-1-24)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-1-3 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
MINORS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Curfew
5-2-2: Cigarette Or Tobacco Sales To Minors
5-2-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hours Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain, and it shall be unlawful for
any parent, guardian or other person having care/custody of any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to permit such person to be or to remain in or
upon any street, alley, public ground, public place or any place open to the
public or exposed to public use within the city between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. (Ord. 998, 5-19-1998;
amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Exceptions To Curfew Hours: A minor shall not be subject to curfew
hours under the following conditions:
      1.   When accompanied by their parent, guardian or other adult person.
      2.   When engaged in legitimate employment for profit or going to or
returning home from a legitimate employment activity without any detour or
stops.
      3.   When engaged in the performance of an errand or duty at the
direction of their parent, guardian or other adult person having care and
custody of the minor.
      4.   When attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the county, city, school
district, recreational district, any other civic organization, religious
organization or other similar entities that take responsibility for the minor
for going to or returning home from, without any detour or stops, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by one of the entities previously stated.
      5.   When involved in an emergency, which includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to protect personal injury or loss of life.
      6.   When emancipated by marriage, or a minor who is in active military
service.
      7.   When exercising first amendment rights protected by the United
States constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right to assemble.
   C.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Any person violating a provision of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 998, 5-19-1998)
5-2-2: CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO SALES TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or
indirectly, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any cigarettes,
tobacco, or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making up of a
cigarette, or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors. (1996 Code §
8-1-6)
ARTICLE A. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Title, Structure, Purpose And Authority
5-2A-2: Definitions
5-2A-3: Failure To Supervise
5-2A-4: Exceptions
5-2A-5: Violations; Penalties
5-2A-1: TITLE, STRUCTURE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Short Title: This article shall be known as the CITY OF HAGERMAN
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE.
   B.   Structure: Titles and subtitles of this article are only used for
organization and structure and the language in each paragraph of this article
should control with regard to determining the legislative intent and meaning of
the city council.
   C.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is as follows:
      1.   To provide for and further the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
      2.   To protect juveniles' health and welfare, which includes their care,
guidance and control.
      3.   To reduce instances of juvenile crime.
      4.   To encourage parents, guardians, or other persons, except foster
parents, to properly supervise and control children under sixteen (16) years of
age who are in their care and custody.
      5.   To hold parents, guardians, or other persons, except a foster
parent, who are lawfully charged with the care or custody of a child under
sixteen (16) years of age for failing to supervise the child over whom they
have responsibility.
   D.   Authority: This article is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by
article XII, section 2 of the Idaho constitution and Idaho Code sections 31-
714, 31-828, and 32-1301. (Ord. 999, 5-19-1998)
5-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CHILD: A person under sixteen (16) years of age.
PARENT: Any person who is the parent, lawful guardian or other person, except
the foster parent, lawfully charged with the care or custody of the child under
sixteen (16) years of age. (Ord. 999, 5-19-1998)
5-2A-3: FAILURE TO SUPERVISE:
It is declared unlawful for a person who is the parent, lawful guardian or
other person, except a foster parent, lawfully charged with the care or custody
of a child under sixteen (16) years of age to fail to supervise that child. The
parent commits the offense of failure to supervise a child if the child commits
any of the following acts:
   A.   Commits any act bringing the child within the purview of the juvenile
corrections act, Idaho Code title 20, chapter 5; or
   B.   Commits a crime for which the child is to be tried as an adult; or
   C.   Commits an act for which jurisdiction of the juvenile corrections act
is subject to waiver pursuant to Idaho Code title 20, chapter 5; or
   D.   Fails to attend school or is not comparably instructed as provided in
Idaho Code section 33-202; or
   E.   Violates the city curfew ordinance or the curfew laws of any city
within Gooding County 1 . (Ord. 999, 5-19-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-2-1 of this chapter.
5-2A-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   A person shall not be subject to prosecution for violation of this
article if the person:
      1.   Is the victim of the act bringing the child within the purview of
the provisions of Idaho Code title 20, chapter 5; or
      2.   Reported the act of the child as soon as reasonably possible to a
local law enforcement agency, juvenile court, or the department of health and
welfare.
   B.   A person shall not be subject to prosecution for violation of this
article if the person shows to the satisfaction of the court that the person
took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time the
person is alleged to have failed to supervise the child. (Ord. 999, 5-19-1998)
5-2A-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed; Parenting Classes: A violation of any of the
provisions of this article is a misdemeanor, and any person who is found guilty
or pleads guilty to a violation of this article shall be subject to a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In lieu of imposing a fine, the
court, with the consent of the person, may order the person to complete
parenting classes or undertake other treatment or counseling to the
satisfaction of the court. The court may discharge the person or, if the person
fails to complete the programs to the satisfaction of the court, the court may
impose the penalty provided in this section.
   B.   Contempt Proceedings: Any person violating any order of the court
entered under this article shall be subject to contempt proceedings in
accordance with Idaho Code title 7, chapter 6, in addition to any other
penalties authorized pursuant to this section.
   C.   Payment Of Restitution: Any person who is found guilty or pleads guilty
to a violation of this article may be ordered by the court to pay restitution
or make whole any victim who suffers an economic loss as a result of the
juvenile's conduct, in accordance with the standards and requirements of Idaho
Code sections 19-5304 and 19-5305; provided, that any restitution ordered to be
paid by a parent under this article shall not exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   Service Of Copy Of Article: Upon a first offense, a law enforcement
officer may, in his discretion, serve a copy of this article upon the parents
and explain to them the consequences of their conduct as a warning of the
penalties contained in this article. This service shall be documented by the
officer.
   E.   Other Actions Or Proceedings: A conviction of a person under this
article shall not preclude any other action or proceedings against the person
which may be taken pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code title 20, chapter
5, or other provisions of law. (Ord. 999, 5-19-1998)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Number Of Dogs Limited; Licensing Requirements; Fees
5-3-2: Running At Large Prohibited
5-3-3: Nuisances And Dangerous And At-Risk Dogs Prohibited
5-3-4: Rabid Animals Quarantined For Observation
5-3-5: Cruelty To Animals
5-3-6: Poisoning Unlawful
5-3-7: Domestic Livestock
5-3-8: Impoundment And Redemption Procedures
5-3-9: Enforcement Powers And Duties
5-3-10: Liability For Damage To Property
5-3-11: Penalty
5-3-1: NUMBER OF DOGS LIMITED; LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   A Maximum Number Of Dogs: No household, individual, or business shall
possess, harbor or own more than three (3) dogs, over the age of (6) months,
within the city limits.
      1.   Military Exemption: If a resident of the City of Hagerman is
supporting an active-duty immediate family member who owns a dog, that resident
may harbor the dog owned by the immediate family member while they are serving
active duty. However, in no event shall the total number of dogs exceed four
(4) dogs per household. The harborer of the dog will provide to the City of
Hagerman: proof of ownership, proof of active duty, current certificate of
rabies, current license with the City of Hagerman, and demonstrate the ability
to keep the dog safe and within the nuisance laws stated under the City of
Hagerman City Code Section
5-3-3.
   B.   License And Registration For Dogs:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess
a dog more than six (6) months old, within the City without first procuring a
license as provided by this chapter; provided, however that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to any person visiting the City for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) days, and owning and possessing a dog currently licensed,
and bearing the current license issued by another municipality, or other
governmental licensing authority.
      2.   The dog license shall be issued by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon
payment of a license fee as herein provided. Payment of a license fee shall be
made to the City Clerk-Treasurer at City Hall during regular business hours.
The license fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
      3.   Such license shall be paid annually by December 31. All licenses
shall expire on December 31 of each year and no notice shall be sent by the
City of Hagerman concerning the expiration of the license. A late fee will be
imposed after January 31st. The late fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
   C.   Licensing And Registration Requirement:
      1.   Application; Fee; Proof Of Vaccination: The owner or harborer of any
dog six (6) months of age or older shall make application for and obtain a
license and registration tag for each dog. At the time of making application,
the owner or harborer of any dog shall:
         a.   Provide the name, address, current phone number, sex, breed, and
color of each dog owned or harbored by such person and if the dog is spayed or
neutered.
         b.   Pay a license fee for each dog license.
         c.   Provide proof of current rabies vaccination for the dog being
licensed.
         d.   Upon payment of the license fee and upon providing a current
rabies certificate, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall issue the owner a license
certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The licenses shall be
issued in four (4) categories as follows:
         One (1) year license for neutered or spayed animals requiring a three
(3) year rabies certificate.
         A three (3) year license for neutered or spayed animals requiring a
three (3) year rabies certificate.
         One (1) year license for un-neutered or un-spayed animals requiring a
one (1) year or three (3) year rabies certificate.
         A three (3) year license for un-neutered or un-spayed animals
requiring a three (3) year rabies certificate.
      2.   Certificate And Tag; Collar Required; Duplicate Tag:
         a.   Upon payment of the license fee and proof of rabies vaccination,
the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the owner a certificate and a metallic tag
for each dog so licensed.
         b.   Every owner or harborer shall be required to provide each dog
with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and worn by the dog at
all times.
         c.   In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag will be
issued by the City upon presentation of the registration for the current year
and an additional payment of such amount as set by resolution of the City
Council for a duplicate tag.
         d.   Dog tags shall not be transferable from one (1) dog to another
and no refunds shall be made for any dog license due to death of the dog or the
owner of the animal moving from the City before the expiration of the license.
         e.   Service Dogs; License Required; Fee Waived: Any dog which has
been trained to assist the handicapped and is currently acting in that capacity
shall be licensed; however, the owner shall be exempt from paying the license
fee for such dog.
   D.   Dog Kennels Prohibited:
      1.   Unless otherwise provided in the city zoning regulations, no
individual or business shall operate or maintain a kennel within the city. A
"kennel" is defined in section
10-2-2 of this code.
      2.   The kennel restriction as contained in this section shall not apply
to the city or to any veterinarian clinic or hospital located within the city.
(Ord. 1037, 3-21-2007; amd. 2010 Code; Ord. 1091, 5-5-2021)
5-3-2: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Private Premises Or Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any owner,
possessor or person who keeps any dog to permit the same to run at large upon
the private premises of others or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks,
highways, vacant lots, school grounds or other public places within the city.
(1996 Code §
8-2-1)
   B.   Running At Large Described; Exceptions:
      1.   A dog shall be deemed to be running at large when off or away from
the premises of the owner, possessor, or keeper thereof, and not under the
immediate control of such owner, possessor, or keeper thereof or his agent or
servant or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord or chain;
provided, however, that any dog on the premises of a city park or school
grounds must be controlled. (1996 Code §
8-2-1; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   Procuring a license and tag shall not authorize the running at large
of said dog.
      3.   This provision shall not apply to dogs working with livestock or to
dogs, engaged with their owner, in hunting or performing in field trials.
   C.   Violations Declared A Nuisance: Violation of the provisions of this
section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to the public health
and safety, and said dog or dogs shall be taken up and impounded as provided
herein. (1996 Code §
8-2-1)
5-3-3: NUISANCES AND DANGEROUS AND AT-RISK DOGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Creating A Nuisance; Barking Or Attacking: It shall be unlawful for any
owner or other keeper of a dog or other animal to fail to exercise proper care
and control of such animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance.
Frequent, continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing
vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon public
or private property in such manner as to damage the property shall be deemed a
nuisance.
   B.   Dangerous Dogs: Anyone that harbors or keeps a "Dangerous Dog", which
for purposes of Title 5, Chapter 3 of this code is defined as a dog that
without Justified Provocation bites a person causing injury, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. "Justified Provocation" means to perform any act or
omission that a reasonable person with common knowledge of dog behavior would
conclude is likely to precipitate a bite or attack by an ordinary dog and shall
include but not be limited to the following:
      1.   The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate
vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault;
      2.   The person was committing a crime or offense upon the property of
the owner or custodian of the dog;
      3.   The person was at the time, or had in the past, willfully tormented,
abused or assaulted the dog;
      4.   The dog was responding to pain or injury or protecting its
offspring;
      5.   The dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator
control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper,
and the damage or injury sustained was to a person who was interfering with the
dog while the dog was working in a place where it was lawfully engaged in such
activity, including public lands;
      6.   The dog was a service animal individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for a person with a disability; or
      7.   The person was intervening between two (2) or more animals engaged
in aggressive behavior or fighting.
   C.   Dangerous Dogs At Large: If any Dangerous Dog is found at large which
cannot be taken up and impounded, such dog may be slain by any Sheriff's
Officer or Animal Control Officer.
   D.   Nothing in this subsection
5-3-3 is intended to alter, replace, or affect the provisions and requirements
of Idaho Code section 25-2810.
(Ord. 1099, 11- -2023)
5-3-4: RABID ANIMALS QUARANTINED FOR OBSERVATION:
   A.   Quarantine:
      1.   A dog which is known to have bitten, or injured, any person so as to
cause an abrasion of the skin, or a suspected rabid dog, shall be placed in
confinement under observation of the veterinary hospital, or municipal pound,
and shall not be killed or released until at least ten (10) days after the
onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies.
      2.   Any animal of the species subject to rabies that has bitten a person
shall likewise be confined and observed for at least ten (10) days. (1996 Code
§
8-2-7)
      3.   If the animal dies or has been killed, its head shall be removed and
immediately taken to the Boise Animal Health Laboratory to be examined for
rabies. (1996 Code §
8-2-7; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Official Inspection Or Examination; Determination:
      1.   No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow any official of the
City to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during said
period.
      2.   No such dog or animal shall be removed from the place of quarantine
without written permission of the City.
      3.   If the animal shall be determined free of rabies, the same shall be
returned to the owner upon payment of a fee to be designated by the animal
control officer for keeping dogs impounded. No other fee shall be charged; if
such fee is not paid, the dog shall be subject to disposal. (1996 Code §
8-2-7)
5-3-5: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Failing To Provide Sustenance: It shall be unlawful for any owner or
other keeper of an animal to fail to provide such animal with sufficient and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection, veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering, or humane care and treatment. (1996 Code §
8-2-2)
   B.   Inhumane Treatment: It shall be unlawful for any person to maltreat or
torture any dog or other animal, or, having the right or authority to kill any
dog or other animal, to kill such dog or other animal in an inhumane manner.
(1996 Code § 8-2-9)
5-3-6: POISONING UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to administer or cause to be administered
poison of any sort whatsoever to any animal which is the property of another,
or poison food where same is accessible to any dog or other animal. (1996 Code
§ 8-2-10; amd. 2010 Code)
5-3-7: DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK:
   A.   Livestock Prohibited: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful for any person to keep or maintain horses, mules, cattle, sheep,
goats, pigs, fowl, or similar livestock, within the City Limits.
   B.   Exception:
      1.   Laying Hens: Each household in the City of Hagerman shall be allowed
to possess up to six (6) laying hens to be kept in the back yard of a residence
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Permitted Location: Kept in a fenced back yard of a residence.
         b.   Roosters Prohibited: No roosters are allowed.
         c.   Running At Large Prohibited: Not allowed to run at large.
         d.   Prohibited Locations: Not allowed in front or side yards of the
residence.
         e.   Noncommercial Use Only: Kept for noncommercial use only, such as
for family consumption, or 4-H or school projects, etc.
      2.   Market Lamb Projects: That each household in the City of Hagerman
shall be allowed to possess two (2) lambs for the purpose of a market lamb
project for 4-H or, FFA, provided that the household has sufficient pasture
area to contain the lambs without creating a nuisance and the market lambs are
in the personal possession and responsibility of the child who will be the
primary caretaker of the lambs. In the event that any individual wishes to have
more than (2) lambs, for a market lamb project, then they may apply to the City
for a special use permit for the excess number of lambs.
      3.   Special Use Permit: Any individual who resides within the City
limits who wishes to have market lambs in excess of two (2) lambs, for any
market lamb project, may apply for a special use permit for the additional
lambs as long as those lambs are in the personal possession and responsibility
of the child who will be the primary caretaker of the market lambs. The permit
shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed not more than six (6)
months. A new permit must be applied for each year. The fee for the permit
shall be five dollars ($5.00) per lamb in excess of two (2) lambs.
   C.   Existing Pasture: Existing pastures shall remain a pasture until the
pasture is void of any lambs for more than six (6) months. The minimum size for
a pasture shall be two (2) City lots or twelve thousand five hundred (12,500)
square feet. (1996 Code § 8-2-15; amd. Ord. 1063, 4-16-2014; Ord. 1091, 5-5-
2021)
5-3-8: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority To Impound: Any animal control officer or any other person
authorized by the City may, in fresh pursuit, seize and impound all dogs
without collars bearing licenses as required by this chapter, or any and all
dogs or any other animals found running at large upon the public streets,
alleys or other public places or private premises without the permission of the
owner of said premises.
   B.   Hearing Regarding Impounded Animals: A hearing may be held at the
request of any animal owner whose animal has been impounded. Said hearing shall
be requested by contacting the Mayor, and shall be requested within forty-
eight (48) hours of said impoundment.
   C.   Redemption:
      1.   Any dog impounded may be taken from the pound by the owner or any
authorized person upon exhibiting to the animal control officer or authorized
person having charge of said pound a receipt showing that the license fee has
been paid for such dog, and upon paying the person in charge of the pound an
impounding fee to be set by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   All impounded dogs not redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours shall
be offered for adoption to a party other than the predetermined prior owner, if
any. Such adoption fee is set by resolution, plus any required license fee.
      3.   All dogs that are not adopted or redeemed within five (5) days may
be destroyed in a humane manner and all expenses will be charged to the owner,
harborer, orkeeper of said animal for the keeping and disposing of said animal.
(1996 Code §§ 8-2-3, 8-2-4, 8-2-12; amd. Ord. 995, 7-15-1997; Ord. 1091, 5-5-
2021)
5-3-9: ENFORCEMENT POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Animal Control Officer Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the Animal
Control Officer or such persons designated by the City to:
      1.   Enforce the licensing and control the dogs in the City as provided
in this chapter;
      2.   File complaints in the Magistrate Court against any person, firm or
corporation failing to license any dog as provided in this chapter; or who
otherwise fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter;
      3.   Capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter;
      4.   Remove such dogs in a humane manner to the pound; and
      5.   Hold dogs as impounded for a period of not less than seventy-two
(72) hours in a humane manner.
   B.   Right Of Entry On Private Property: In the enforcement of any provision
of this chapter, any Deputy Sheriff and the Animal Control Officer or such
persons designated by the City are authorized to enter, while in fresh pursuit,
the private property of any person to take possession of any licensed or
unlicensed, fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog at the time the dog goes onto
private property. 1996 Code §§ 8-2-5, 8-2-11; amd. Ord. 1091, 5-5-2021)
5-3-10: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
The owner, harborer or keeper of any dog that does damage to property of
another shall be liable to the owner of the property damaged for the damages
and costs of suit. In the prosecution of action for such damage, it is not
necessary for the plaintiff to show that the owner, harborer or keeper of such
dog had knowledge of the fact that such dog was doing damage to the property.
(1996 Code § 8-2-14)
5-3-11: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided in this Title 5, Chapter 3 of this ordinance, any
owner, possessor, or person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be,
upon Conviction or entry of plea, found guilty of an infraction and subject to
a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for any subsequent violations, within a twelve (12) month period. The
third offense within a twelve (12) month period will be charged with a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1099, 11- -2023)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Motor Vehicle Laws Adopted
6-1-2: Speed Limits; General
6-1-2-1: Speed Limits; School Zones
6-1-3: Engine Brakes Banned
6-1-4: Removal Of Vehicles
6-1-1: STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED:
   A.   Intent: It is hereby declared to be the intent of the governing body of
the city to aid and assist by whatever means possible, for the utmost
consistency in traffic regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having
such jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by
the cities of Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity. (1996
Code §
9-1-1)
   B.   Adoption Of State Laws By Reference: There is hereby adopted,
therefore, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of
all streets and public thoroughfares of the city, that certain code, identified
as the latest edition of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, more particularly Idaho
Code title 49, published by the department of Idaho state police, and as the
same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho legislature, or amended by the
governing body, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance
of the city as fully as though set forth at length herein. (1996 Code §
9-1-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Copy On File: A copy of the said Idaho motor vehicle laws, together
with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk-treasurer,
shall be kept on file at city hall for use and examination of and by the
public. (1996 Code §
9-1-1)
6-1-2: SPEED LIMITS; GENERAL:
   A.   Limits Established:
      1.   General: Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the maximum
speed limit on any street, alley and State Highway 30 within the city limits
shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 1049, 6-16-2010)
   B.   Violations A Misdemeanor: Any person violating any provision of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1000, 6-2-1998)
6-1-2-1: SPEED LIMITS; SCHOOL ZONES:
   A.   Speed Limit: Speed limit for all residential school zones shall be
twenty (20) miles per hour. Speed limits for the U.S. Highway 30 school zones
shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. The time of enforcement for all
school zone speed limits shall be between seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Monday through Friday when school is in session.
School zones speed limit is also in effect during school activities when
students are present.
   B.   School Zones, Residential: Residential school zones shall be the
streets as follows: Second Avenue from the Main Street to Spring Street; Lake
Street from Second Avenue to State Street; Spring Street from Second Avenue to
State Street and Main Street from Second Avenue to State Street.
   C.   School Zones, U.S. Highway 30: School zones located on U.S. Highway 30
in the city of Hagerman shall be between Spring Street and Salmon Street.
   D.   Violation: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to an infraction citation under Idaho Code 49-658. (Ord. 1052, 10-20-
2010)
6-1-3: ENGINE BRAKES BANNED:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful to use air compression brakes,
commonly known as engine brakes within the city limits.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an
infraction and punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1020, 6-3-
2003)
6-1-4: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Improperly Parked Vehicles: Any vehicle parked in violation of traffic
regulations or any vehicle parked so as to obstruct the free movement of
traffic or to cause a traffic hazard may be immediately removed upon order of a
duly authorized law enforcement officer in accordance with Idaho Code section
49-1801 et seq. (1996 Code §
9-5-1)
   B.   Wrecked Or Abandoned Vehicles: All other vehicles believed to be
abandoned shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code
title 49, chapter 18. (1996 Code §
9-5-2)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Authority To Install
6-2-2: Specifications
6-2-3: Obedience To Devices
6-2-4: When Devices Required
6-2-5: Unauthorized Signs, Signals Or Markings
6-2-6: Interference With Devices
6-2-7: Crosswalks And Safety Zones
6-2-8: Traffic Lanes
6-2-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
The city shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices
when and as required under the traffic regulations of the city to make
effective the provisions of said regulations, and may place and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary. (1996 Code §
9-3-1)
6-2-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the approved
specifications. All signs and signals, required hereunder for a particular
purpose, shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location
throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this title shall be official traffic
control devices. (1996 Code §
9-3-2)
6-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
regulations of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (1996
Code §
9-3-3)
6-2-4: WHEN DEVICES REQUIRED:
No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place. (1996 Code § 9-3-4)
6-2-5: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
   A.   Prohibited Signs: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in
view of any highway any authorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   Commercial Advertising: No person shall place or maintain nor shall any
public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
   C.   Exception: This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   D.   Prohibited Signs A Nuisance: Every such prohibited sign, signal or
marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having
jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause
it to be removed without notice. (1996 Code § 9-3-5)
6-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or
in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic
control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or
insignia thereon or any part thereof. (1996 Code § 9-3-6)
6-2-7: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
The city is hereby authorized:
   A.   Crosswalks: To designate and maintain appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in
the mayor's and city council's opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as may be deemed
necessary.
   B.   Safety Zones: To establish safety zones of such kind and character and
at such places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(1996 Code § 9-3-7)
6-2-8: TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   Marking Traffic Lanes: The city is hereby authorized to mark traffic
lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
   B.   Compliance Required: Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep
such vehicle within the boundaries of such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1996 Code
§ 9-3-8)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Restricted Parking District Established
6-3-2: Parking Lanes Designated
6-3-3: Overparking
6-3-4: Parking Outside Marked Lanes
6-3-5: Parking In Alley
6-3-6: Parking Vehicles With Offensive Loads
6-3-7: Stopping On Crosswalk
6-3-1: RESTRICTED PARKING DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
For the purposes of the regulation and control of traffic upon the streets in
the city, there is hereby established a restricted vehicular district, and the
city is hereby authorized and directed to designate immediately, and from time
to time as is deemed necessary for the control of traffic, all streets and
parts of streets to be included within said district, and to designate the
hours and limits of time of parking within such district; and for such purpose,
the city is also hereby authorized and directed to erect and place such signs
within such districts as shall give notice of the various hours and times of
parking within such districts. (1996 Code §
9-2-1)
6-3-2: PARKING LANES DESIGNATED:
The city is hereby authorized to cause lanes or markings to be painted or
placed upon the curbs and/or upon the streets, designating the parking space of
each vehicle, which said lanes or markings shall be so painted as to show
either parallel or diagonal parking at such places. It shall be unlawful, where
such spaces are designated, to park any vehicle across any such lanes or
markings or to park any vehicle in such position that the same shall not be
within the space so designated by such lanes or markings. Where such spaces are
not designated, it shall be unlawful to park except when headed with the
traffic, parallel with the edge of the curb, or other street boundary and with
the curbside edge of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or
other street boundary. (1996 Code §
9-2-2; amd. 2010 Code)
6-3-3: OVERPARKING:
When signs are erected or markings made giving notice of the length of time of
parking at any space, no person shall park a vehicle thereon for longer than
the length of time so designated by said signs. Parking shall be deemed ended
only by the removal of the parked vehicle to a distance of at least one block
therefrom. (1996 Code § 9-2-3)
6-3-4: PARKING OUTSIDE MARKED LANES:
All street spaces between parking spaces upon a street are reserved for moving
traffic and it shall be unlawful to park thereon or to park otherwise than in
this chapter provided. (1996 Code § 9-2-4)
6-3-5: PARKING IN ALLEY:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any alley or in the entrance to any
alley, except for the expeditious and actual loading or unloading of
passengers, materials, goods or merchandise, such usage not to exceed thirty
(30) minutes. (1996 Code § 9-2-5)
6-3-6: PARKING VEHICLES WITH OFFENSIVE LOADS:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicles on city streets when such vehicle is
loaded with any material that is offensive to human smell. (1996 Code § 9-2-6)
6-3-7: STOPPING ON CROSSWALK:
All vehicular and pedestrian traffic facing the "STOP" device shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may
be indicated by visible lines, and no vehicle or pedestrian facing such device
shall enter onto the crosswalk or cross such street. (1996 Code § 9-2-7)
CHAPTER 4
STREET DESIGNATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Street Designations
6-4-1: STREET DESIGNATIONS:
   A.   East Avenue from Hagerman Avenue East is hereby designated as a
collector street.
   B.   East Avenue North from U.S. Highway 30 to 2650 South. East Avenue South
to Hagerman Avenue East to U.S. Highway 30 to the Hagerman city limit boundary
is hereby designated as the truck route
   C.   Commercial trucks, vehicles commonly referred to as semitrucks and
tractor trailers with four (4) or more axles or that are capable of having a
gross weight capacity in excess of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or are
registered to transport sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or more, are
prohibited from using any other streets within the Hagerman city limits, except
those streets designated in subsection B of this section or for the purpose of
local pick up and delivery upon otherwise prohibited streets.
   D.   Any person found guilty of or who pleads guilty to violating this
section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall pay a fine of fifty-three
dollars ($53.00). (Ord. 1105, 6-18-2025)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Survey, Datum Plane
7-1-2: Dedication Of Streets And Alleys
7-1-3: Street Cuts And Restoration; Permit And Bond
7-1-4: Excavations And Obstructions
7-1-5: Awnings Over Sidewalks
7-1-6: Snow And Ice Removal
7-1-7: Heavy Equipment Crossing Culverts Or Bridges
7-1-8: Removal Of Trash
7-1-9: Removing Or Dumping Gravel; Consent Required
7-1-1: SURVEY, DATUM PLANE:
The mean sea level shall be and the same hereby is the official datum plane or
base from which the height of all points measured by or for the city shall be
determined as shown by the official bench mark of the United States reclamation
service. (1996 Code § 1-10-2)
7-1-2: DEDICATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The streets and alleys as drawn on the map as described in subsection
1-5-4A of this code are hereby dedicated as official streets and alleys of the
city. (1996 Code § 1-10-3)
7-1-3: STREET CUTS AND RESTORATION; PERMIT AND BOND:
   A.   Street Cutting Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
cut or make cuts in any street or in any paved alley for the purpose of making
sewer connections, water connections or otherwise without first obtaining a
street cutting permit.
   B.   Restoration Of Pavement:
      1.   Where a paved street or alley is cut, the restoration of the
pavement shall be made by and at the expense of the person cutting the street
or alley.
      2.   Franchised utilities may, at the approval of the engineer, contract
with others within the city to restore pavement. All costs of pavement shall be
at the expense of the utility.
   C.   Specifications: All street and alley cuts shall be made in accordance
with the specifications hereby adopted as "Regulations For Cutting Streets And
Alleys", copies of which shall be on file at all times in the office of the
city clerk-treasurer.
   D.   Permit Fee And Performance Bond: A permit fee shall be charged at the
time a permit is issued. The applicant shall also obtain a performance bond
sufficient to cover the cost of the cut to ensure compliance with this section,
which will be returned after restoration is properly made, as determined by the
city. The cost of the permit fee and deposit shall be set by resolution of the
city council. (1996 Code § 6-1-6)
7-1-4: EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS:
Any person who shall make any excavation or cause any excavation to be made in
any public place, or bordering on any public place, or who shall obstruct any
street or alley, or cause any street or alley to be obstructed in any manner,
shall comply with section 6F.78 of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices". (1996 Code §
6-1-2; amd. 2010 Code)
7-1-5: AWNINGS OVER SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to erect, construct or maintain
any awning, canopy, or covering over any sidewalk that is not placed upon
substantial frames and securely fastened to the building. The lower edge of the
frame of any such awning shall not be less than seven feet (7') from the
sidewalk, and the lower edge of any skirt of said awning shall not be less than
six and one-half feet (61/2') from the sidewalk. Awnings may project into
public right of way up to four feet (4'), but shall not project closer than two
feet (2') to the curb along the public street or alley. (1996 Code §
3-6-2; amd. 2010 Code)
7-1-6: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
   A.   Requirement: Owners, tenants or occupants of any premises abutting or
adjoining any public sidewalk shall remove all snow and ice from any such
sidewalk.
   B.   Notice Given: It shall be the duty of the city officials to notify any
owner, tenant or occupant of property therein described to remove or otherwise
correct the objectionable matters herein legislated against.
   C.   Removal By City: Upon failure of the owner, tenant or occupant of said
premises to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice, then and in
that event, the city shall have the right to remove such snow and ice and
assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the sidewalks. (1996 Code
§ 6-1-7)
7-1-7: HEAVY EQUIPMENT CROSSING CULVERTS OR BRIDGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to run or otherwise move any tractor or
similar engine across or over any culvert or bridge in any of the streets or
alleys without first covering such bridge or culvert with good substantial
plank of not less than four inches (4") in thickness so placed and arranged as
to prevent the weight of such engine from resting on or being sustained by such
bridge or culvert. (1996 Code §
6-1-1)
7-1-8: REMOVAL OF TRASH:
Whenever any person who is the owner or proprietor or entitled to the
possession of any house, building, lot or tract of land shall fail or neglect
to remove the rubbish, snow, weeds, filth or any obstruction to the streets,
alleys or sidewalks, the same shall be done at the expense of the owner. (1996
Code §
6-1-4)
7-1-9: REMOVING OR DUMPING GRAVEL; CONSENT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pile, dump, deposit, lay or place any
gravel, sand, rocks, dirt or clay upon any of the streets, avenues, or
sidewalks or to remove any of said substances from any of the streets, avenues
or alleys thereof, without first obtaining the consent of the mayor and council
so to do. (1996 Code § 6-1-5)
CHAPTER 2
TREES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Creation And Establishment Of A City Tree Board
7-2-3: Compensation
7-2-4: Duties And Responsibilities
7-2-5: Operations
7-2-6: Recommended Street Tree Species To Be Planted
7-2-7: Spacing
7-2-8: Distance From Curb And Sidewalks
7-2-9: Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs
7-2-10: Utilities
7-2-11: Public Tree Care
7-2-12: Tree Pruning, Tree Topping
7-2-13: Pruning Of Trees And Shrubbery On Private Property
7-2-14: Removal Of Stumps
7-2-15: Interference With City Tree Board
7-2-16: Insurance And Bonding
7-2-17: Review By City Council
7-2-18: Penalty
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
PARK TREES: Trees and other woody vegetation in city parks, and all other areas
owned by the city.
STREET TREES: Trees and other woody vegetation on land lying within city rights
of way within the city. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-2: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A CITY TREE BOARD:
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city of
Hagerman, Idaho, which shall consist of three (3) or more members who shall
serve at the pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the city tree board to develop and administer
a written comprehensive tree management plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of street and park trees.
Such plan will be presented to the city council and upon their approval shall
constitute the official comprehensive city tree management plan for the city of
Hagerman, Idaho. Prior to and following development of the comprehensive tree
management plan the city tree board, when requested by the city council, shall
consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-5: OPERATIONS:
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and
keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum
for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-6: RECOMMENDED STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED:
Any tree to be planted as a street tree should fit the definition of one of
three (3) tree classifications, namely, class I (small trees) are those that
will not, under optimum growing conditions exceed twenty five feet (25') in
height at maturity. Class II (medium trees) are those that will not, under
optimum growing conditions, exceed fifty feet (50') in height at maturity.
Class III (large trees) are those that, under optimum growing conditions, will
exceed fifty feet (50') in height at maturity. Expected height at maturity of
all species under optimum growing conditions shall be determined by a consensus
of professional horticultural publications and catalogues. Generally class III
trees should not be planted as street trees. A list, by size class, of the most
desirable tree species to be planted in Hagerman will be included in the
comprehensive tree management plan. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-7: SPACING:
The spacing of street trees should be in accordance with the three (3) species
size classes listed in section
7-2-6 of this chapter and trees should be planted no closer together than the
following:
 
Class I (small trees)   30 feet
Class II (medium trees) 40 feet
Class III (large trees) 50 feet
 
(Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-8: DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALKS:
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks should
be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in section
7-2-6 of this chapter, and no trees should be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk, or in an opening in a sidewalk with a radius smaller than the
following:
 
Class I (small trees)   2 feet
Class II (medium trees) 3 feet
Class III (large trees) 4 feet
 
(Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-9: DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS:
No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty five feet (35') of any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb
lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') of any
fireplug. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-10: UTILITIES:
Only those species meeting the class I (small trees) criteria in section
7-2-6 of this chapter, may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, or directly above or within five (5) lateral feet of
any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-11: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove street and
park trees as may be necessary to ensure public safety, protect public works,
and preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public grounds. (Ord. 1014,
10-2-2001)
7-2-12: TREE PRUNING, TREE TOPPING:
Any tree care firm, city department, or public utility shall use acceptable
techniques when pruning street or park trees. Descriptions and diagrams of
acceptable pruning techniques will be described and more fully explained in the
comprehensive tree management plan called for in section
7-2-4 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any tree care firm, city
department or public utility to top any street tree or park tree. "Topping" is
defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
(3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other
pruning practices are impractical may be removed or exempted from this section
at the determination of the city tree board. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-13: PRUNING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees
on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging the sidewalks, streets or
alleys, so that the branches thereon will hang no lower than seven feet (7') so
as not to interfere with pedestrian or public travel. Such persons shall also
trim all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of
said hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk.
The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property
when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a
streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-14: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-15: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in or about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park
trees or other trees as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-16: INSURANCE AND BONDING:
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the
city without possession of liability insurance equal to the limits of liability
of the city of Hagerman but not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), indemnifying the city against any liability for any injury or
property damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein
described. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-17: REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions
of the city tree board. A person may appeal any ruling or order of the city
tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make a final
decision. (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
7-2-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or
upon a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) (see section
1-4-1 of this code). (Ord. 1014, 10-2-2001)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Mandatory Service Connection
8-1-3: Refusal Of Use Of System For Noncompliance
8-1-4: Permits Required
8-1-5: Right To Revoke Permission
8-1-6: Water Service Lines And Meters
8-1-7: Construction Plans, Specifications And Inspection
8-1-8: Extension Of Water Mains Within City
8-1-9: Injury To Or Tampering With Water System Unlawful
8-1-10: Service Call Charge
8-1-11: Monthly Water User Fees
8-1-12: Billing Procedure; Delinquencies
8-1-13: Water Service Discontinuance; Vacancy Of Premises
8-1-14: Water System Fund
8-1-15: Water System Materials And Installations
8-1-16: Water System Design
8-1-17: Cross Connection Installations
8-1-18: Use Of Backflow Prevention Devices
8-1-19: Cross Connection Inspection
8-1-20: Additional Remedies
8-1-21: As Built Drawings And Engineer's Certification
8-1-22: Responsibility Of Subdivision Developer Or Property Owner
8-1-23: Nonliability Of City
8-1-24: Citation; Appearance
8-1-25: Penalty
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings herein given to them:
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The public works superintendent of the city of Hagerman or
his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
BACKFLOW: The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign
liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution system of the city water
supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent
back siphonage.
CITY: The city of Hagerman, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind or for any type of
business or enterprise, or for any other purposes not otherwise described or
covered under the definition of "dwellings" in this section.
COMMERCIAL USER: All persons not specifically classified as a domestic or as an
industrial water user.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a city water supply of any
substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby the city water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer,
drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device
which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, or other wastes or
liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the city water supply as a result of backflow.
DOMESTIC WATER USAGE: Water that is used principally for dwellings, business
buildings, institutions, and the like.
DWELLINGS:
Auto Court, Motor Court, Travel Trailer Court, Motel, Hotel, Etc.: The
combination or group of two (2) or more dwelling units occupying a building
site or area under one ownership, used for the purpose of furnishing transient
living accommodations.
Duplex: A building designed, built, rented, or leased for occupancy by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
Multiple-Family Dwelling Or Apartment House: Any building or portion thereof
which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or
which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families or
persons living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within
the premises, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
Single-Family Dwelling: A building designed for or occupied by one family for
living or sleeping purposes, and having one kitchen or set of cooking
facilities.
Trailer House Or Mobile Home: Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit
its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and
constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or
sleeping place for one or more persons.
MG: Million gallons.
MGD: Million gallons per day.
PARTS PER MILLION: A weight to weight ratio; the parts per million value
multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group
or other entity.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: A water system serving two (2) or more buildings,
residences or properties, constructed by private contract outside of the public
right of way and remaining under private ownership and jurisdiction, and which
shall be maintained by said private owners. Private water systems shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained by said private owners to the same
design, construction, and maintenance standards as are public water systems.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A water system provided by or subject to the jurisdiction
of the city. It shall also include water systems within or outside the city
boundaries that serve one or more persons and obtain their water supply from
the city water system, even though the water system may not have been
constructed with city funds. All public water mains shall be located in
dedicated public rights of way or easements. Public water mains shall be at
least six inches (6") in diameter.
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT: The public works superintendent of the city of
Hagerman.
REPLACEMENT: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the water system to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
SERVICE CHARGE: The charge levied on all users of the water system for the
purpose of repayment of city indebtedness for the construction and installation
of the system and for its efficient maintenance and operation; and in
establishing such rates and charges, the city has taken into account the cost
and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible
delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies and any amounts
necessary to retire all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserve
required for these.
SERVICE CONNECTION: A water line connected to the water main.
SERVICE LINE: The extension from the building water system to the public water
main and is sometimes referred to as the water service connection or water
service line.
WATER: Potable water meeting the requirements of the state of Idaho for public
water systems.
WATER DISTRIBUTION AND SUPPLY SYSTEM: All facilities for transporting, pumping,
storing, and pressurizing of water, and includes water main as well as the
water supply system.
WATER MAIN: The pipe laid in a street, road, alley, or easement and running
approximately parallel to the street, road, alley or easement for the
distribution of water to the customers, and which is owned, operated,
controlled, and maintained by the city.
WATER METER: A device which is calibrated and constructed to measure the exact
amount of water that flows through the device in total gallons. The water
meter, when used, shall include the actual meter plus yoke, remote readout
device and meter box, if required.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: An assemblage of wells, pumps, devices, structures,
equipment, and tanks for providing water for domestic, commercial, or
industrial uses.
WATER SYSTEM: A water main line that conveys potable water to a residence,
commercial user, industry or other establishment for consumptive use,
irrigation, process or similar uses. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-2: MANDATORY SERVICE CONNECTION:
   A.   Connection Required; Costs:
      1.   Every parcel of land or premises within the boundaries of the city
that is improved for occupancy after August 1, 1995, by any person, or as a
commercial business, shall be connected to the public water system. The owner
or person in charge of such land shall make or cause to be made such connection
before such land is occupied for a dwelling or commercial building.
      2.   All charges associated with the laying of pipe from the home or
facilities to be served to the city water mains and all other costs incurred in
connecting to said mains shall be borne by the property owner.
      3.   All such connections to the city mains shall be properly designed
and constructed in conformity with requirements specified by the city.
      4.   If a parcel of land is not within three hundred feet (300') of a
water main, connection is optional.
      5.   The city shall provide the water meter for the requested connection
unless a meter larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") is requested. Then it must
be approved by city council, and the property owner shall be responsible for
the price difference. The property owner shall have the meter installed at his
expense.
      6.   The city shall also make the hot tap connection to its main line,
but the property owner shall provide all required excavation, backfill, street
repair, and all other service line and connection costs.
   B.   Public Works Superintendent Issue Notice To Comply: The public works
superintendent of the city is hereby empowered, and it is hereby made his duty,
in all cases where there is a public water system within three hundred feet
(300'), to notify every owner or person in charge of land or premises requiring
a water service building connection, as specified in subsection A of this
section, to comply with the said provisions within ninety (90) days or cease to
use or occupy the land. A lessee of land shall be deemed to be in charge. (Ord.
984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-3: REFUSAL OF USE OF SYSTEM FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
The public works superintendent may prohibit the connection to the public water
system for any user that does not comply with the limitations set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-4: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Water Connection Permit; Hookup Fee:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to install or alter any water system or service
line within the city, or to tap onto or connect to any water line, whether
lateral or main, without having first obtained from the city a permit therefor.
      2.   An application for a connection to the city water system shall be
made at the city office, and no connection shall be made to any water main
without a valid permit therefor having been issued by the public works
superintendent.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, make any connection
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public water main line or
appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit to perform said
work from the public works superintendent. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
      4.   The charge for a water hookup for residential and commercial users
shall be as set by resolution of the city council. (2010 Code)
   B.   Service Line Extension Or Repair Permit:
      1.   When any water service line or private water system connected with
any public water main is leaking, broken or out of order, on private property
(outside of any public right of way or easements), the owner, agent, or tenant
of such premises shall repair the same at his own expense. No person shall
construct, re-lay, repair, or extend any water service connection or private
water system until the person doing said work has obtained the appropriate
water permit for same.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any private service
line beyond the limits of the building or property for which a permit has been
given without obtaining a new permit for the desired extension. The existence
of a water permit shall in no way be construed as making permissible any work
for which an excavation permit may be required by the city. (Ord. 984, 7-5-
1995)
8-1-5: RIGHT TO REVOKE PERMISSION:
Permission given to connect to the water main shall be upon the express
condition that the city council and mayor may, for good cause, revoke the same;
and the person making such connection, or his successor in interest, shall have
no right to claim any damage in consequence of such permission being revoked.
(Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-6: WATER SERVICE LINES AND METERS:
   A.   Independent Service Line And Meter Required:
      1.   The water main line and water service line shall be so arranged that
there is a separate and independent water service line and meter to each
property owner.
      2.   After the effective date hereof, a separate and independent water
service line and meter shall be provided for every new property owner
connecting to the water system of the city. Separate service lines and meters
are not required for each trailer space in overnight trailer courts, nor for
each cabin in cabin courts; however, separate water service lines and meters
are required for trailer houses on individual lots or for long term trailer
rental units in mobile home courts.
      3.   The city may, in its sole discretion, allow a property owner to have
more than one water service line providing water to its property; provided,
however, that the property owner shall pay for the meter and shall have the
additional meters installed at its expense and shall provide all required
excavation, backfill, street repair and other service line and connection
costs.
   B.   Existing Branch Service Lines: Where water service is now provided
through one water service line to several customers (branch service lines), the
city, by resolution of the city council, may decline to continue to provide
water for said premises until separate water service lines are provided at the
owner's expense. Where more than one dwelling is served from one such service
line, the established rate shall be charged for each customer in the same
manner as if each did, in fact, have an individual water service line.
   C.   Service Line And Meter Maintenance: All water users shall keep their
individual water service lines and water meters in good repair and shall keep
them in such good condition that they shall not allow any leakage from the city
water system.
   D.   Service Line Installation And Maintenance:
      1.   As part of the construction of the new water system in 1995, the
city will construct an appropriately sized water service line at the city's
expense which shall run from the main line to the property line of each
individual property owner who was receiving service from the city's prior water
system. All other property owners desiring water service, whether for an
existing dwelling unit, commercial facility, or a newly constructed facility,
shall be required to obtain all permits, licenses, etc., required by this
chapter and shall be required to install his own water service line as
explained in the following subsections.
      2.   When a permit for a water service line has been granted, the water
tap at the main line shall be installed by the city at the city's expense. The
actual service line and all associated excavation, backfill, street repair, and
piping shall be completed by the property owner at his expense. Thereafter, or
after the water service line has been installed, each water service line within
the public right of way or easement shall be maintained by the city at its
expense and kept within and under its exclusive control and jurisdiction.
      3.   All water service lines within any public right of way or easement
shall be constructed by the property owner requesting the water service; and in
any new subdivision, they may be installed as part of the construction of the
new water distribution system within said subdivision; and provided further,
that said water and service lines are constructed, inspected, tested, and
certified as being in conformance with the city standard drawings and
specifications governing the construction of water service lines.
      4.   Water service lines may also be installed by contract in conjunction
with city sponsored projects or when, in the opinion of the public works
superintendent, it is in the city's best interest to have or allow said water
service lines to be installed by other than city personnel.
   E.   Water Meter Installation And Maintenance: The city shall provide to all
property owners making new connections to the water system one appropriately
sized water meter and meter box. If the meter is determined to be
malfunctioning by the city, after proper inspection by the public works
superintendent, it shall be the city's responsibility to provide the property
owner with a new meter as replacement for the malfunctioning unit. (Ord. 984,
7-5-1995)
8-1-7: CONSTRUCTION PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Conformance With City Standards:
      1.   All construction or reconstruction of public, private and water
service lines shall be in accordance with the city standard drawings and
standard specifications, and subject to inspection by the city.
      2.   Plan and profile drawings shall be prepared for all new water mains
(whether public or private) and for all water main extensions, reconstructions,
or renovations; and all such plan and profile drawings must be reviewed and
approved by an engineer designated by the city and the state department of
environmental quality before any construction work on said water lines is
started.
   B.   Right Of Entry For Inspection: The public works superintendent and the
city representative assigned to read the water meters shall have the right to
enter upon any premises connected with the public water system at all
reasonable hours to determine that there is compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. If conflict is noted, the owner of said premises or his agent
shall be directed to alter, repair, or reconstruct said water facilities to
conform to the requirements of this chapter within fifteen (15) days. (Ord.
984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
8-1-8: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS WITHIN CITY:
The public works superintendent shall be authorized to construct, or cause to
be constructed, extensions to the water system if one of the following
conditions exists:
   A.   Anticipated Revenue: The annual anticipated revenue made available to
the city from the customers to be immediately served by such extension is not
less than one-tenth (1/10) of the actual cost to the city for the construction
of said extension.
   B.   Declaration Of Necessity: The public works superintendent declares that
the water main extension is needed for the overall benefit and improvement of
the entire water distribution system.
   C.   Contract With Parties Desiring Service: The city approves a contract
for the construction of the extension with a party or parties desiring water
service. Provided, however, that subdividers or developers within or adjacent
to the city shall construct at their own expense all water mains within their
subdivisions or developments, where a water subscription agreement has not been
executed by the property owner and where the water system is not, as of the
effective date hereof, connected to any city water system. The above referenced
water connection fee will not apply to or be charged against the reconstruction
of any existing water service line serving any existing dwelling, building,
etc. It is intended that this water connection fee be charged only where a new
building is being constructed on previously undeveloped property or where an
existing building is being connected to the water system without its property
owner having previously executed a water subscription agreement with the city.
(Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-9: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle, or
otherwise interfere with any portion of the city water distribution or supply
system or its appurtenances, located on either public or private property.
Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from
handling or otherwise tampering with said water system, the violator shall pay
for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or for
any damages that may result from the tampering with said water system. (Ord.
984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-10: SERVICE CALL CHARGE:
The public works superintendent may require a service charge in an amount not
to exceed the actual cost to the city, for service calls which are only for the
convenience and benefit of the customer. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-11: MONTHLY WATER USER FEES:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Each water user shall be levied a monthly water user fee for the
privilege of utilizing water from the city water system. This water user fee
shall be levied on all users of the water to cover the actual or estimated cost
of operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing of the city's water
system facilities. All water users and property owners shall be levied a water
user fee. Billings will be levied regularly at intervals set by the city
council, but no more often than monthly. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   The actual monthly water user fee to be billed to each property
owner or customer shall be determined by the addition of the calculated monthly
base rate fee and the calculated monthly water usage fee. A description of the
base rate fee and water usage fees to be assessed by this chapter shall be
described in subsections B and C of this section. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
   B.   Base Rate And Water Usage Fees: Base rate fees and water usage fees
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. (2010
Code)
   C.   Review And Revision Of Rates:
      1.   The water user base rate and usage fees shall, as a minimum, be
reviewed annually and, when required, updated by resolution of the city council
to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing
of the water system.
      2.   Any revisions of the user connection and usage fees shall be based
on actual operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing expenses, and/or
on significant changes in the total number of equivalent users and/or the total
daily flow. All changes in user charges applicable to this chapter shall be
computed by the methods outlined herein.
   D.   User Request For Rate Change: Any water user, who feels his user charge
is unjust and inequitable as applied to his premises within the spirit and
intent of the foregoing provisions, may make written application to the city
requesting a review of his user charge. Said written request shall, where
necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow of water in comparison
with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements
or estimates were made. Any flow measurements shall be approved in detail by
the city and/or its engineer. Review of the request by the city shall determine
if it is substantiated or not, including recommended further study of the
matter for the city and/or user by a registered professional engineer. (Ord.
984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-12: BILLING PROCEDURE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Monthly Statements; Responsibility: The city clerk- treasurer shall
furnish to each property owner, landlord, tenant, or agent, a monthly statement
of the amount due for water service for that month. The failure of any water
user to receive notice or statement will in no way affect the obligation of the
user to remit monthly as required. The property owner having rental property,
apartments or trailer parking shall be responsible for tenant water charges.
   B.   Due Date: Bills rendered for water service are payable upon receipt and
become past due eleven (11) days from the date on which rendered. When the past
due date falls on a legal holiday or on a day when city offices are not open
for business, the next regular business day is considered the past due date.
When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid on the date of
mailing as shown by the postmark. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
   C.   Delinquent Accounts; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   When bills are not paid within ten (10) days from the past due date,
the city clerk-treasurer shall issue a fifteen (15) day notice of delinquency
and intent to shut off and discontinue water service to such delinquent
customers. If said bill is not paid within five (5) days, a twenty four (24)
hour shut off notice shall be given prior to termination of water services. In
case service is discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until
the delinquency is paid, or until arrangements for payment satisfactory to the
city clerk-treasurer have been made, together with a fee as set by resolution
of the city council for discontinuing and restoring service. Said fee shall be
payable whenever a service trip is made for the purpose of discontinuing
service because of nonpayment. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   In the event that a delinquent customer fails to pay his bill within
the time set forth in subsection C1 of this section, the city may discontinue
city water service and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purpose.
(Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-13: WATER SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE; VACANCY OF PREMISES:
   A.   Request For Turn Off And Turn On: When any property owner, person,
firm, or business determines that his residence, property, or business is going
to be vacant, not used or shut down for an extended period of time, he shall
notify the public works superintendent. Under these circumstances, the public
works superintendent shall shut off the water service to the facilities. When
the home, property, or business is reoccupied, the public works superintendent
shall once again be notified, and he shall restore water service once again to
the facilities.
   B.   Owner Responsible For Damage To Service Line: Since there is
significant potential for freezing and thus damage to the service line in the
event of a lengthy shutdown period, the property owner shall be responsible at
his expense for any water service line repairs that may be needed to repair the
water service line that is located on city right of way properties and also any
associated repairs that are needed on his private property, including the cost
of replacing water meter, meter readout, etc., if it becomes necessary to do
so.
   C.   Base Rate Fee Continuation: In the case where water service is
discontinued, the property owner shall still be required to pay the monthly
water base rate fee even while the property is vacated. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-14: WATER SYSTEM FUND:
There is hereby established a water system fund to be maintained by the city
clerk-treasurer in managing the fiscal affairs of the city. All revenues
derived from the charging of any fees, charges, rates, etc., as such are set
forth herein shall be deposited in said fund and shall be disbursed only for
the purposes of paying existing or future indebtedness connected with or
relating to maintaining, repairing, studying, controlling, enlarging,
extending, enhancing, or improving the water system of the city. (Ord. 984, 7-
5-1995)
8-1-15: WATER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Water Main Lines: All water main lines, valves, fire hydrants, and
fitting materials and their installation shall be in accordance with the city
standard specifications for the construction of water system improvements and
the applicable standard drawings depicting various water line installation
details.
   B.   Water Service Lines: All water service line materials and their
installation shall be in accordance with the city standard specifications for
the construction of water system improvements and the applicable standard
drawings depicting the various water service line installation details.
   C.   Water System Materials: All water system materials shall be of the
class, strength, thickness, etc., necessary to accommodate or provide for the
depth of cover over the pipe, the anticipated working pressure in the pipe, the
type of material and bedding around the pipe, and the type, magnitude, and
extent of the external loads being applied to the pipe.
   D.   Approval Of Materials: All materials must be approved by an engineer
designated by the city prior to their installation. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-16: WATER SYSTEM DESIGN:
   A.   Plans: The plans for all water lines, booster stations, etc., shall be
designed, signed, and sealed by a registered engineer licensed in the state of
Idaho. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
   B.   Lines And Stations: All water lines, booster stations, etc., shall be
in accordance with the state department of environmental quality requirements.
(Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Minimum Water Main And Service Line Sizes: Minimum water main size
shall be six inch (6") diameter. Larger sizes shall be as required by the
city's overall water system master plan or as are needed to provide adequate
water carrying capacity for the area (and surrounding developable area) being
developed and/or annexed to the city. Minimum building service line size shall
be three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter.
   D.   Materials:
      1.   Standards, Materials Selection: Pipe, fittings, valves and fire
hydrants shall conform to the latest standards issued by the AWWA, if such
standards exist, and are acceptable to the city. In the absence of such
standards, materials meeting applicable product standards and acceptable to the
city may be selected. Special attention shall be given to selecting pipe
materials which will protect against both internal and external pipe corrosion.
      2.   Packing And Jointing Materials: Packing and jointing materials used
in the joints of pipes shall meet the standards of the AWWA and the city. Pipe
having mechanical joints or slip on joints with rubber gaskets is preferred.
   E.   Water Main Design:
      1.   Pressure: All water mains, including those not designed to provide
fire protection, shall be sized after a hydraulic analysis based on flow
demands and pressure requirements. The system shall be designed to maintain a
minimum pressure of twenty (20) psi at ground level at all points in the
distribution system under all conditions of flow. The normal working pressure
in the distribution system should be approximately ninety (90) psi and not less
than forty five (45) psi.
      2.   Diameter: The minimum size of a water main for providing fire
protection and serving fire hydrants shall be six inch (6") diameter. Larger
size mains will be required if necessary to allow the withdrawal of the
required fire flow while maintaining the minimum residual pressure specified in
subsection E1 of this section. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
      3.   Fire Protection: When fire protection is to be provided, system
design should be such that fire flows and facilities are in accordance with the
requirements of the state insurance fund. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
      4.   Small Mains: Any departure from minimum requirements shall be
justified by hydraulic analysis and future water use, and can be considered
only in special circumstances.
      5.   Hydrants: Water mains not designed to carry fire flows shall not
have fire hydrants connected to them.
      6.   Dead Ends: Dead ends shall be minimized by looping of all mains
whenever practical.
      7.   Flushing: Where dead end mains occur, they shall be provided with a
fire hydrant if flow and pressure are sufficient, or with an approved flushing
hydrant or blowoff for flushing purposes. Flushing devices should be sized to
provide flows which will give a velocity of at least two and one-half feet
(2.5') per second in the water main being flushed. No flushing device shall be
directly connected to any sewer.
   F.   Valves: Sufficient valves shall be provided on water mains so that
inconvenience and sanitary hazards will be minimized during repairs. Valves
should be located at not more than five hundred foot (500') intervals in
commercial districts and at not more than one block or eight hundred foot
(800') intervals in other districts. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
   G.   Hydrants:
      1.   Location And Spacing: Hydrants should be provided at each street
intersection and at intermediate points between intersections as recommended by
the state insurance fund. Generally, hydrant space may range from three hundred
fifty (350) to six hundred feet (600') depending on the area being served.
(Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   Valves And Nozzles: Fire hydrants should have a bottom valve size of
at least five inches (5"), one 41/2-inch pumper nozzle and two (2) 21/2-inch
nozzles.
      3.   Hydrant Leads: The hydrant lead shall be a minimum of six inches
(6") in diameter. Auxiliary valves shall be installed in all hydrant leads.
      4.   Drainage: Hydrant drains should be open. A gravel pocket or dry well
shall be provided unless the natural soils will provide adequate drainage.
Hydrant drains shall not be connected to or located within ten feet (10') of
sanitary sewers or storm drains.
      5.   Brand: The city requires Mueller centurion fire hydrants, no likes.
   H.   Air Relief Valves, Valve Meter And Blowoff Chambers:
      1.   Air Relief Valves: At high points in water mains where air can
accumulate, provisions shall be made to remove the air by means of hydrants or
air relief valves. Automatic air relief valves shall not be used in situations
where flooding of the manhole or chamber may occur.
      2.   Air Relief Valve Piping: The open end of an air relief pipe from
automatic valves shall be extended to at least one foot (1') above grade and
provided with a screened, downward facing elbow. The pipe from a manually
operated valve should be extended to the top of the pit.
      3.   Chamber Drainage: Chambers, pits or manholes containing valves,
blowoffs, meters, or other such appurtenances to a distribution system, shall
not be connected directly to any storm drain or sanitary sewer, nor shall
blowoffs or air relief valves be connected directly to any sewer. Such chambers
or pits shall be drained to the surface of the ground where they are not
subject to flooding by surface water, or to absorption pits underground.
   I.   Installation Of Mains:
      1.   Standards: Specifications shall incorporate the provisions of the
AWWA standards and/or manufacturer's recommended installation procedures.
      2.   Bedding: A continuous and uniform bedding shall be provided in the
trench for all buried pipe. Backfill material shall be tamped in layers around
the pipe and to a sufficient height above the pipe to adequately support and
protect the pipe. Rocks found in the trench shall be removed for a depth of at
least six inches (6") below the bottom of the pipe.
      3.   Cover: In general, water lines shall be sufficiently deep so as to
provide frost protection. Water lines shall have at least three and one-half
feet (31/2') of cover (from the top of water line pipe to the ground or street
surface) unless a special design is approved by an engineer designated by the
city.
      4.   Blocking: All tees, bends, plugs and hydrants shall be provided with
reaction blocking, tie rods or joints designed to prevent movement.
      5.   Pressure And Leakage Testing: All types of installed pipe shall be
pressure tested and leakage tested in accordance with the latest edition of
AWWA standard C600.
      6.   Disinfection: All new, cleaned or repaired water mains shall be
disinfected in accordance with AWWA standard C601 at developer cost. The
specifications shall include detailed procedures for the adequate flushing,
disinfection, and microbiological testing of all water mains.
   J.   Separation Of Water Mains, Sanitary Sewers And Storm Sewers:
      1.   General: The following factors should be considered in providing
adequate separation:
         a.   Materials and type of joints for water and sewer pipes.
         b.   Soil conditions.
         c.   Service and branch connections into the water main and sewer
line.
         d.   Compensating variations in the horizontal and vertical
separations.
         e.   Space for repair and alterations of water and sewer pipes.
         f.   Offsetting of pipes around manholes.
      2.   Parallel Installation: Water mains shall be laid at least ten feet
(10') horizontally from any existing or proposed sewer. The distance shall be
measured edge to edge. In cases where it is not practical to maintain a ten
foot (10') separation, the reviewing authority may allow deviation on a case by
case basis, if supported by data from the design engineer. Such deviation may
allow installation of the water main closer to a sewer; provided, that the
water main is laid in a separate trench or on an undisturbed earth shelf
located on one side of the sewer at such an elevation that the bottom of the
water main is at least eighteen inches (18") above the top of the sewer.
      3.   Crossings: Water mains crossing sewers shall be laid to provide a
minimum vertical distance of eighteen inches (18") between the outside of the
water main and the outside of the sewer. This shall be the case where the water
main is either above or below the sewer. At crossings, one full length of water
pipe shall be located so both joints will be as far from the sewer as possible.
Special structural support for the water and sewer pipes may be required.
      4.   Exception: The city must specifically approve any variance from the
requirements of subsections J2 and J3 of this section when it is impossible to
obtain the specified separation distance.
      5.   Force Mains: There shall be at least a ten foot (10') horizontal
separation between water mains and sanitary sewer force mains. There shall be
an eighteen inch (18") vertical separation at crossings as required in
subsection J3 of this section.
      6.   Sewer Manholes: No water pipe shall pass through or come in contact
with any part of a sewer manhole.
   K.   Surface Water Crossings: Surface water crossings, whether over or under
water, present special problems. The reviewing authority should be consulted
before final plans are prepared.
      1.   Above Water Crossings: The pipe shall be adequately supported and
anchored, protected from damage and freezing, and accessible for repair or
replacement.
      2.   Underwater Crossings: A minimum cover of five feet (5') shall be
provided over the pipe. When crossing watercourses which are greater than
fifteen feet (15') in width, the following shall be provided:
         a.   The pipe shall be of special construction, having flexible
watertight joints.
         b.   Valves shall be provided at both ends of water crossings so that
the section can be isolated for testing or repair; the valves shall be easily
accessible, and not subject to flooding; and the valve closest to the supply
source shall be in a manhole.
         c.   Permanent taps shall be made on each side of the valve within the
manhole to allow insertion of a small meter to determine leakage and for
sampling purposes.
   L.   Cross Connections And Interconnections:
      1.   Cross Connections: There shall be no connection between the
distribution system and any pipes, pumps, hydrants, or tanks whereby unsafe
water or other contaminating materials may be discharged or drawn into the
system.
      2.   Cooling Water: Neither steam condensate nor cooling water from
engine jackets or other heat exchange devices shall be returned to the potable
water supply.
      3.   Interconnections: The approval of the reviewing authority shall be
obtained for interconnections between potable water supplies.
   M.   Water Services And Plumbing:
      1.   Plumbing: Water services and plumbing shall conform to relevant
local and/or state plumbing codes.
      2.   Booster Pumps: Individual booster pumps shall not be allowed for any
individual service from the public water supply mains.
   N.   Sanitary Water Lines And Water Lines: Sanitary water lines and water
lines shall, wherever possible, be located on opposite sides of the street.
Preferably, water lines shall be located thirteen feet (13') west or north of
the street centerline and the sanitary water lines at thirteen feet (13') east
or south of the street centerline. Where storm drains are needed, these shall
preferably be located along the street centerline. The above referenced
locations and dimensions may be varied to accommodate unusual circumstances.
   O.   Drawings: All drawings shall be on linen or Mylar in ink and of such
quality that they clearly show the dimensions, locations, sizes, etc., of all
facilities represented thereon. All main lines, valves, fire hydrants, building
service lines, etc., shall be clearly shown and identified by name and by
station or other means of horizontal location. Water lines shall be shown in
both plane and profile unless the length of said water line or water line
extension is so short that an engineer designated by the city waives this
requirement. If a profile of the water line is not provided, it shall be
located in the vertical plane by elevations on the flow line of the pipe at
intervals as the city engineer may require. Drawings shall be drawn on a scale
of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') unless the amount of detail,
topography, etc., necessitates their being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., 1" =
30') to provide the clarity and completeness needed on the drawings.
   P.   Design Approval: The design of all water lines and all water line plans
must be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-17: CROSS CONNECTION INSTALLATIONS:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in
the city unless the water supply is protected by backflow prevention devices as
may be required by this chapter, Idaho Code, and all standards, rules, and
regulations of the state of Idaho, the Idaho department of environmental
quality, and any other federal, state, county, or city authority or agency
thereof. The installation or maintenance of a cross connection which will
endanger the water quality of the potable water supply of the city shall be
unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross connections shall be in accordance
with this chapter, Idaho Code, and all standards, rules, and regulations of the
state of Idaho, the Idaho department of environmental quality, and any other
federal, state, county, or city authority or agency thereof, together with the
latest addition of appropriate manuals of standard practice pertaining to cross
connection control enacted by the city and any applicable county, state, and
federal authorities and agencies. The city shall have the authority to
establish requirements more stringent than state regulations if it deems that
the conditions so dictate. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
8-1-18: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Conditions For Requiring Installation: Backflow prevention devices
shall be installed in connection with water service connections or within any
premises where, in the judgment of the city, the nature and extent of the
activities, or the materials stored on the premises, would present an immediate
and dangerous hazard to health and/or be deleterious to the quality of the
water should a cross connection occur. Even though such cross connection does
not exist at the time, the backflow prevention devices shall be installed under
circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: (Ord. 984, 7-5-
1995)
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply that is connected to a
lawn irrigation system, swimming pool, or is otherwise not in compliance with
Idaho drinking water standards, rules, and regulations of the Idaho department
of environmental quality, and any other federal, state, county, or city
authority or agency thereof and is acceptable to the city. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995;
amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable,
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain
whether or not cross connections exist.
      3.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to ensure that cross connections do not exist.
      4.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
      5.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the city water supply, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters.
      6.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard
might result.
      7.   The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above
categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the city
water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these
facilities unless the city and applicable state, county, and federal
authorities and agencies determine that no hazard exists:
         a.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics.
         b.   Laboratories, including school laboratories.
         c.   Metal plating industries.
         d.   Sewage treatment plants.
         e.   Food or beverage processing plants.
         f.   Chemical plants using a water process.
         g.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         h.   Car washes.
         i.   Dry cleaners.
      8.   Other premises as specified by the city, where backflow prevention
devices are required to protect the city water supply.
   B.   Type Of Protective Devices: The type of protective device required
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists:
      1.   An air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed where the city water supply may be
contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other
contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.
      2.   In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not
hazardous to health, a double check valve assembly, air prevention device shall
be installed.
   C.   Location: Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be
installed at the property line of the premises or at a location designated by
the city. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for
maintenance and testing, and furthermore, where no part of the device will be
submerged.
   D.   City Supervision And Approval Of Installation: Backflow prevention
devices required by this chapter shall be installed under the supervision of,
and with the approval of, the city.
   E.   Approval Of Device Required: Any protective device required by this
chapter shall be approved by the city, applicable state, county, and federal
authorities and agencies. These devices shall be furnished and installed by and
at the expense of the customer.
   F.   Inspections, Tests And Maintenance:
      1.   Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this chapter shall
be inspected and tested annually, or more often if necessary.
      2.   Inspections, tests and maintenance shall be at the customer's
expense, and if requested by the city, by a certified tester retained and paid
by the customer.
      3.   Whenever the devices are found to be defective, they shall be
repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the customer's expense.
      4.   Inspections, tests, repairs, and records thereof, shall be
accomplished in accordance with all standards, rules, and regulations of this
chapter, Idaho Code, and all standards, rules, and regulations of the state of
Idaho, the Idaho department of health and welfare, and any other federal,
state, county, or city authority or agency thereof by certified testers
retained and paid by the customer.
   G.   Underground Sprinkling Devices: No underground sprinkling device will
be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from
which the water for irrigation is taken from the city water supply.
   H.   Failure To Comply; Discontinuance Of Water Service: Failure of the
customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing, or inspection
of backflow prevention devices required by this chapter, Idaho Code, and all
standards, rules and regulations of the state of Idaho, the Idaho department of
health and welfare, and any other federal, state, county, or city authority or
agency thereof shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the
premises, or, in the alternative, the installation of an air gap separation at
the customer's expense. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-19: CROSS CONNECTION INSPECTION:
   A.   Inspection:
      1.   No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within
the city or within areas served by city water until the same shall have been
inspected by the city for possible cross connections and been approved as being
free of the same.
      2.   Inspections may be made periodically of all buildings, structures,
or improvements of any nature now receiving water through the city's system,
for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross connections exist. Such
inspections shall be made by the city or applicable county, state, and federal
authorities and agencies.
   B.   Hazardous Facilities: Any construction for industrial or other purposes
which is classified as hazardous facilities pursuant to subsection
8-1-18A7 of this chapter, where it is reasonable to anticipate cross
connections, or as determined by the city, shall be protected by the
installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the point of service
from the city water supply or any other location designated by the city, and
applicable county, state, and federal authorities and agencies. (Ord. 984, 7-5-
1995)
8-1-20: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected within the time
limits set by the city or in the event the city is refused access to any
property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections exist,
the city may cease delivery of water to the property until the deficiency is
corrected to the city's satisfaction. In addition, the city, without waiving
any terms of this chapter, may, but shall not be required to, effect the
necessary repairs or installations at the expense of the property owner and
refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been
paid. Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the
city, after notice to the customer or property owner to remove or correct the
violation, may prevent, remove, and abate the same at the expense of the party
creating or maintaining the same, in which event the city may levy a special
assessment, as provided in the Idaho Code, on the land or premises whereon the
nuisance is situated to defray the cost or to reimburse the city for the cost
of abating the same. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-21: AS BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
   A.   Drawings Required: "As built" or "record" drawings of water line plans
shall be prepared by a professional engineer and the "corrected" original
drawings or a duplicate Mylar copy of the "corrected" original drawing(s) shall
be provided to the city.
   B.   Certification: As built plans shall include a certification thereon
signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work that the
as built drawings of the water lines are true and correct and that he (the
registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the water
line installation and that the materials and installation of same were all done
in conformance with the city standard specifications for the construction of
water line improvements. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-22: RESPONSIBILITY OF SUBDIVISION DEVELOPER OR PROPERTY OWNER:
   A.   Responsibility For Construction And Costs:
      1.   The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is
responsible for the construction of the water line (or for the water line
costs) along any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which
a water line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the city
water main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall
also be responsible for the necessary and required system of water lines within
the interior of the tract of land.
      2.   The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all
needed water lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or
frontages of any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed
thereon is occupied or utilized, unless "phased" construction of the water main
system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development
agreement.
   B.   Large Size Water Lines: The owner or developer of any property or
subdivision will be responsible for the cost of a six inch (6") diameter water
line. Provided further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or
development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a
water main size larger than a six inch (6") diameter line, or if the type of
development is such as to produce a water flow in excess of the capacity of a
six inch (6") diameter water line, then the owner or developer of said
subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever
size of water line is needed to accommodate his development.
   C.   Conditions For Extension Of Service Outside City Limits: The city will
consider the extension of water service outside of the corporate limits of the
city only under the following conditions:
      1.   The property must be contiguous or parallel to the corporate limits
of the city.
      2.   Landowner agrees to sign an "agreement for connection to the city
water system for property owners outside of the corporate limits of the city of
Hagerman", providing for annexation of the property being served at the option
of the city.
      3.   Landowner agrees, at their own expense, to extend any water lines to
the property in question.
      4.   Landowner agrees to pay, prior to the extension of such services,
any and all hookup, capitalization, main extension or any other appropriate
fees that may be required by the city in place at the time of such extension.
      5.   Landowner agrees to pay for the monthly usage of such service at
rates set by resolution. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-23: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage
to any water user by reason of a stoppage or interruption of the water supply
caused by scarcity of water, accidents to waterworks, or mains, alterations,
additions, repairs, or from other unavoidable causes to persons or property.
The city shall also not be held liable for damage to persons or property by
reason of the inspection or testing herein, or the failure to inspect or test
or by reason of approval of any cross connections. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-24: CITATION; APPEARANCE:
Whenever it is determined by any police officer or other duly authorized
officer that any person has violated any provisions of this chapter, the said
officer shall provide in quadruplicate and serve upon such person a written
citation containing a notice to appear in a designated court of competent
jurisdiction within Gooding County. This citation shall contain the name and
address of the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and
where the offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall
appear in said court, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary;
and such person shall appear in said court as directed in the citation. The
issuance of a citation shall not be the exclusive method of summoning offenders
hereunder. (Ord. 984, 7-5-1995)
8-1-25: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day said violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 984, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2-1: Mandatory Connection
8-2-2: Application For Connection; Fees
8-2-3: Rates And Charges
8-2-4: Unpaid Charges A Lien
8-2-5: Discontinuance Of Service
8-2-6: Extension Of Service Outside City Limits
8-2-7: Use Of Public Sewers
8-2-8: Privies, Cesspools Prohibited; Exception; Permit
8-2-1: MANDATORY CONNECTION:
   A.   Connection Required:
      1.   All owners of property within the city limits and within three
hundred feet (300') of the general sewer system of the city, and physically in
the areas capable of receiving the service of the system of sewerage, shall,
within sixty (60) days after the publication in the official newspaper of the
city of a notice signed by the city clerk-treasurer for connections to be made
therewith, cause a connection to be made between said sewer and each such
premises.
      2.   All connections of said sewer system heretofore constructed and made
shall be maintained in a sanitary, permanent and watertight condition.
      3.   All connections made hereafter shall be made in a permanent and
sanitary manner and shall be sufficient to carry all the sewage and waste
fluids of every kind from the building into said system of sewerage, and each
toilet, sink, stationary washstand and other piece or type of equipment having
waste fluids, shall be connected with said system; provided, that where the
building or structure has not been completed before publication of such notice,
connection shall be made on or before the completion of such building or
structure and before any occupancy or use thereof. (1996 Code § 6-4-1)
   B.   Connection By City; Assessment Of Costs; Lien: If any connection or any
needed repair to an existing condition shall not be made within the time herein
provided, the city council is hereby authorized and directed to cause the same
to be made and to file a statement of the cost thereof with the city clerk-
treasurer, and thereupon a warrant shall be issued under direction of the
council by the clerk-treasurer and against the sewer system revenue special
fund for the payment of such costs. The amount of such costs shall be assessed
against the property upon which the said building or structure is situated and
shall become a lien thereupon as hereafter provided. (1996 Code § 6-4-1; amd.
2010 Code)
8-2-2: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION; FEES:
   A.   Filing Of Application; Consideration:
      1.   Any person desiring to utilize the sewer system of the city shall
make application therefor to the city clerk- treasurer. Application must be
made in writing upon forms to be furnished by the clerk-treasurer, and, among
other things, must be signed by the owner of the land where the connection is
proposed to be made, and give the location of the proposed connection. (1996
Code § 6-4-2)
      2.   When such application is made, it shall be referred to the building
inspector for examination and consideration by him. If such application is
approved by the building inspector, the work of installation can proceed
immediately under the supervision and control of the building inspector. (1996
Code § 6-4-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Payment Of Connection Charge: The charge for all sewer connections
shall be set by resolution of the city council and said sums must be paid prior
to the final approval of the permit and prior to actual connection with the
sewage system. Such connection charge shall be paid by all persons connecting
with the sewage system, whether the connection be made directly with one of the
city lines or mains, or whether it is made with a private line before such
private line enters one of the lines or mains of the city sewer system. (1996
Code § 6-4-2)
8-2-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Service Rates:
      1.   The sum per month per hookup is hereby set by resolution. (1996 Code
§ 6-4-3)
      2.   All of the rates and charges for sewerage service fixed by the city
council shall be paid on or before the tenth day of each month, and if not so
paid, shall become delinquent on said date.
      3.   The city council hereby expressly reserves the right to change or
revise the rates by resolution adopted from time to time. (1996 Code § 6-4-3;
amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Hookup Fee: The sewer hookup fee shall be as set by resolution of the
city council. (2010 Code)
8-2-4: UNPAID CHARGES A LIEN:
All charges for connections and for sewerage service provided for in this
chapter, together with penalties and interest thereon, shall be a lien upon the
property with which such connection is made or sewerage service rendered
respectively, superior to all other liens and encumbrances whatsoever, except
for general taxes and local special assessments. The clerk-treasurer is hereby
authorized and directed, prior to the expiration of six (6) months from the
first day of the month for which such charges were unpaid, to certify to the
auditor of Gooding County all of such charges a lien upon such property. (1996
Code § 6-4-4)
8-2-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Authority To Discontinue Service: As an additional and concurrent
method of enforcing the lien of the city for charges provided for in section
8-2-4 of this chapter, the city council is hereby authorized and directed, at
the end of five (5) days after the date of the first delinquency of any such
charges, to cut off the water and sewer services from the premises to which
such services were furnished, and said services shall remain cut off until all
such charges, plus penalties and interest thereon, shall be paid.
   B.   Billing And Collection; Disconnect Pipe: Charges for sewerage service
shall be billed and collected in the same manner as charges for water service
pursuant to chapter 1 of this title. In the event of nonpayment of charges for
sewerage service, a delinquency charge shall be payable and water service may
be terminated as provided in chapter 1 of this title. In addition, the city,
after notice, may cause the pipe or conduit from the affected property to be
disconnected from the city sewerage system. (1996 Code § 6-4-5; amd. 2010 Code)
8-2-6: EXTENSION OF SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The city will consider the extension of sewer service outside of the corporate
limits of the city only under the following conditions:
   A.   The property must be contiguous or parallel to the corporate limits of
the city.
   B.   Landowner agrees to sign an "agreement for connection to the city sewer
system for property owners outside of the corporate limits of the city of
Hagerman", providing for annexation of the property being served at the option
of the city.
   C.   Landowner agrees, at their own expense, to extend any sewer lines to
the property in question.
   D.   Landowner agrees to pay, prior to the extension of such service, any
and all hookup, capitalization, main extension or any other appropriate fees
that may be required by the city in place at the time of such extension.
   E.   Landowner agrees to pay for the monthly usage of such service at rates
set by resolution. (Ord. 980, 2-21-1995)
8-2-7: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Prohibited Discharges Into Sanitary Sewer: No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process waters into any sanitary sewer.
   B.   Permitted Discharges Into Combined And Storm Sewers: Stormwater and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the public works superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewers or natural outlet.
   C.   Prohibited Wastes Into Public Sewers: No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any
public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive solid or gas, or pesticides and insecticides.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes
as discharged to the public sewer.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   D.   Harmful Materials Prohibited In Sewers: No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or
wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as to quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and
65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric), or greater, shall be subject to the review and
approval of the superintendent.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the superintendent for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentrations as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         b.   Excessive BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         c.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs.
      10.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirement of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged into
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or the characteristics
enumerated in this subsection, and which, in the judgment of the
superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewer;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of section
8-2-3 of this chapter.
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   E.   Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that, such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   F.   Owner Maintain Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalizing Facilities:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   G.   Owner Install Control Manhole: When required by the superintendent, the
owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the
owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
   H.   Sampling, Control Manholes: All measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this section
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
For The Examination Of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.)
   I.   Acceptance Of Special Agreements: No statement in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern. (1996 Code § 6-4-7)
8-2-8: PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or use, or cause to be dug or used,
any privy vault or cesspool or connect any plumbing with a cesspool, or build,
or cause to be built any privy building within the city limits, except upon
written permit of the city council. All applications for such permits must be
in writing and accompanied by a certificate from the council that said premises
are not within three hundred feet (300') of a public sewer. (1996 Code § 6-4-6)
CHAPTER 3
SANITARY SERVICE SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-3-1: Short Title
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Mandatory Service
8-3-4: Collection And Disposal Requirements; Unlawful Practices
8-3-5: License, Contract Or Franchise
8-3-6: Sanitary Containers
8-3-7: Precollection Practices
8-3-8: Curbside Or Alley Collection; Frequency Of Collection
8-3-9: Rates, Fees, Charges And Deposits
8-3-10: Solid Waste Collection Vehicles; Inspection
8-3-11: Separation And Recycling
8-3-12: Penalty For Infraction
8-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL SANITARY SYSTEM
OF THE CITY. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
BULKY WASTE: Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture
and other waste materials other than construction debris, dead animals,
hazardous materials or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those
allowed for cans.
CAN: A receptacle approved by the city.
CITY: The city of Hagerman, Idaho.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
CONTRACTOR: The person or entity authorized by the city to operate, conduct,
and maintain a municipal solid waste collection and removal system of the city.
COUNTY: The county of Gooding, state of Idaho.
CUSTOMER: An occupant or owner of any premises in the city for which solid
waste service is, or has been, provided.
FRANCHISEE: Any person or entity authorized by the city of Hagerman, or
employed by the city of Hagerman to collect, handle, transport and dispose of
solid waste and/or recyclable materials and who has executed a franchise
agreement with the city of Hagerman.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article
which is designated by the United States environmental protection agency or
appropriate agency of the state to be "hazardous", as that term is defined by
or pursuant to federal or state law.
INSPECTOR: The authorized employee or employees of the city of Hagerman, or
some individual designated by the city council as having the duty of
enforcement of this chapter.
MANDATORY: Every resident, business, entity or owner of a residential unit
within the city is required to use the collection and disposal system
established by the city.
OWNER: The person owning the real property where solid waste is created or
accumulated.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, public
agency, or any other legal entity.
PREMISES: Land and all buildings and structures thereon. "Premises" can be of
two (2) or more classifications, defined as:
Commercial Premises: Business, industrial, and institutional premises and
activities located within a commercially or industrially zoned district of the
city or operating with a valid issued special use permit in a residentially
zoned district, as distinct from residential or multi-family premises.
Multi-Family Premises: A dwelling or structure where more than one family
resides.
Residential Premises: A dwelling or structure where a person or group of
persons reside.
PROHIBITED WASTE: A. Includes any wastes that have any of the following general
characteristics:
        1. Extreme temperature;
        2. Harmful vapors;
        3. The presence of corrosive, flammable, explosive or toxic chemicals;
        4. Any materials with physical or other properties which render
collection operations hazardous; or
        5. Any materials which create a risk to the environment or public
health and safety.
   B.   In addition to wastes with the general characteristics described above,
prohibited wastes include:
      1. Liquid wastes, both bulk and contained;
        2. Tires;
        3. Any material regulated by the state of Idaho or the United States
environmental protection agency (40 CFR 260 through 268) as hazardous waste;
        4. Any equipment or machines containing refrigerants;
        5. Infectious wastes generated from business sources such as hospitals,
clinics, medical, surgical, dental, nursing homes, veterinarian offices, and
laboratories. Generators of infectious waste are required to sterilize,
package, or otherwise process the infectious waste so that it may be collected
without hazard to collection personnel and the general public; and
        6. Dead animal remains in an amount exceeding twenty five (25) pounds,
excluding animal carcasses if broken down and placed into plastic solid waste
bags and into a lidded, airtight and watertight container.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE: Wastes that can decay and stink or become putrid.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Products, including paper, cardboard, metal, glass, or
other substance capable of being reprocessed into consumer materials, which
have served the purpose for which they were originally manufactured or produced
and have passed through their end usage as consumer items, and which have been
discarded or placed for collection by their owner, whether or not such products
have monetary value.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except sewage),
including garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENT: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge,
custody, or control of any premises, residential or commercial, where solid
waste is created or accumulated.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied
by a person or group of persons comprising not more than three (3) families. A
"residential unit" shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light
and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether
single or multi-level construction, consisting of three (3) or less continuous
or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential
unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit
may be billed separately as a residential unit. Each separate rental unit, in
the case of a multi-family dwelling, shall be considered as a residential unit
and billed separately.
RUBBISH: All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead
plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste, pulp and
other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery, and glass,
ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any
and all other waste materials not included in the definition of "bulky waste",
"construction debris", dead animals, garbage, "hazardous materials" or "stable
matter".
SEWAGE: Water carried wastes from residences, commercial or industrial
establishments, business buildings, and other premises, containing polluted
matter subject to treatment at the sewage treatment plant.
SOLID WASTE: Any ashes, garbage, refuse, or rubbish, or any combination
thereof.
STABLE MATTER: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-3: MANDATORY SERVICE:
In order to maintain the public health, safety, and aesthetics of the city, all
owners and/or occupants of any residential units are required to pay for, and
are provided, solid waste collection services. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-4: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS; UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
   A.   System Of Collection Established:
      1.   There is hereby established a system of solid waste collection,
transportation and disposal.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting, transporting, hauling, or conveying any solid waste, other than
from a commercial premises, over the streets or alleys of the city, or to dump
or dispose of the same, unless and until such person has a franchise, license,
or contract as an authorized representative of the city.
   B.   Compliance With Chapter Required: All refuse accumulated in the city
shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of as provided by this chapter, and
no person shall collect, or convey over any of the streets, alleys or public
ways in the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city except as
provided in this chapter.
   C.   Commercial Premises Exempt: The requirements under this section for the
collection and hauling of waste within the city shall not apply to commercial
premises.
   D.   Use Of System; Special Exception:
      1.   Every person who is an owner or occupant of premises within the city
limits shall use the refuse collection and disposal system herein provided and
shall deposit or cause to be disposed of in accordance with this chapter all
refuse which is accumulated on such premises; provided, that nothing herein is
to be construed to prohibit any owner from transporting and disposing of refuse
accumulated on his own premises, subject to all regulations herein contained.
      2.   An individual or entity may be granted a special exception from the
mandatory system used by the city council in extreme circumstances upon
application and a showing before the city council that the city, its licensee
or franchisee cannot reasonably accommodate the collection of the individual's
or entity's garbage. Upon being granted the exception, the garbage collector
must comply with the license, contract, and franchise provisions of this
chapter.
   E.   Lower Price Charged By Collector Not A Factor: The fact that another
garbage collector is willing to collect the garbage for a price less than the
price set by the city shall not be a factor in determining whether the city,
its licensee or franchisee can reasonably accommodate the collection of the
individual's or entity's garbage.
   F.   Minimum Payment Required: All owners or occupants of premises within
the city limits will be charged the minimum collection charge regardless of
whether they actually use the collection system provided by the city.
   G.   Refuse Accumulations Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or to cause, the
accumulation in or about any premises or upon any street, alley or public way
of the city adjacent to such premises, owned or occupied by him, of garbage,
refuse and rubbish in an amount and/or manner as to constitute a health menace
or a nuisance.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or leave, or permit to
remain, anywhere in the city any garbage, rubbish or refuse except as provided
in this chapter.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any garbage,
rubbish or refuse in such a manner that it can be blown away by the wind or
cause littering of public or private premises, streets, alleys and public ways
of the city.
   H.   Construction Dirt Or Debris: It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit into the refuse system, dirt or earth debris from construction or
building renovation, rocks, stones, automobile bodies and parts, washing
machines, refrigerators, hot water tanks, stoves, tree trunks and stumps, and
other similar materials, dead animals, furniture, building materials such as
mortar, plaster, scrap lumber, broken concrete, and brick, waste oils and
lubricants from garages, service stations, machine shops, restaurants and other
similar establishments. Such material shall be collected and disposed of by the
building contractor, person, owner, occupant of the premises, or by the person
responsible for same. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005; amd. 2010 Code)
8-3-5: LICENSE, CONTRACT OR FRANCHISE:
   A.   City Authorized To Enter Into Franchise Agreement: The city may enter
into a license, contract, or franchise agreement with an individual or entity
to collect, transport, convey and dispose of garbage and refuse upon, on or
over the streets, alleys and public ways of the city. The mayor and city
council have the sole authority to select and approve all persons who shall
enter into a franchise or license agreement; contract to perform all services
pertaining to sanitary collection and disposal under the provisions of this
chapter; to establish reasonable fees for licenses; and may establish
reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct and operation of such
licensee or contractor. All franchise holders shall be bound by and comply with
the provisions of this chapter wherever applicable, and shall comply with all
requirements set forth by the city council, and shall observe and faithfully
perform the conditions and provisions of the license and the ordinances, rules
and regulations of the city.
   B.   Residential Premises Service: Residential premises solid waste service
is provided to residents of Hagerman by the city.
   C.   Commercial Service: Commercial premises located within the city will
not be provided solid waste service by the city. Any commercial premises may
use the services of any contractor for the collection of solid waste within the
city limits without it being a violation of this chapter. However, no entity or
contractor may be allowed to collect from any residential premises in the city
without the proper license and/or franchise from the city.
   D.   Franchise Required To Collect: Collection of solid waste for
residential premises within the city limits without a valid franchise or
license agreement is a violation of this chapter subject to the penalties
contained in section
8-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-6: SANITARY CONTAINERS:
   A.   Container Requirements: Sanitary containers for residential premises or
for commercial premises shall be as set forth by the city council.
   B.   Use Of Containers: It shall be the duty of the resident or owner of any
premises at all times to keep, or cause to be kept, containers, as defined in
this chapter, and to deposit or cause to be deposited therein all solid waste,
except as otherwise herein provided.
   C.   Covers: All containers shall be: 1) equipped with close fitting covers;
or 2) securely tied; or 3) otherwise closed to prevent the contents to be blown
by the wind or otherwise littered.
   D.   Compacting Of Waste: Solid waste or recyclable materials shall not be
compacted in a container to the extent of obstructing free and easy removal
from the container.
   E.   Restraint Of Animals: Residents and owners shall restrain their animals
from spreading solid waste, or recyclable materials left for collection, or
from interfering with pick up personnel during collection. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-
2005)
8-3-7: PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES:
   A.   Draining Of Liquids: All solid waste, before being placed or deposited
in sanitary containers for collection, shall have drained from it all free
liquids and may be wrapped and placed in paper or plastic bags.
   B.   Tree Trimmings Bundled: Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar
materials shall be cut to a length not to exceed four feet (4') and securely
tied in bundles no more than two feet (2') in diameter before being deposited
in the can for collection.
   C.   Grass And Leaves: Grass clippings, leaves, and garden debris, except
sod, dirt, and rocks, may be placed in the collection can.
   D.   Removal Of Container From Pick Up Location: At other than commercial
and alley pick up, all containers shall be removed from the curb line of
streets and public ways within twenty four (24) hours. Unauthorized
accumulation of garbage, rubbish and refuse on any premises is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and thereby prohibited.
   E.   Taking Of Solid Waste Or Recyclables:
      1.   All trash and recyclable materials placed for collection shall be
owned by, and is the responsibility of, the customer until the time of
collection. At the time of collection, all trash and recyclable materials
become the property of the franchisee.
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to take, examine,
uncover, snoop in, separate, gather, collect or salvage materials deposited in
solid waste containers except with the express permission of the generator of
the solid waste.
   F.   Theft Of Collection Services:
      1.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person, except for the
owner, occupant, or invitee, to place or deposit any materials in or around a
solid waste receptacle provided for the use of a specific business or premises,
or in or around the can or container at a residence without permission from
such owner or occupant.
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to place solid
waste at any premises within the city limits that is not generated at that
commercial, residential, or multi- family premises.
   G.   Disposal Of Waste: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
throw, discard or deposit any solid waste in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch, drainage
ditch or other watercourse. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-8: CURBSIDE OR ALLEY COLLECTION; FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
   A.   Placement Of Containers: All containers shall be placed for collection
outside of all buildings and shall be placed in the alley adjoining such
premises or other convenient place easily accessible by the collector; if no
alley is conveniently available, such receptacle may be placed on the street,
parking or sidewalk.
   B.   Handling Of Containers:
      1.   All containers shall be replaced upright where found. Containers and
lids shall not be placed or thrown on streets, alleys, highways, or on
adjoining property. The collector shall not permit receptacles to be thrown
from the truck to the pavement or parkway nor in any other way permit damage to
occur by rough or improper handling thereof.
      2.   Space, private ground, public streets, alleys, or ways about the
containers and the collection truck shall be left free from solid waste spilled
during collection. The collector shall be responsible for removal of such
spillage, but shall not be responsible for cleaning up conditions created by
the resident around such containers.
   C.   Frequency Of Collection:
      1.   Solid waste accumulated at residences shall be collected at least
once a week.
      2.   Solid waste accumulated at the premises of commercial and business
places shall be collected at least once each week, unless the city provides for
alternative collection on a special exception basis.
      3.   If residential or commercial users desire a greater frequency of
collection, such residential or commercial user may pay an additional fee, rate
or charge to be fixed and approved by the city.
      4.   The days for collection and permitted hours for collections shall be
set by the city council. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-9: RATES, FEES, CHARGES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Rates Set By City; Billing And Collection: The rates, fees or charges
for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall at all times be
subject to the right of the city to prescribe and regulate the rates, fees and
charges made for services rendered or to be rendered. The city may bill and
collect all fees and charges.
   B.   Failure To Pay Bills: Failure to pay an account within fifteen (15)
days when due may subject the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant to withdrawal
or suspension of service as well as withdrawal or suspension of water and sewer
service, and such civil remedies provided by law.
   C.   Service Suspension; Deposit: In the event that garbage or water service
has been suspended or terminated by the city for nonpayment of fees, the city
shall, prior to reinstating said service, require an advance deposit equal to
three (3) months' projected service charge for said account.
   D.   Hauler May Collect Deposit: The city shall have the authority to
authorize its trash contract hauler to collect a deposit prior to delivery of
temporary box containers.
   E.   Special Fund Established: The proceeds from the collection of fees and
charges herein provided shall be placed in a special fund to be known as the
"solid waste collection account", and all expenses of the city in the operation
of the sanitary collection system shall be paid out of such fund, and any
surplus remaining therein at the end of each fiscal year may be transferred by
the council to the general fund. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-10: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLES; INSPECTION:
   A.   Furnishing And Maintaining Trucks And Equipment: The contractor will
furnish a sufficient number of workers, trucks and equipment to collect and
dispose of solid wastes collected in the city. Said equipment shall be
maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary condition at the expense of the
contractor.
   B.   Specifications And Condition Of Vehicles: The contractor shall furnish
vehicles especially designed for the collection and hauling of solid waste and
waste products. All solid waste vehicles shall be closed and watertight, front,
rear, or side loading, commonly known as packers for collecting solid waste.
The equipment shall be clean, uniformly painted and marked and identified,
subject to review and approval by the city. All vehicles will be licensed,
lighted and safety inspected for highway operations.
   C.   Roadside Littering From Packer Vehicles: No roadside littering from
packer vehicles or from loading practices will be allowed. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-
2005)
8-3-11: SEPARATION AND RECYCLING:
The city reserves the right to, and may at its option, require the separation
of garbage, rubbish, or other components of solid waste, require the deposit
thereof in separate containers, and prescribe the method of disposal thereof.
The city also reserves the right to issue further regulations for the placement
and disposal of recyclable materials. The contractor shall cooperate at all
times with efforts to promote recycling of consumer products in the separation,
transportation, and deposit of identified recyclable materials. Any extra work
caused by said handling of recyclable materials over and above the contract
price will be the subject of prior separate contractual negotiations between
the city and the contractor. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005)
8-3-12: PENALTY FOR INFRACTION:
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, including any owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of
premises, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-1B of this code. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. (Ord. 1033, 9-21-2005; amd. 2010 Code)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Codes Adopted; Building Permits And Fees
9-1-2: Area Of City Impact
9-1-1: CODES ADOPTED; BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards
and requirements for regulating and controlling grading, quality, and
installation of materials, use occupancy, and maintenance of all buildings,
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and structures in the City of Hagerman.
Further, to bring the City of Hagerman ordinances into compliance with
requirements of the laws of the State of Idaho.
   B.   Adoption Of Applicable Codes:
      1.   The approved editions of the following codes, as adopted by the
State of Idaho and as required by Idaho Code 39-4116 and 39-4109, are adopted
as the official building codes of the City of Hagerman, State of Idaho, except
as provided in this section:
         a.   The 2012 version of the International Building Code; including
all rules promulgated by the board to provide the equivalency with the
provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines and
the Federal Fair Housing Act accessibility guidelines, but not including the
other referenced codes in the International Building Code.
         b.   The International Residential Code, parts I - IV and IX.
         c.   The International Energy Conservation Code.
      2.   Provided that the adopted versions of these codes shall be
superseded by successive versions of these codes as they are adopted by the
Idaho Building Code Board pursuant to the statutes set forth above, and further
that these codes shall be effective upon the effective date as adopted by the
Idaho Building Code Board.
   C.   Building Permit Requirements: The following requirements must be met,
if applicable, prior to the issuance of a building permit:
      1.   Applicants shall provide plans and specifications of sufficient
detail to reflect compliance with Code requirements.
      2.   Applicants shall submit a completed building permit application with
the required supporting documentation.
      3.   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this section
and/or the Building Code has been commenced without first obtaining the
required permit, a fee in addition to the regular permit fee shall be imposed;
with the additional fee to be set by the City of Hagerman in compliance with
this section.
   D.   Fees: The City of Hagerman shall establish fees for the issuance of all
required permits, including but not limited to building permits, plan reviews,
reinspections, and additional fees for commencing work prior to acquiring
permit. These fees shall be set by resolution by the City Council in such
amounts and at such times, as they may deem appropriate.
   E.   Violations: Violations of any provision of this section and/or failure
to comply with any of its requirements shall be a misdemeanor offense as
defined by Idaho Code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Each violation may be punished by imprisonment and up to six
(6) months and/or a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). The City may also
seek civil remedies to the maximum extent allowed by law. In addition, any
violation deemed by the City to threaten the public health, safety, and/or
general welfare of the City, the City Council may take any lawful action they
deem necessary to abate such violation. (Ord. 1062, 3-5-2014)
9-1-2: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   A.   Facility For Commercial Propagation Of Fish Unlawful: Notwithstanding
any provision of the international building code or any other section of this
code, no permit shall be granted for the construction or maintenance of a
facility for the commercial propagation of fish within the impact area of the
city. The construction or maintenance of a facility for the commercial
propagation of fish is unlawful.
   B.   Building Code Enforcement: All regulations, provisions, penalties and
conditions of said international building code shall apply and be enforced by
the city in the area of city impact as described in ordinance 933 of the city
of Hagerman and as described in ordinance 20 of the ordinances of Gooding
County, or as said area may hereafter be fixed and described 1 . (1996 Code §
3-1-2; amd. Ord. 1017, 12-17-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 8 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Fire Codes Adopted
9-2-2: LP Gas And Fuel Oil Tank Regulations
9-2-1: FIRE CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption: The following are hereby adopted by the city for the purpose
of prescribing regulations regarding conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosions: 1) that certain code and standard known as the
international fire code, including appendices; and 2) the international fire
code standards published by the Western Fire Chiefs Association and the
International Conference Of Building Officials, being particularly the latest
editions thereof. One copy of the code and standard has been and now is filed
with the city clerk-treasurer, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from the effective date hereof,
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 1021, 9-2-2003)
   B.   Definitions: Wherever the following terms are used in the fire codes
adopted in subsection A of this section, the meanings thereof shall be as
follows:
BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION: This term is referring to the fire chief of the fire
district or his designee.
JURISDICTION: The city of Hagerman area of impact. (1996 Code §
5-1-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Appeal: Whenever the chief disapproves an application or refuses to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
codes adopted in subsection A of this section do not apply or that the true
intent of the meaning of said codes has been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the
fire district to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the
decision appealed. (1996 Code §
5-1-3)
   D.   Violations; Penalties:
      1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code or
standards adopted in subsection A of this section, or fails to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire
chief of the fire district or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the
time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code §
5-1-4; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violation or defects within a reasonable time; and when
not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
      3.   The application of the above penalties shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1996 Code §
5-1-4)
9-2-2: LP GAS AND FUEL OIL TANK REGULATIONS:
   A.   LP Gas Tank Sizes:
      1.   Residential zone: Two hundred fifty (250) gallon. If larger quantity
is needed, additional tanks must be installed as outlined in the international
fire code.
      2.   Commercial zone: Five hundred (500) gallon.
      3.   Industrial zone: Tanks larger than five hundred (500) gallon must be
placed in the industrial area.
      4.   All tanks must be installed according to the regulations set forth
in the international fire code.
   B.   Fuel Oil Tank Sizes:
      1.   Tank size shall be no greater than three hundred sixty (360) gallon.
      2.   All tanks must be installed according to the regulations set forth
in the international fire code.
   C.   New Installations; Notify Fire District: The building inspector for the
city must contact the Hagerman fire district whenever LP gas or fuel oil is
being installed in new construction. (Ord. 1021, 9-2-2003; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Buildings Or Structures Declared Unsafe
9-3-2: Public Nuisance
9-3-3: Procedures For Abatement
9-3-1: BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES DECLARED UNSAFE:
Buildings, structures or attachments which are structurally unsafe or which
constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for
purposes of this chapter, unsafe. (Ord. 1009, 3-22-2000)
9-3-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
All unsafe buildings, structures or attachments are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or demolition or
removal in accordance with procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 1009, 3-22-2000)
9-3-3: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT 1 :
   A.   Declaration As Unsafe; Notice:
      1.   The building inspector shall make the initial determination whether
any building, structure or attachment is a public nuisance and possesses a
threat to the public safety or welfare.
      2.   Upon a determination that a building, structure or attachment is a
public nuisance, the building inspector shall give the owner and/or occupant of
the building verbal notification of the determination. The building inspector
shall also serve written notice by personal service or certified mail to the
owner and/or occupant of the property within twenty four (24) hours of his
determination. The notification shall set forth the building inspector's
findings and what steps can be taken to abate the nuisance. A copy of the
written notice shall be given to the city clerk- treasurer.
   B.   Posting Notices On Property: The building inspector shall post all
appropriate notices on the property and take the appropriate steps to protect
the public safety and welfare.
   C.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the written notice from the
building inspector, the city clerk-treasurer shall schedule a hearing before
the city council at the next regular or special meeting of the city council, to
determine if the building, structure or attachment is a public nuisance. Notice
of the hearing shall be served upon the owner and occupant of the property by
the city police and/or mailed to the owner and occupant of the property. The
clerk- treasurer shall place the hearing upon the agenda for the next meeting.
   D.   Hearing; Presentation Of Evidence; Council Decision:
      1.   At the hearing before the council, the building inspector shall
present evidence of the public nuisance to the council. The owner of the
property shall be allowed to present such evidence or testimony to the council
as the owner chooses.
      2.   The council shall make its decision on declaring the property a
public nuisance and give the owner a copy of the decision and what actions the
owner can take to cure the nuisance. (Ord. 1009, 3-22-2000; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-1-8 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
9-4-1: Purpose
9-4-2: Definitions
9-4-3: Historic Preservation Commission Established
9-4-4: Organization; Officers; Rules; Meetings
9-4-5: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
9-4-6: Special Restrictions
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public of the city through the identification,
evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, areas,
structures, and objects which reflect significant elements of the city's, the
state's, and the nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural
heritage. (Ord. 958, 9-16-1986)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Hagerman.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of Hagerman.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state,
or the nation. (1996 Code § 4-6-1)
9-4-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Commission Established: There is hereby created a historic preservation
commission that shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
   B.   Membership: All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated
interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The
council shall endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional
training or experience in the disciplines of architecture, history,
architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law, or other
historic preservation related disciplines.
   C.   Initial Appointments; Filling Vacancies:
      1.   Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: one
1-year term; two (2) 2-year terms; two (2) 3-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms.
      2.   Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term. (1996 Code § 4-6-2)
9-4-4: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; RULES; MEETINGS:
   A.   Rules And Bylaws: The commission shall have the power to make whatever
rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this
chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall be
available for public inspection.
   B.   Officers: The commission shall elect officers from among the commission
members. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the commission. The vice
chairman shall, in the absence of the chairman, perform the duties of the
chairman.
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public, and follow the requirements of the Idaho open meeting law 1 . The
commission shall keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its
resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
   D.   Recommend Employment Or Contracting: The commission may recommend to
the council, within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the
contracting with other parties for the service of technical experts or other
persons as it deems necessary to carry on the functions of the commission.
(1996 Code § 4-6-3)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-2341 et seq.
9-4-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the council and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   B.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequests, or
donations.
   C.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
   D.   Recommend the lease, sale, or other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
   E.   Contract, with the approval of the council, with the state or federal
government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
   F.   Cooperate with the federal, state, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
   G.   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
county, the city, the state, or the federal government and the agencies of
these entities.
   H.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purpose
of historic preservation in the city.
   I.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic
preservation and historic properties in the city.
   J.   Commission members, employees or agents of the commission may enter
private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of their official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
   K.   Review nominations of properties to the national register of historic
places for properties within the city's jurisdiction. (1996 Code § 4-6-4)
9-4-6: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Under the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-4612, the city may provide, by
ordinances, special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement
and preservation of historic properties. (1996 Code § 4-6-5)
CHAPTER 5
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 1
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Organization And Enforcement
9-5-3: Manufactured Homes Outside Manufactured Home Park
9-5-4: Permit Requirements
9-5-5: Mobile/Manufactured Home Park Requirements
9-5-6: Unsafe Conditions
9-5-7: Nonconforming Uses
9-5-8: Access To Public Street
9-5-9: Access And Inspection
9-5-10: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
  1. See also "manufactured homes" in section
1 10-4A-2, and sections
  11-6-5 and
  11-6-6 of this code.
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPROVED: Approval by the building inspector as the result of investigation for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level of the premises.
INSPECTOR: The building inspector or any legally designated representative of
the city.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home
construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is
forty (40) body feet or more in length, and when erected on site is one
thousand (1,000) square feet or more in size, and which is built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes
shall not include travel trailers, or other similar recreational vehicles, and
shall not include manufactured homes or mobile homes constructed prior to the
year of the adoption of this title.
MOBILE HOME: All vehicles used, or so constructed as to permit being conveyed
upon the public streets or highways as such and constructed in such a manner as
will permit occupancy thereof for human habitation, constructed prior to 1976.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot, or site of land whereupon
mobile homes, as defined in this chapter, are placed, located and maintained
for dwelling purposes only, either on a permanent or semipermanent basis and
for which a fee, rental or contract for payment for such use is collected or
collectible to the person holding the land.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park, or
any plot of ground that is designed for or designated as the location for a
mobile home and manufactured home.
MOBILE STRUCTURES: All vehicles designed for human habitation.
OFFICIAL: A person who has either been duly elected or appointed to a public
office and who represents the city government for a prescribed duty or
capacity.
PERMITTEE: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation, whether tenant, owner, lessee, licensee, permittee, agency, heirs
or assigns.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation,
whether tenant, owner, lessee, licensee, permittee, agency, heirs or assigns.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece or work artificially built up or composed of parts joined in
some definite manner.
TRAILER: See definition of Mobile Home.
YARD: An open space within a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward. (1996 Code § 4-5-1; amd. 2010 Code)
9-5-2: ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The building inspector of the city or his duly authorized representative shall
be charged with the enforcement of this chapter and shall keep a permanent,
accurate account of all fees and other monies collected, the amount, purpose
and person from whom it was received, together with the location of the
premises to which they relate. (1996 Code § 4-5-14)
9-5-3: MANUFACTURED HOMES OUTSIDE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK:
   A.   Location: Manufactured homes not located within a mobile home park must
be located on a legal city lot.
   B.   Age Of Manufactured Home; Inspection: Each manufactured home must have
been manufactured after the year 1976, and may not be occupied until approved
by the building inspector.
   C.   Manufactured Home Requirements: Each manufactured home not in a
manufactured home park must meet the following requirements:
      1.   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is located not more
than twelve inches (12") above grade.
      2.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no
standards shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in
height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
      3.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which
is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings, as
determined by the local permit approval authority.
      4.   If the manufactured home has a garage or carport, such garage shall
be constructed of like material.
   D.   Number Of Homes On Lot: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain
two (2) or more occupied mobile/manufactured homes on a single legal building
site, other than in a manufactured home park.
   E.   Replacement; Permit Required: Replacement of an existing mobile/
manufactured home due to fire, etc., shall not be without a permit. (1996 Code
§ 4-5-2)
9-5-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permits Required; Fee:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to build, establish, maintain, operate
or permit to be built, established, maintained or operated, any recreational
vehicle park or manufactured home park within the bounds of the city without
first having secured all proper zoning and building permits. Pre-1976 mobile
homes shall not be accepted, unless already on site prior to July 1995. (1996
Code § 4-5-3)
      2.   The permit fee for each manufactured home park shall be set by
resolution. (1996 Code § 4-5-10)
   B.   Application For Permit: To obtain a permit for the construction or
alteration of a manufactured home park or the placement of a manufactured home
outside a manufactured home park, the applicant shall:
      1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
the application is made.
      2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address and physical location.
      3.   Show the use and occupancy for such lot, block and tract.
      4.   State the true valuation of the proposed improvements.
      5.   Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent.
      6.   Give such other information as may reasonably be required by the
building inspector. (1996 Code § 4-5-4)
   C.   Issuance Of Permit; Compliance With Requirements: The application with
a sketch will be filed by the applicant for a permit. If the building inspector
is satisfied that the proposal, as submitted, subject to corrections, meets the
requirements as set forth in this chapter, he shall then issue the permit
therefor to the applicant. The septic system must be installed and approved by
the Central health district. (1996 Code § 4-5-5)
   D.   Retention Of Plans: One set of approved plans, specifications and
computations shall be retained by the building inspector for a period of not
less than one hundred eighty (180) days from date of completion of the work
covered therein, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be
returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept on such building or work
during the time the work authorized thereby is in progress. (1996 Code § 4-5-6)
   E.   Validity Of Permit: The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of
plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (1996 Code
§ 4-5-7)
   F.   Expiration Of Permit: Every permit issued by the building inspector
under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null
and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit. Also, such
permit shall become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days
any time after the work is commenced. (1996 Code § 4-5-8)
   G.   Inspections: All construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the building inspector. (1996 Code § 4-5-11)
   H.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: The building inspector may, in
writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this chapter
whenever the permit is issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied,
or in violation of any ordinance or regulations or any of the provisions of
this chapter. (1996 Code § 4-5-9)
9-5-5: MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Density For Mobile Home Parks: In no event shall the density exceed
eight (8) mobile homes per gross acre. Density requirements shall be
established as the minimum square footage or gross site area for each mobile
home. If it is determined by the city council that a street widening or
terminating dedication is necessary, the amount of land dedicated shall be
subtracted from the gross site area when calculating the proposed density.
   B.   Application To Existing Homes And Mobile Home Parks: A mobile home, a
manufactured home and a mobile home park, lawfully existing and in use at the
effective date hereof may be continued although such mobile home park, mobile
home or manufactured home may not conform to the provisions of this chapter as
herein set forth.
   C.   Manufactured Home Parks:
      1.   Abandoning Standards; Council Approval Required: Every manufactured
or mobile home park that conforms to any of the standards listed below shall
not abandon any of the standards listed below without obtaining approval from
the city council.
      2.   Central Facilities: Central facilities such as toilets, baths, or
laundry rooms are not required.
      3.   Streets And Roads:
         a.   All spaces shall abut upon a roadway not less than twenty feet
(20') in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or
highway, as set forth in the city subdivision ordinance. Dead end roadways
shall provide adequate vehicle turning space or cul-de-sac with not less than a
sixty foot (60') radius exclusive of parking. Roads to service areas or storage
yards shall be not less than twenty feet (20') wide.
         b.   Directory and regulatory signs shall be provided as required to
assure maximum safety and convenience to occupants and visitors, consistent
with accepted safety standards.
      4.   Minimum Requirements: Each manufactured home space shall be not less
than forty feet (40') wide and one hundred feet (100') long.
      5.   Increase In Number Of Spaces: Any manufactured home park existing at
the effective date hereof that increases the number of manufactured home spaces
must bring the entire manufactured home park up to the specifications contained
in this section.
      6.   Other Requirements: All such parks shall conform to the following
requirements:
         a.   Shall be located on a well drained site with all roadways and
spaces properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools
of water;
         b.   All roadways and walks within a recreational vehicle or
manufactured home park shall be all weather surfaced, maintained and adequately
lighted. (1996 Code § 4-5-12)
   D.   Water Supply:
      1.   The park shall connect to the city water system. The water supply
shall be easily accessible to each manufactured home space, shall provide not
less than twenty five (25) pounds of pressure at all times and not less than
one hundred twenty five (125) gallons per unit per day. All water supplies must
be approved by the public works superintendent.
      2.   Manufactured home parks shall meet existing state fire code
regulations.
   E.   Plumbing: All plumbing shall be within the standards set forth in the
international building code and shall be subject to inspection and approval by
the designated officials. (1996 Code § 4-5-12; amd. 2010 Code)
   F.   Sewage Disposal: All sewage shall be collected and disposed of in a
sanitary manner, either in a public sewage system or in conformance with
standards set forth in the state health district.
   G.   Electricity: All installations of electrical wiring and equipment in
recreational vehicle and manufactured home parks shall conform to the minimum
requirements of the state.
   H.   Yard Requirements:
      1.   Manufactured home parks shall set back at least ten feet (10') from
any interior property line. The setback from any abutting public street shall
be at least twenty feet (20') from the properly line.
      2.   In any required yard through which automobile access is taken
between a public or private parking area and a street, no fence, wall, hedge or
other vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision from a
public sidewalk to automobiles backing from said parking area(s) across said
public sidewalk.
   I.   Parking Requirements:
      1.   There shall be one vehicle parking space at least nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20') in size for each manufactured home space, with clear and
unobstructed access to an accessway. Any parking in the accessway shall not
fulfill this requirement.
      2.   Guest parking shall be provided on the manufactured home parking
site (but not in the accessway) at the rate of one vehicle parking space of the
dimensions set forth in subsection I1 of this section for each manufactured
home space.
   J.   Skirting And Support Structure:
      1.   All manufactured homes shall be set on a permanent foundation and
shall have compatible skirting of moisture resistant, noncombustible material
or fire retardant wood, which must be maintained and not provide a harborage
for rodents.
      2.   All spaces shall be provided with pedestals or blocking supports.
Such systems shall ensure adequate support and be in compliance with the HUD
and manufacturer's specifications as to setup procedures and conform to city
building regulations 1 . (1996 Code § 4-5-12)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1 of this title.
9-5-6: UNSAFE CONDITIONS:
All manufactured home parks, mobile homes and manufactured homes, buildings or
premises which constitute a hazard to health, safety, or fire by reason of
inadequate maintenance, insanitation, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment
are nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal, according to state laws. (1996 Code § 4-5-13)
9-5-7: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   A nonconforming use is a use existing at the effective date hereof or
of any earlier land use ordinance that is not permitted by provisions of this
chapter or the land use ordinance.
   B.   A nonconforming use may not be expanded in regard to actual land use or
in regard to building space used, except through an appropriate conditional use
permit. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use
without compliance with the terms of this title. (1996 Code § 4-5-15)
9-5-8: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET:
A manufactured home park, mobile home or manufactured home shall not be
established on any site that does not have access to a public street with less
than fifty feet (50') of right of way. No manufactured home space or
manufactured home shall be located in such a manner that a public street must
be used to maneuver the manufactured home into that space. (1996 Code § 4-5-16)
9-5-9: ACCESS AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Occupant And Owner: It shall be the duty of every occupant to give the
park owner or his agent access, at reasonable times, to any part of the park or
its premises for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effectuate compliance with this chapter, or any lawful order
issued.
   B.   Owners And City: It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of
manufactured home parks and mobile homes and manufactured homes contained
therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the building inspector and
the city council or their duly authorized assistants free access to such
premises, upon notice to the management, at reasonable times, for the purpose
of inspection.
   C.   City Inspection: The building inspector and city council or their duly
authorized assistants are authorized and directed to inspect and determine the
condition of manufactured home parks, mobile homes and manufactured homes
within the city, in the performance of their duty to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and other applicable ordinances. (1996 Code § 4-5-17)
9-5-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this chapter or who
wilfully violates any provision of the codes enumerated herein, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1996 Code § 4-5-18; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   A separate violation is deemed to have occurred with respect to each
building not in compliance with this chapter. Each day such violation continues
constitutes a separate offense. (1996 Code § 4-5-18)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Scope
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: Sign Requirements
9-6-4: Manner Of Construction
9-6-5: Sandwich Board Signs
9-6-6: Banner Signs
9-6-1: SCOPE:
Sign regulations in the commercial and industrial areas will be permitted under
the rules set out in this chapter. (2010 Code)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
BANNER SIGNS: A sign that is temporary, having characters, letters, or
illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other similar material,
with the purpose of such nonrigid material being for background.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign that is supported by one or more columns, upright
pole or brace extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or that
is erected on the ground where no part of the sign is attached to any part of a
building, structure, or other sign; the term includes a "pole sign", "pedestal
sign", and "ground sign".
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign depicted upon, attached to, or supported by a marquee.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign attached to a building or extending in whole or in part
fifteen inches (15") or more horizontally beyond the surface of the building to
which the sign is attached or suspended from a canopy.
ROOF SIGN: A sign supported by poles, uprights, or braces extending from the
roof of a building, or projecting above the roof of a building.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A temporary sign that is generally constructed in such a
manner as to form an "A" or a tentlike shape that is placed on, but not
permanently attached to the ground. This definition also includes signs of
similar temporary nature but that are constructed with a base and a single
upward sign face, forming an upside down "T".
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas, or other
artificial light including reflecting or phosphorescent light.
SIGN, LIGHTING DEVICE: Any light, string of lights, or group of lights located
or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: Any sign, including, without limitation, a billboard or
general outdoor advertising device, that advertises or directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, or activity conducted, sold, or offered other
than on the same lot or within the same building upon which such sign is
located.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: Any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a
commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises, where such sign is
located.
WALL SIGN: A sign displayed upon or against the wall of an enclosed building,
where the exposed face of the sign is in place parallel to the plane of the
wall and extends not more than fifteen inches (15") horizontally from the face
of the wall.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign that is painted on, applied or attached to, or located
within one foot (1') from the window and can be seen from the exterior of the
structure, but excludes merchandise included in a window display. (2010 Code)
9-6-3: SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Projecting Signs:
      1.   Projecting signs are limited to one per business where such sign is
located.
      2.   The maximum size shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet per face or
one hundred (100) square feet per sign.
      3.   No point on any sign shall project more than ten feet (10') above
the highest point of the roof structure of the building to which it is
attached. Any sign exceeding four feet (4') in height shall provide a clearance
of not less than four feet (4') between the roof and the lowest point on the
sign. Signs attached to parapet walls shall not project more than six feet (6')
above the highest point of said parapet wall. Projecting signs and marquees
shall not project more than eight feet (8') from the principal building.
   B.   Freestanding Signs:
      1.   Freestanding signs are limited to the same size as projecting signs
with a maximum height of twenty feet (20').
      2.   No freestanding sign shall be set nearer to a lot line adjacent to a
street than the required minimum setback for the principal building.
   C.   Illuminated Signs:
      1.   Any illuminated sign or lighted device shall emit a light of
constant intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing,
intermittent, rotating, or moving light or lights.
      2.   In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed
or directed to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or
beamed onto a public thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent premises or
cause a glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
   D.   Signs With Moving Parts: No sign shall employ any parts or elements
which revolve, rotate, whirl, spin, or otherwise use motion to attract
attention (not to include any sign performing a public information service
function such as indicating time, temperature, stock market quotations or
similar services).
   E.   Signs Along Primary Highways: Signs along primary highways shall
conform to the state transportation department regulations. No sign shall be
placed in any public right of way except publicly owned signs. (2010 Code)
9-6-4: MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Wall Mounted Signs: All signs shall be supported from the buildings in
front of which they are placed with proper metal supports securely bolted or
fastened to the walls. All signs extending over the sidewalk shall be laterally
secured with guywires which are made adjustable by means of turnbuckles.
   B.   Freestanding Signs: Where buildings set back off of the property line,
signs shall be mounted on a single or double rigid pole that is securely
anchored in concrete, and placed on a line that is two feet (2') within the
curb line. No sign shall extend beyond a point two feet (2') within the curb
line and minimum vertical clearance shall be nine feet (9').
   C.   Rooftop Mounted Signs: The framework of all signs placed upon the roof
of any building or structure shall be so constructed and fastened to the roof
as to be capable of withstanding a wind pressure of not less than twenty (20)
pounds per square foot of surface area. Said sign shall be set back from the
firewall of said building or structure a distance of at least three feet (3')
so as to leave a clear passageway around and in front of the same. The bottom
line of the surface of said sign shall be at least four feet (4') in the clear
above the roof of said building so as to leave a clear passageway under the
same. (2010 Code)
9-6-5: SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A "sandwich board sign" is a temporary sign that is
generally constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or a tentlike shape
that is placed on, but not permanently attached to the ground. This definition
also includes signs of a similar temporary nature that are constructed with a
base and a single upward sign face, forming an upside down "T".
   B.   Conditions: Sandwich board signs are permissible subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Temporary Display:
         a.   A sandwich board sign is considered a temporary sign and as such
can advertise a special sale for a maximum of thirty (30) days and must include
dates.
         b.   Sandwich board signs may be placed on properties during business
hours only and must be taken in at the end of business.
      2.   Placement:
         a.   Sandwich board signs shall not be located within a landscaped
area, parking space, or vehicular travelway.
         b.   Sandwich board signs shall not be located more than ten feet
(10') from the door of the business or use utilizing the sign.
         c.   A maximum of one sandwich board sign may be placed per business
or tenant on the property where the sandwich board sign(s) is located and be
properly secured.
         d.   Sandwich board signs shall be placed no closer than twenty feet
(20') from other sandwich board signs.
         e.   Sandwich board signs shall be located on the interior of the
property and shall not be located within any public right of way and/or
sidewalk.
         f.   Should a sandwich board sign be placed adjacent to a sidewalk, an
unobstructed pedestrian clearance must be provided adjacent to the sign.
      3.   Appearance And Maintenance:
         a.   The maximum size of a sandwich board sign is twelve (12) square
feet with a maximum height of four feet (4') and a maximum width of three feet
(3').
         b.   All signs shall be maintained with fresh paint or lettering and
not be left unkempt. All signs shall look neat and professional with an
artistic appearance. (2010 Code)
9-6-6: BANNER SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A "banner sign" is a temporary sign having characters,
letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other similar
material, with the purpose of such nonrigid material being for background.
   B.   Conditions: Banner signs are permissible subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Permit Required; Exception; Duration Of Display:
         a.   A sign permit shall be necessary to erect or place a banner sign
across State Highway 30 or on a property.
         b.   A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a banner sign
across State Highway 30 or on a property until a site plan has been approved by
the city.
         c.   Each banner sign must be permitted individually. Individual
banner signs can be placed for a maximum of five (5) weeks; four (4) weeks
prior to event and taken down no later than one week after event.
         d.   Arrangements for installation and removal of banner signs across
State Highway 30 must be made in advance by the group or organization using the
banner. Arrangements must be presented to the city in order to receive a sign
permit.
      2.   Placement:
         a.   Banner signs are allowed on a property in any area that does not
obstruct the view of intersections or driveways. Banner signs are not allowed
on rights of way.
         b.   With permission, banner signs may also be allowed during social
or athletic events at Coltharp Park or other city owned property. The banner
signs can be attached to the gazebo, fences, stakes, or poles for a maximum of
five (5) weeks; four (4) weeks prior to event and taken down no later than one
week after event.
      3.   Appearance And Maintenance:
         a.   All banner signs shall be maintained with fresh paint or
lettering and not be left unkempt. All signs shall look neat and professional
with an artistic appearance.
         b.   A banner sign shall be securely attached at all times. Banner
signs must be in good repair, taut, and vertical at all times with a sufficient
number of holes to allow for airflow in the event of wind. (2010 Code)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-1-1: Purposes
10-1-2: Declaration
10-1-3: Interpretation And Intent
10-1-4: Zoning Permit
10-1-5: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
10-1-6: Violations; Penalties
10-1-1: PURPOSES:
The district boundaries and regulations which apply within each of the
districts have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed:
   A.   To promote the health, convenience, order, prosperity, and general
welfare of the citizens of Gooding County, Idaho, that reside in or about the
city of Hagerman.
   B.   To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the
city.
   C.   To lessen the danger of fire, flood, traffic hazards and other threats
to public welfare.
   D.   To secure economy in the services provided by the city.
   E.   To stabilize and enhance property values, and to facilitate adequate
provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools, and other public
requirements.
   F.   To clarify what is expected of new development in order for it to be in
harmony with existing and future development in the Hagerman area. (Ord. 989,
6-4-1996)
10-1-2: DECLARATION:
In establishing the districts, the boundaries thereof, and the regulations
applying within each of the districts, due and careful consideration was given,
among other things, to the suitability of land for particular uses with a view
to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land throughout the city and area of impact. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council that the regulations and restrictions as
set forth in this title shall also be interpreted and construed as to further
the purposes of this title and the objectives and characteristics of the
respective districts. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-1-4: ZONING PERMIT:
   A.   Contents Of Application: The application for zoning permit shall be
signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all
information supplied on the application. Each application shall clearly state
that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun or is
substantially completed within one year. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
      2.   Legal description of property.
      3.   Existing use.
      4.   Proposed use.
      5.   Zoning district.
      6.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of
the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings on
the lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or
alteration.
      7.   Building heights.
      8.   Number of off street parking spaces or loading berths.
      9.   Number of dwelling units.
      10.   Proposed sewer and water facilities.
      11.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance
with, and provide for, the enforcement of this title.
   B.   Expiration Of Zoning Permit: If the work described in any zoning permit
has not begun within one year from the date of issuance thereof, said permit
shall expire. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-1-5: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
   A.   Schedule Of Fees Established: The city council shall establish a
schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning
permits, amendments, appeals, variances, special use permits, plan approvals
and other matters pertaining to the administration enforcement of this title
requiring investigations, inspections, legal advertising, postage, and other
expenses.
   B.   Posting Of Schedule: The schedule of fees shall be posted in the city
hall, and may be altered or amended only by the city council.
   C.   Payment Of Fees Required: Until all applicable fees, charges, and
expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or
appeal. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-1-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
The attorney for the city shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal action
deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this title.
Penalties for failure to comply with or violate the provisions of this title
shall be as follows:
Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any
of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. The landowner, tenant,
subdivider, builder, public official, or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may be found guilty of
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council or
any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title or the Idaho
Code.
(Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Interpretation Of Terms And Words
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
   B.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
   C.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
   D.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
or arranged to be used or occupied".
   E.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel", and "tract", as the
meaning may require it.
   F.   The term "erected" means "constructed", "altered", "moved", "repaired".
   G.   The word "district" is synonymous with the term "zone".
   H.   The term "planning and zoning commission" is synonymous with the term
"zoning commission" and the term "planning commission" is synonymous with the
term "zoning commission". (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building detached from, but located on the
same lot as, the principal building, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the main building or use.
ACCESSORY USE: The use of land, or of a subordinate building or part thereof,
or a portion of a main building, such use being accessory to or incidental to
the principal use of the premises, and including home occupations as defined in
this section.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land over five (5) acres for farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, aquaculture,
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that:
   A.   The operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities.
   B.   The above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of animals,
fish or poultry in penned enclosures within one hundred feet (100') of any
residential zoning district. "Agriculture" does not include the operation or
maintenance of a commercial stockyard or where poultry are fed concentrated
feeds particularly for the purpose of fattening for market.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use by
aircraft and including the necessary appurtenant structures or facilities
located thereon.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: See definition of Veterinary Animal Hospital Or Clinic.
APARTMENT HOUSE: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as the home or residence of
three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their
own cooking in said building.
AUTOMOTIVE MANUFACTURED HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER, AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES: The
sale of or rental of new and used motor vehicles, mobile homes, travel trailers
or farm implements, but not including repair work except incidental warranty
repair of same, to be displayed and sold on the premises.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles
or parts thereof, including bodywork, painting and steam cleaning.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING YARD: The dismantling or wrecking of two (2) or more used
motor vehicles, mobile homes, trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of
dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BLOCK: The space along one side of a street between the two (2) nearest
intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and a right of way,
waterway or other similar barrier, whichever is lesser.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
BUILDING ALTERATION: As applied to a building, a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location
or position to another.
BUILDING ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: A change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
BUILDING AREA: The maximum horizontal area, enclosed by the outside walls of a
building and its accessory buildings, at the ground level or above, whichever
is greater, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps or balconies.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the top of
building walls for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: The line, parallel to the front lot line, measured between side
lot lines through that part of the building, structure or construction site
where the lot is narrowest.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is situated.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human or
animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums, and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the
boundaries of such cemetery for which perpetual care and maintenance is
provided.
CITY: The city of Hagerman.
COMMISSION: The zoning, planning and zoning, joint zoning or joint planning and
zoning commission appointed by the city council.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the city
council, including such things as the general location and extent of present
and proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial and commercial
uses, major transportation, parks, schools, and other community facilities.
COTTAGE INDUSTRY: See definition of Home Occupation.
DAYCARE: Any home, structure, or place where nonmedical care, protection, or
supervision is regularly provided to children under fourteen (14) years of age,
and not members of the operator's own family, for periods less than twenty four
(24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are not on the premises.
There are three (3) types of childcare facilities.
Childcare Center: A childcare facility that provides care for more than twelve
(12) children throughout the day.
Family Childcare Home: A childcare facility which provides care for five (5) or
fewer children throughout the day.
Group Childcare Home: A childcare facility, which provides care for six (6) to
twelve (12) children throughout the day.
Method Used To Count Children: In determining the type of childcare facility
that is being operated, the total number of children cared for during the day
and not the number of children at the facility at any one time is
determinative.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per parcel of
land.
Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre or parcel of total land to
be developed, including public right of way.
Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre or parcel of land when the
acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding
public right of way.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of three (3) or more dwelling
units including townhouses and condominiums with varying arrangements of
entrances and party walls. Multi-family housing may include public housing.
DWELLING, ROOMING HOUSE (BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, DORMITORY AND BED AND
BREAKFAST HOUSE): A dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or
restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for three
(3) or more unrelated persons where no cooking or dining facilities are
provided in the individual rooms.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only,
separated from other dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of two (2) dwelling units which may
be either attached side by side or one above the other (duplex).
DWELLING UNIT: Space within a dwelling comprising living, dining, sleeping room
or rooms, storage, closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking,
bathing, and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its household
employees.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a
specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT: An overlay zoning district that regulates building
construction and improvements, in addition to the zoning requirements of the
underlying district, in flood prone areas as set forth by the national flood
insurance program.
GARAGE, PARKING: A building or portion thereof for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles for persons living on the premises.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or portion thereof for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles for persons living on the premises.
GARAGE, SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed
at retail, and does not include major mechanical and bodywork. A filling
station is not a repair garage or a body shop.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling
unit including handicrafts, dressmaking, millinery, laundering, preserving,
office of a clergyman, teaching of music, dancing and other instruction when
limited to attendance of one pupil at a time and other like occupancies which
meet all of the following conditions:
   A.   The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes.
   B.   The use is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is carried on by
the inhabitants thereof.
   C.   No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except
such as is produced by the occupants on the premises, and no mechanical or
electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as is
customarily incidental to domestic use.
   D.   The use does not change the character of the dwelling or adversely
affect the uses permitted in the residential district.
   E.   The use creates no additional traffic and requires no additional
parking space.
   F.   No persons are employed other than those necessary for domestic
purposes.
   G.   Not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the gross area of one floor of said
dwelling is used for such use.
   H.   The entrance to the space devoted to such use is from within the
building and no internal or external alterations or construction features not
customary in dwellings are involved.
HOTEL OR MOTEL AND APARTMENT HOTEL: A building in which lodging or boarding are
provided and offered to the public for compensation. As such, it is open to the
public in contradistinction to a boarding house, rooming house, lodging house,
or dormitory which is herein separately defined.
JUNKYARD: An outdoor space where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are stored or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, and yards for used
building materials and places or yards for storage of salvaged building
materials and places or yards for storage of salvaged building and structural
steel materials and equipment; excluding yards or establishments for the sale,
purchase or storage of used cars or machinery in operable condition, and the
processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of a permitted
manufacturing operation on the same premises.
KENNEL: Any place that keeps, maintains, harbors or possesses three (3) or more
dogs over the age of six (6) months.
LIVESTOCK CONFINEMENT OPERATION: Includes all new operations and maintains more
than the number of animals specified in any of the following categories:
   A.   Slaughter/feeder cattle and/or dairy heifers: Thirty (30).
   B.   Cow/calf pair: Twenty five (25).
   C.   Mature dairy cattle (milked or dry cows): Twenty (20).
   D.   Swine, each weighing over fifty five (55) pounds: Twenty (20).
   E.   Horses: Ten (10).
   F.   Sheep or lambs: Thirty (30).
   G.   Turkeys: Ten (10).
   H.   Laying hens or broilers: One hundred (100).
   I.   Goats: One.
   J.   Furbearing animals: Twenty (20).
   K.   Maximum of thirty (30) animal units.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pick ups and deliveries.
LOT: A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements
for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as
are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street,
and may consist of:
   A.   A single lot of record.
   B.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record.
LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot
to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest
the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and
through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered
frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under the definition of
"yards" in this section.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF: The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of
the right of way of any public or private street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot recorded in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or
parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots,
interior lots and through lots is as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street.
Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot.
Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home
construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is
forty (40) body feet or more in length, and when erected on site is one
thousand (1,000) square feet or more in size, and which is built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes
shall not include travel trailers, or other similar recreational vehicles, and
shall not include manufactured homes or mobile homes constructed prior to the
year of the adoption of this title.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership, upon
which two (2) or more manufactured homes for habitation are parked, either free
of charge or for revenue purposes; including any roadway, building, structure,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the facilities of
such park.
MANUFACTURING, EXTRACTIVE: Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing,
storing, separating, cleaning, or marketing of any mineral natural resource.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing,
and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive
in character; require large sites, open storage and service areas, extensive
services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation; and normally
generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air
pollution, and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are usually
controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet, and free of objectionable or
hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor, or dust; operating and storing
within enclosed structures; and generating little industrial traffic and no
nuisances.
MOBILE HOME: A structure constructed prior to 1976 transportable in one or more
sections which are eight (8) body feet or more in width and is thirty two (32)
body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical system contained therein.
MOTEL: See definition of Hotel Or Motel And Apartment Hotel.
NOISOME AND INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES, CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS:
   A.   Creation of unreasonable physical hazard by fire, explosion, radiation
or other cause, to persons or property at or beyond the property line of the
premises in question.
   B.   Discharge of any liquid or solid waste into any stream or body of water
or into any public or private disposal system or into the ground, so as to
contaminate any water supply, including underground water supply.
   C.   Maintenance or storage of any material either indoors or outdoors so as
to cause or to facilitate the breeding of vermin.
   D.   Emission of smoke, measured at the point of emission, of a denser shade
than that specified for the district or which otherwise constitutes an
unreasonable hazard to the health, safety or welfare of any persons.
   E.   Fly ash or dust that can cause damage to the health of persons,
animals, or plant life or to other forms of property, or excessive soil,
measured at or beyond the property line of the premises in question.
   F.   Creation or causation of any unreasonably offensive odors at or beyond
any property line of the premises in question.
   G.   Creation or maintenance of any unreasonable reflected or direct glare,
by any process, lighting or reflecting material at or beyond any property line
of the premises in question.
   H.   Creation or maintenance of any unreasonably distracting or
objectionable vibration and/or electrical disturbances at or beyond any
property line of the premises in question.
   I.   Any public nuisance.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or use of land existing at the time of
enactment of this title, and which does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
NURSERY, FOR CHILDREN: A place, home, or facility providing care for more than
five (5) children of preschool age.
NURSING HOME: A home or facility for the care and treatment of more than five
(5) elderly people.
OPEN SPACE: An area substantially open to the sky that may be on the same lot
with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental
features, water areas, swimming pools, and tennis courts, any other
recreational facilities that the commission deems permissible. Streets, parking
areas, structures for habitation, and the like shall not be included.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: Shall consist of an area adequate for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly
related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be
located totally outside of any street or alley right of way.
PERFORMANCE BOND OR SURETY BOND: A financial guarantee by a subdivider or
developer with the city in the amount of the estimated construction cost,
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the agreement.
PREMISES: A lot together with all the buildings and uses thereon.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: The erection, construction, alteration, operation, or
maintenance of buildings, power plants, or subdisposal or pumping plants and
other similar public service structures by a public utility, or by a municipal
or other governmental agency, including the furnishing of electrical, gas,
communication, public water and sewage services.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and
structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the
storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service
facilities.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals, and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic, or nonprofit nature.
RECREATION VEHICLE PARK: A tract of land or land as more fully defined in title
9, chapter 5 of this code.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER: A facility for the collection of recyclable items
to include aluminum, tin, plastic, cellophane, paper, cardboard and glass, to
be transported to a recycling plant on a frequent and regular basis. No
recycling of any product, other than the collection, compaction, building and
transportation of said products, shall occur or be permitted at a recycling
collection center. No medical or hospital hazardous waste and refuse, or items
used in treatment of patients, shall be permitted to be collected or stored at
any recycling collection center.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses
as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In
addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips,
sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities and may include special features
(required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped
areas, viaducts, and bridges.
SEATS: For purpose of determining the number of off street parking spaces for
certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or
indicated, or each twenty four (24) linear inches of benches, pews, or space
for loose chairs.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building
or structure may be located aboveground, except as may be provided in this
title.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the road right of way outside the roadway, which is
improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons, not on
the premises on which the sign is located.
SPECIAL USE: A special use permitted within a district, other than a
principally permitted use, requiring a conditional use permit and approval of
the commission.
STORY: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling
immediately above it.
STREET: A right of way that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted. The
term "street" also includes the terms "highway", "thoroughfare", "parkway",
"road", "avenue", "boulevard", "lane", "place", and other such terms.
Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
Arterial: A street designated on the comprehensive plan for the purpose of
carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
Collector: A street designated on the comprehensive plan for the purpose of
carrying traffic from minor streets to other collector streets and/or arterial
streets.
Minor: A street that has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
Private: A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance which
provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location on the
ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls,
fences and billboards.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure, either:
   A.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
   B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
SUPPLY YARD: A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building
supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar
goods.
USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated, arranged,
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot
coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking
space, height of buildings, or other ordinance provisions affecting the size or
shape of a structure or the size of lots. A variance shall not be considered a
right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a
showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site, that the
variance is not in conflict with the public interest and the need for a
variance was not caused by any action taken by the current or previous owners.
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming,
diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals, and those
who are in need of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight
accommodations on the premises for the treatment, observation and/or
recuperation. It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary
activity.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means the
relationship of the proposed development to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
WALKWAY: A public way, four feet (4') or more in width, for pedestrian use
only, whether or not along the side of a road.
YARD: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any structure or portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the general
ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, that accessories, ornaments,
and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
Yard, Front: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot
and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
Yard, Interior Side: A yard extending from the principal building to the side
lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing
the front and rear yards.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot
and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
Yard, Street Side: A yard extending from the principal building to the
secondary street that adjoins the lot between the lines establishing the front
and rear yards. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
10-3-1: Purpose; Districts Established
10-3-2: Boundaries Determined By Zoning Map
10-3-3: Land Or Premises
10-3-4: Buildings And Structures
10-3-5: Residences And Commercial Buildings
10-3-6: Area Classification
10-3-1: PURPOSE; DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of promoting pride of ownership, health, safety, morals and
general welfare within its area of jurisdiction, the city of Hagerman and city
impact area is divided into the following use districts:
 
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-2 Multiple-family residential district
C   Commercial district
L-I Light industrial district
A-1 Agricultural/transitional district
 
(Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-3-2: BOUNDARIES DETERMINED BY ZONING MAP:
   A.   The boundaries of the use districts shall be determined and defined by
the adoption of a zoning map on which are shown the boundaries of use districts
so adopted for each portion. The map is adopted as part of this title.
   B.   The boundaries of the use districts shall be established and clearly
indicated upon the zoning map adopted as part of this title. (Ord. 989, 6-4-
1996)
10-3-3: LAND OR PREMISES:
Land or premises shall be used, unless otherwise provided in this title, only
in conformity with the regulations herein set forth for the use districts in
which such land or premises is located. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-3-4: BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered or used,
unless otherwise provided in this title, except in conformity with the
regulations herein set forth for the use district in which such building or
structure is located. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-3-5: RESIDENCES AND COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
For the purpose of ensuring orderly development and to provide adequate access
for firefighting equipment and other services to all buildings, no residence or
commercial building shall be erected or moved onto any lot, tract or parcel of
land in any use district adopted under the provisions of this title unless said
lot, tract or parcel of land has fifty feet (50') of frontage on a public right
of way and has reasonably efficient access thereto for vehicular traffic and
has been legally subdivided; and provided further, that a building permit may
be issued for construction of a residence on a private easement where, in the
opinion of the planning commission, the following conditions have been
reasonably met:
   A.   Minimum easement width of twelve feet (12').
   B.   Maximum easement length of four hundred feet (400').
   C.   Minimum turnaround radius of sixty feet (60').
   D.   Maximum grade of nine percent (9%).
   E.   The easement must serve land which otherwise would have no access to a
public road. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-3-6: AREA CLASSIFICATION:
Areas are to be classified according to the established use districts, and such
zoning shall give due consideration as to conformity with an adopted
comprehensive plan and its stated goals and objectives, where these exist.
(Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
CHAPTER 4
USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4A-1: Purpose
10-4A-2: Permitted Uses
10-4A-3: Special Uses
10-4A-4: Height Regulations
10-4A-5: Setback Requirements; Yards
10-4A-6: Area Requirements
10-4A-7: Off Street Parking
10-4A-8: Fences
10-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District is to: a) control
housing and population concentration within the specified district; b) promote
the development of adequate, safe, and sanitary residential dwellings; and c)
prevent the development of land uses within residential areas that would create
undesirable impacts on the physical, social, or economic well being of the
present and future residents of the area. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the R-1 District:
Accessory uses. Up to two (2) accessory buildings (not to be used for sleeping
or living quarters) which does not encroach into the front or side yards.
Home gardening and other horticultural uses, not operated as a commercial
enterprise and where no building is involved.
Manufactured homes meeting the following conditions 1 :
   A.   The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclosed with a space
of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
   B.   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is located not more
than twelve inches (12") above grade.
   C.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except that no
standards shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet (3') in
height for each twelve inches (12") above grade.
   D.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in
color, material, and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which
is comparable to the predominant material used on surrounding dwellings as
determined by the local permit approval authority.
   E.   If the manufactured home has a garage or carport, it shall be
constructed of like materials. A governing board may require an attached or
detached garage in lieu of a carport where such is consistent with the
predominant construction of immediately surrounding dwellings.
Sign. One sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area pertaining to the
lease or sale of buildings or premises where the sign is located. This
provision shall also apply to political signs during campaign periods. Signs
for home occupations shall be limited to two (2) square feet in area, shall be
unlighted and attached flush to the building.
Single-family dwellings. Homes shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
square feet. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996; amd. 2010 Code; Ord. 1070, 9-7-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 5, and section
  11-6-5 of this Code.
10-4A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The planning commission may, after notice and public hearing as prescribed in
chapter 5 of this title, permit the following uses where such uses are deemed
essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. The commission
shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems
necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or
neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance or other detriment.
Building for governmental or public utility functions.
Churches.
Clinics operated by a single operator.
Daycares.
Duplexes.
Home occupations (cottage industry) as defined in section
10-2-2 of this title and meeting the following sign requirements:
   A.   Any sign pertaining to home occupations or professions shall be
attached to the building used therefor and shall be single faced and announce
only the occupant's name, occupation and/or the trade name of the dwelling to
which it pertains.
   B.   Each dwelling or office shall be permitted only one motionless sign.
   C.   No sign or any part thereof shall extend beyond the property line of
the building to which sign pertains.
   D.   No sign shall project farther than twelve inches (12") from the
building to which it pertains.
   E.   No sign shall be larger than four (4) square feet in area nor shall
measure more than four feet (4') in any direction.
Nonprofit community clubhouse.
Parks and playgrounds.
Rest and convalescent home.
Schools.
Temporary buildings as uses necessary for construction purposes for a period
not to exceed one year. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4A-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord.
989, 6-4-1996)
10-4A-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS; YARDS:
The following are the area setback requirements in the R-1 district:
   A.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than
twenty feet (20') from the property line; provided, that when lots comprising
fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage between two (2) intersecting
streets are already developed with buildings having front yards with a
variation of not more than twenty feet (20') in depth, the average of such
front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire
frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than thirty five feet (35') in
depth be required.
   B.   Side Yard: If a yard borders a street, no building shall be within
twenty feet (20') of the property line. If the side yard borders another lot,
then a minimum of five feet (5') of vertical clearance must be maintained
between the main structure and the property line. Accessory buildings shall not
be located nearer than five feet (5') from an interior property line.
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
ten feet (10'). (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4A-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The following are area requirements in the R-1 district:
   A.   The minimum lot area for each residential structure shall be six
thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet.
   B.   Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area may be covered
by buildings or structures. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4A-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
Each dwelling shall have a driveway or off street parking space for not less
than two (2) motor vehicles with an approach from the street or alley. (Ord.
989, 6-4-1996)
10-4A-8: FENCES:
Fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height when located behind the front
setback line of the building within the zone in which the fence is placed.
Fences shall not exceed four feet (4') in height if located within the front
yard, in front of the setback line. (Ord. 1058, 3-20-2013)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4B-1: Purpose
10-4B-2: Permitted Uses
10-4B-3: Special Uses
10-4B-4: Height Regulations
10-4B-5: Setback Requirements; Yards
10-4B-6: Area Requirements
10-4B-7: Off Street Parking
10-4B-8: Fences
10-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 multiple-family residential district is to provide for
medium to high density residential development. This type of zoning pattern is
intended to create transition areas and buffer districts between commercial
areas and low density residential development. It is also intended to permit
higher density activities adjacent to more intensive community use areas. (Ord.
989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following are uses allowed in the R-2 district:
Those uses allowed in the R-1 district.
Accessory uses as regulated in the R-1 district.
Boarding and rooming house.
Club and lodge of a service and fraternal character when not operated for
profit.
Convalescent home, nursing home.
Home for ambulatory aged, rest home, elderly housing.
Hospital.
Multiple-family dwellings limited to not more than four (4) units per building.
Signs.
   A.   One sign not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area pertaining
to the lease or sale of buildings or premises where the sign is located. This
provision shall also apply to political signs during campaign periods. Signs
for home occupations shall be limited to two (2) square feet in area, shall be
unlighted and attached flush to the building.
   B.   Up to two (2) signs of not more than thirty two (32) square feet each,
identifying the structure or activity on the immediate land parcel. Such signs
are to be an integral part of the design and use of the land parcel, shall be
indirectly lighted, nonrevolving and nonanimated. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The planning commission may, after proper notice and public hearing as
prescribed in chapter 5 of this title, permit the following uses where such
uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience, with such
conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the best interest of
the surrounding property or neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance or other
detriment:
Those other uses requiring conditional use permits and as regulated in the R-
1 district.
Buildings for governmental activity and public utility structures.
Clinic or office of a medical, professional or administrative character.
Daycares.
Motels.
Multiple-family dwelling in excess of four (4) units. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS; YARDS:
The following are setback requirements for the R-2 District:
   A.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than
twenty feet (20') from the property line; provided, that when lots comprising
fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage between two (2) intersecting
streets are developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of not
more than fifteen feet (15') in depth, the average of such front yards shall
establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') in depth be required.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to
any side property line, except corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot (20')
side yard adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the
building fronts.
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The following are area requirements for the R-2 District:
   A.   The minimum lot area for single-family and two-family dwellings, six
thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet; except corner lots shall
contain at least seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit above that required for
two-family dwellings shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet of land area
for each additional unit.
   C.   Not more than forty five percent (45%) of the lot area may be covered
by buildings or structures. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
The following are off street parking requirements for the R-2 District:
   A.   For up to four (4) residential units on a single lot, two (2) spaces
for each unit, sufficient in size for a garage or carport.
   B.   For other uses and additional residential units in the R-2 District, a
minimum of one space per unit. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4B-8: FENCES:
Fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height when located behind the front
setback line of the building within the zone in which the fence is placed.
Fences shall not exceed four feet (4') in height if located within the front
yard, in front of the setback line. (Ord. 1058, 3-20-2013)
ARTICLE C. C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4C-1: Purpose
10-4C-2: Permitted Uses
10-4C-3: Special Uses
10-4C-4: Accessory Uses
10-4C-5: Height Regulations
10-4C-6: Setback Requirements; Yards
10-4C-7: Area Requirements
10-4C-8: Landscaping
10-4C-9: Off Street Parking
10-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the C commercial district is to concentrate commercial users in
order to: a) encourage new commercial development to build within the
designated business area; b) promote the general welfare and safety of the
city, both present and future; c) enhance the city's appearance; and d) offer a
more attractive concentrated business community. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
10-4C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the C district:
Accessory uses to uses allowed.
Auction establishment.
Automobile sales and service.
Automobile sales lot.
Boarding and rooming houses.
Bowling alley, dance hall or similar commercial establishments for public
gatherings or recreational use.
Church.
Clinics.
Club or lodge.
Commercial and private off street parking lot for passenger automobiles.
Drive-in theater.
Government or public utility facilities of a nonindustrial character.
Hospital.
Mortuaries.
Nursery school, school for students of art, dancing, dramatics, music,
business, or secretarial work.
Radio, television and FM broadcasting stations including aerials when made an
integral part of a principal building.
Retail stores and retail or personal service shops.
Sale of hay, grain, seed and related supplies.
Sale of salvage goods within an enclosed building.
School.
Storage warehouse.
Taverns or lounges.
Theater, indoor.
Trade or industrial school.
Trailer sales and rental.
Travel trailer park. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999; amd. 2010 Code)
10-4C-3: SPECIAL USES:
The planning commission may, after proper notice and public hearing as
prescribed in chapter 5 of this title, permit the following uses where such
uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience and welfare.
The commission shall have the authority to impose such conditions and
safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the best interests of the
surrounding property or neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance, or other
detriment.
Automobile repair shop, truck repair shop, and auto body shop.
Commercial storage buildings for individual storage units for storage of
personal belongings and effects.
Recycling collection center.
Residence directly related to business located on same lot.
Transit or trucking terminal. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
10-4C-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted if constructed either at the same time or
subsequent to the main building. Such uses shall be limited to two (2) stories
in height and shall not encroach upon required setback areas. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-
1999)
10-4C-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed thirty feet (30') in height unless approved by conditional use permit.
(Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
10-4C-6: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS; YARDS:
   A.   Front Or Side Yard: No front or side yard shall be required, except
that when a building or group of buildings abuts upon a residential district, a
yard shall be provided on the side of a lot abutting the residential district,
which yard shall have a width of not less than ten feet (10').
   B.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than
fifteen feet (15') when abutting upon a residential district. The rear yard may
be used for off street parking and loading. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
10-4C-7: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be a minimum lot size of three thousand one hundred (3,100) square
feet. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
10-4C-8: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscaping Or Screening Requirements: Landscape planning shall be
required for all new commercial building. Screening and/or landscaping shall be
required whenever a parking area is located in or adjacent to a residential
district. It shall be effectively screened on all sides which adjoin or face
any property used for residential purposes, unless it predates the residential
use, by an acceptable designed wall, fence or vegetative screen of not less
than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height and is maintained in
good condition. The space between such fence, wall or planting and the lot line
shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground cover, and
maintained in good condition. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
   B.   High Density Residential Function: In the event that a user with a high
density residential function builds adjacent to or facing a commercial user,
then the residential user is required to provide the above described screening.
Such a user will also be required to provide such screening when adjacent to or
facing a residential district.
   C.   Failure To Comply; City Maintenance; Cost To Owner: Any such screening
or landscaping required under this section not properly maintained will be
enforced by the city at the owner's expense after proper notice has been given.
Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4C-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Requirement For New Construction Or Major Additions: Off street parking
shall be required in the commercial district as an accessory for all new
construction or major additions that would involve a substantial increase in
floor space for existing businesses.
   B.   Off Street Parking Requirements: Requirements for off street parking
shall be as follows:
      1.   Parking must be within three hundred feet (300') of the business
generating the parking requirements.
      2.   Except for landscaping, off street parking shall not be used for
purposes other than parking. There shall be unobstructed ingress and egress to
streets for standard sized automobiles.
      3.   Off street parking facilities serving more than one business must
provide a total number of spaces to fulfill the requirements of all
participating businesses.
      4.   Parking area requirement will not include platforms or loading area.
      5.   Commercial buildings having access to alleys may use these as off
street loading areas.
      6.   Within a parking area of over five (5) spaces, one may be designed
for a compact automobile (20 percent compact sized spaces).
         a.   Standard space: Nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20').
         b.   Compact space: Eight feet by sixteen feet (8' x 16').
      7.   A minimum number of parking spaces will be required in accordance
with the guidelines that follow:
         a.   Parking areas must be surfaced and must address on site drainage.
         b.   Construction shall meet all standards as set by the city.
   C.   High Volume Retail/Service:
      1.   High volume businesses are those businesses that sell goods or
provide services utilized by nearly all consumers at one time or another, such
as:
Bank.
City office.
Dry goods or notions store.
Furniture store.
General clothing store.
Grocery store.
Hardware store.
Medical clinic.
Pharmacy.
Post office.
      2.   High volume retail stores will provide one parking space for each
employee and one parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of
building.
   D.   Low Volume Retail/Service:
      1.   Low volume retail or service businesses are those businesses that
sell a specialized or limited line of goods or provide a specialized service
such as:
Bakery.
Beauty/barber shop.
Bookstore.
Florist.
Gift, craft, or hobby store.
Infant clothing store.
Liquor store.
Photography shop.
Shoe repair store.
      2.   Low volume retail and/or service businesses will provide one parking
space for each employee and one parking space for each four hundred (400)
square feet of building.
   E.   Eating And Drinking Establishments: Eating and drinking establishments
are those businesses that regularly serve food and/or beverages to customers
within their buildings. These establishments will provide parking spaces as
follows:
      1.   Restaurants: One for each employee and one for each four (4) seats
or thirty inches (30") of seating capacity.
      2.   Bars, taverns, and soft drink fountains: One for each employee and
one for each:
         a.   Four (4) seats or thirty inches (30") of seating capacity; or
         b.   Each two hundred (200) square feet of building, whichever is the
less.
   F.   Public Assembly Establishments:
      1.   Public assembly establishments are those businesses or organizations
designed to assemble large groups for meetings, speeches, or services, such as:
Churches.
Fraternal or service organization assembly halls.
Mortuaries (if they hold services at the building).
Movie theaters.
Schools.
      2.   Such establishments will provide one parking space for each four (4)
seats in the assembly hall.
   G.   Professional Services And Offices: Professional service businesses and
offices will provide one parking space for each employee and an additional
space for each professional utilizing the office. If the office has a walk-in
function as a utility where customers come in to pay bills, the parking
regulation will follow that of the low volume retail/service.
   H.   Residential: All residences or businesses with a residential function
will provide two (2) parking spaces per residential unit.
   I.   Other Businesses: Businesses that are a composite of two (2) or more of
the above types or do not fit into one of the categories will work with the
planning and zoning commission to reach a compatible agreement on the number of
parking spaces to be provided. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
ARTICLE D. L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4D-1: Purpose
10-4D-2: Permitted Uses
10-4D-3: Accessory Uses
10-4D-4: Special Uses
10-4D-5: Height Regulations
10-4D-6: Area Requirements
10-4D-7: Fencing; Lighting; Ingress And Egress
10-4D-8: Off Street Parking
10-4D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the L-I light industrial district is to establish an area in the
community where economic activities that create truck traffic, noise, or dust
of a nature that could be irritating to other users in the vicinity can locate
without degrading neighboring properties or having noncompatible users later
locate near them. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999)
10-4D-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the L-I district:
Those uses allowed and special uses permitted in the C district, except single-
family, two-family and multiple- family dwellings, schools, churches,
hospitals.
Automobile repair shop, truck repair shop, and auto body shop.
Bottling and distribution plant.
Contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of public agencies or
public utilities or materials and equipment of a similar nature including
lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards.
Contractor's shop within a building and including outside incidental storage
adequately screened by view obscuring fences from surrounding properties.
Food processing.
Laundry and dry cleaning of an industrial character.
Manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, processing, packing, repairing, or
storage uses which have not been declared a nuisance by statute, resolution, or
any court of competent jurisdiction, and provided these uses shall not cause:
   A.   Dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, or odor beyond the
boundaries of the site on which such use is conducted that is unduly hazardous
or injurious to other properties in the vicinity or to the general public as
shall be determined by the commission.
   B.   Hazard of fire, explosion, or other physical damage to any adjacent
building or plant growth.
Sale of heavy building materials and machinery.
Sheet metal, roofing or sign painting shop.
Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, and distribution. (Ord. 1003, 2-16-1999;
amd. 2010 Code)
10-4D-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4D-4: SPECIAL USES:
The planning commission may, after proper notice and public hearing as
prescribed in chapter 5 of this title, permit the following uses where such
uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare.
The commission shall have the authority to impose such conditions and
safeguards as it deems necessary to protect the best interest of the
surrounding property or neighborhood from damage, hazard, nuisance, or other
detriment.
Boarding kennel.
Broadcasting tower for radio or television.
Grain elevator and bulk storage such as for potatoes, hay and other similar
uses.
Railroad boxcars, motor vehicle cargo containers or other containers normally
used for the shipment of freight, cargo or other items, by rail, ship or motor
vehicular transportation, wherein the applicant desires to cause the same to be
located upon property within the city for storage or other purposes. Said
containers are specifically prohibited from being located within any other
district within the city or the area of city impact.
Sewerage treatment plant and similar facilities.
Storage, for wholesale or for distribution in bulk, of any flammable liquid
above or below ground. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4D-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure, or portions thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed thirty feet (30'), unless permitted to exceed this height by a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4D-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no minimum lot size. Buildings shall not occupy over fifty
percent (50%) of the site. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4D-7: FENCING; LIGHTING; INGRESS AND EGRESS:
   A.   Fencing: All sites must be enclosed by fencing of at least six feet
(6') in height on all property lines. Where a site is bounded by streets which
form corner intersections, a thirty foot (30') area must be maintained in a
condition that allows clear sight of oncoming traffic. Any landscaping within
this restricted area cannot be allowed to exceed thirty six inches (36") in
height.
   B.   Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be confined to the area
as much as possible and not create a safety hazard on public ways.
   C.   Ingress And Egress: All ingress and egress shall be to a public right
of way and shall not use roads through residential areas to reach them. (Ord.
989, 6-4-1996)
10-4D-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
Parking area shall be provided under the following formula: one and one-fourth
(1.25) parking places per employee or one parking space per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of building space, whichever is the greater. (Ord. 989, 6-
4-1996)
ARTICLE E. A-1 AGRICULTURAL/TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4E-1: Purpose
10-4E-2: Permitted Uses
10-4E-3: Special Uses
10-4E-4: Accessory Uses
10-4E-5: Height Regulations
10-4E-6: Setback Requirements; Yards
10-4E-7: Area Requirements
10-4E-8: Off Street Parking
10-4E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the A-1 agricultural/transitional district is to set aside land
to properly guide growth of the fringe areas of the community deemed to be
important for preservation at rural standards. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the A-1 district:
Accessory uses.
Agriculture. "Agriculture" is defined as: tilling soil; horticulture;
floriculture; forestry; viticulture; raising crops and including all uses
customarily accessory and incidental thereto, but not including livestock
confinement operations, slaughterhouses, fertilizer works or bone yards.
Golf course.
Roadside stands for vending fruits and vegetables.
Single-family dwelling as regulated in the R-1 district, with the exception
that the minimum lot size for such use shall be one acre unless connected to a
central water and sewer system. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses are permitted in the A-1 district:
Airport.
Broadcasting tower for radio or television.
Cemetery.
Commercial kennel, animal hospital.
Home occupations.
Mining, dredging, and excavation of sand, dirt, gravel or other aggregate.
Private amusement park, ball park, race track, or similar uses.
Public building, school, hospital or church.
Public utility installation. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-4: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-6: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS; YARDS:
The following are setback requirements for the A-1 district:
   A.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than
thirty feet (30') from the right of way line of the street.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than ten feet (10') to
any side property line, except corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot (20')
side yard adjacent to the street, which intersects the street upon which the
building fronts.
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-7: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area shall be one acre unless connected to a central water and
sewer system. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-4E-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
The following are off street parking requirements for the A-1 district:
For each single-family residence, two (2) spaces, sufficient in size for a
garage or carport. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
ARTICLE F. RECREATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4F-1: Purpose
10-4F-2: Permitted Uses
10-4F-3: Special Uses
10-4F-4: Height Regulations
10-4F-5: Setback Requirements
10-4F-6: Area Requirements
10-4F-7: Off Street Parking
10-4F-8: Parking Reduction
10-4F-9: Building Coverage
10-4F-1: PURPOSE:
REC Recreation District: The Recreation district shall be established as the
principal district in which larger scale outdoor and certain indoor recreation
occurs. It is the intent of this article to promote the purposes of the
comprehensive plan related to the preservation and enhancement of the
recreational quality and character of the community. The Recreation district
zoning is consistent with the recreational land use designation identified in
the comprehensive plan and consists of areas appropriate for recreational
purposes, generally those lands that are open in nature where development may
be limited. The Recreation district includes areas for parks, golf courses,
developed campgrounds, developed picnic sites, recreational day lodges, and
other similar recreational uses. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are allowed in the Recreation district:
   Accessory maintenance uses for recreation uses,
   Agriculture;
   Arboretums;
   Cemeteries;
   Cultivation and harvesting of crops;
   Equestrian uses, outdoors;
   Fish and wildlife management activities or facilities;
   Land and stream rehabilitation;
   Local government facilities;
   Nature preserves and conservation areas, public and private;
   Public Park;
   Recreation uses, outdoor; except skeet, trap, pistol and rifle ranges;
   Trails, trailheads, paths (nonmotorized);
   Trails or paths for the use of pedestrians, bicycles and horses; and
   Tree farms. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses are permitted in the Recreation district:
   Accessory uses for recreation uses, other than maintenance related;
   Art, education, and entertainment uses;
   Athletic field;
   Church;
   Community and recreation centers, indoor;
   Country clubs;
   Driveways and parking areas for uses, including, but not limited to,
equestrian trail nodes, hiking trailheads, picnic areas or scenic lookouts;
   Equestrian uses, indoors;
   Golf courses;
   Private recreational facilities;
   Recreation uses, outdoor; skeet, trap, pistol and rifle ranges;
   Schools;
   Stables and riding academies;
   Temporary, special events;
   Utilities, above grade;
   Utilities, below grade;
   Wireless communication facilities; and
   Zoological park. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following are setback requirements for the Recreation district:
   A.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than
thirty feet (30') from the right of way line of the street.
   B.   Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than ten feet (10') to
any side property line, except corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot (20')
side yard adjacent to the street, which intersects the street upon which the
building fronts.
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-6: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre unless connected to a central water
and sewer system. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
The following standards shall apply to any new construction, alteration, or any
new or more intense use of property. The number of off-street parking spaces,
as set forth in this article, shall be provided for all allowed uses in all
districts.
   A.   Design Of Parking Areas:
      1.   All parking areas shall be designed and constructed to provide the
type and number of off-street parking spaces required by this article and
designed accordance with the standards set forth in Hagerman City Code Section
4, Chapter 10, Article C, Section 9.
      2.   All parking spaces shall be grouped together into parking areas or
compounds, to the maximum extent possible.
   B.   Required number of off-street parking spaces are as follows:
      1.   For indoor uses, one (1) on-site parking space for every four (4)
seats or one (1) on-site parking space for every sixty (60) square feet of net
usable floor area in the indoor facility or place for public assembly,
whichever is greater.
      2.   For outdoor uses, five (5) on-site spaces for the first acre and one
(1) space for each additional ten (10) acres. Additional parking spaces must be
provided for each separate use classification constructed in the development.
(Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-8: PARKING REDUCTION:
Alternatives to providing on-site parking as set forth in this section are
encouraged in all developments. Alternatives shall include, but not be limited
to, shared use facilities, remote parking area with transit service, access to
transit service (bus, rail, gondola, and trolley), pedestrian and bicycle
facilities, and availability of other forms of automobile transportation such
as carpool and vanpools. Where alternative modes of transportation are
available or a parking study has demonstrated that parking as required by
section is not required, on-site parking may be reduced as determined
acceptable by the planning and zoning commission through a conditional use
permit process. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
10-4F-9: BUILDING COVERAGE:
The maximum building or structure coverage hereinafter erected shall not exceed
ten percent (10%) of the lot size. (Ord. 1102, 1-15-2025)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Filing Of Application; Contents
10-5-2: General Standards
10-5-3: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
10-5-4: Public Hearing; Notice
10-5-5: Commission Action
10-5-6: Council Action
10-5-7: Applicant Notification
10-5-1: FILING OF APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
An application for special use permit shall be filed with the city clerk-
treasurer by at least one owner or lessee of property for which such
conditional use is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain the
following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of the applicant.
   B.   Legal description of property (with street address, if possible).
   C.   Description of existing use.
   D.   Zoning district.
   E.   Description of proposed conditional use.
   F.   A plan of the proposed site for the conditional use showing the
location of all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the commission may require to
determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and requirements of
this title.
   G.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on adjoining
property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other
properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-5-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed conditional use in terms of the following standards, and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
   A.   Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established in this
title for the zoning district involved, in that it is not already defined as a
permitted use.
   B.   Will be harmonious with, and in accordance with, the general objectives
or with any specific objective of the comprehensive plan and/or this title.
   C.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity, and that such use will not change the essential character of
the same area.
   D.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses.
   E.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage, structures,
refuse disposal, water and sewer and schools, or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services.
   F.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.
   G.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare or odors.
   H.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares.
   I.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic
or historic feature of major importance. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-5-3: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
In granting any conditional use, the commission may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title.
(Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-5-4: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
   A.   Hearing Before Commission: Prior to granting a special use permit, at
least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity
to be heard shall be held before the commission.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice may
also be made available to other newspapers, radio or television announcement.
Notice of the hearing shall also be provided by the applicant by certified,
return receipt mail to property owners and residents three hundred feet (300')
beyond the external boundaries of the land being considered, and any additional
area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed conditional use as
determined by the commission.
      2.   Property owners or residents who reside outside the postal service
zip code mailing limits of the city, and whom the commission determines may be
impacted by the proposed change, shall be given notice of the public hearing by
certified mail. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property
owners or residents, in lieu of the mailing notification, three (3) notices in
the newspaper or paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided, that the
third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 989, 6-4-
1996)
10-5-5: COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Recommendation To Council: Within thirty (30) days after the public
hearing, the commission shall recommend to the city council approval,
conditional approval, or disapproval of the application for special use permit
as presented. If the application is recommended to be approved or approved with
modifications, the commission shall direct the administrator to transmit its
recommendation to the council listing the specific conditions specified by the
commission for approval.
   B.   Conditions Upon Granting Permit: Upon granting of a special use permit,
conditions may be attached to a conditional use permit including, but not
limited to, those:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other developments.
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
      3.   Controlling the duration of development.
      4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly.
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
      6.   Requiring the provisions for on site or off site public facilities
or services.
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in an ordinance.
   C.   Request Studies; Permit Nontransferable:
      1.   Prior to granting a special use permit, the commission may request
studies from the staff or public agencies concerning social, economic, fiscal
and environmental effects of the proposed conditional use.
      2.   A conditional use permit shall not be considered as establishing a
binding precedent to grant other conditional use permits.
      3.   A conditional use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land
to another.
   D.   Compliance With Comprehensive Plan: The commission shall ensure that
any favorable recommendations for special use permits are in accordance with
the comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives. (Ord. 989, 6-4-
1996)
10-5-6: COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   Time Limit For Issuance: Within forty five (45) days after receiving
the recommendations of the commission, the city council shall either approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the application as presented. If the
application is approved or approved with modifications, the council shall
direct the administrator to issue a conditional use permit listing the specific
conditions specified by the council for approval.
   B.   Specifics For Council Action: Upon granting or denying an application,
the council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-5-7: APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the clerk-treasurer
shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request.
(Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
CHAPTER 6
VARIANCES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Application Of Chapter
10-6-2: Considerations For Granting
10-6-3: Filing Of Application; Requirements
10-6-4: Filing Fee
10-6-5: Public Hearing Required; Notification
10-6-6: Commission Action
10-6-7: Council Action; Applicant Notification
10-6-1: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply in considering variances. (Ord. 989,
6-4-1996)
10-6-2: CONSIDERATIONS FOR GRANTING:
The planning commission shall consider variances to the terms of this title
which will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result
in unnecessary hardship and under such conditions that the spirit of this title
shall be observed and substantial justice done. A variance shall not be
considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant
only upon showing of undue hardship, not caused by his own or a previous
owner's actions, because of characteristics of the site and that the variance
is not in conflict with the public interest. In acting upon such variance, the
planning commission shall make a full investigation and shall only recommend
granting a variance upon finding that the following are true:
   A.   That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the
spirit and intent of the comprehensive general plan for the city, and will not
effect a change in zoning.
   B.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions, applicable to the property involved, or the intended use thereof,
which do not apply generally to the property or class of use in the district,
so that a denial of the relief sought will result in:
      1.   Undue loss of value of the property.
      2.   Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner.
      3.   The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of any property right of the
owner.
   C.   The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements
of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of such property or
improvement. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-6-3: FILING OF APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a variance may be initiated by one or more property owners.
Such application shall be filed with the planning commission on forms
prescribed by the planning commission, accompanied by such data and information
necessary to assure the fullest presentation of facts, and should include:
   A.   Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s).
   B.   Legal description of property (and street address, where possible).
   C.   Description of nature of variance requested.
   D.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the standards set forth.
   E.   Name and address of all property owners and residents within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries of the land being considered.
(Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-6-4: FILING FEE:
A filing fee as set by resolution shall be paid at the time of the filing by
the owner or owner's representative. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-6-5: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED; NOTIFICATION:
The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each variance
request following the same hearing and notice procedures as set forth in
chapter 5 of this title, except notification to property owners shall be by
ordinary mail and need not extend beyond three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the land being considered. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-6-6: COMMISSION ACTION:
Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing for a variance request, the
commission shall transmit its recommendations for approval or disapproval to
the city council. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-6-7: COUNCIL ACTION; APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
Within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendations of the commission,
the council shall approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, the
application for variance and shall give notice to the applicant within ten (10)
days after the decision has been rendered. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
CHAPTER 7
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Continuance Of Nonconforming Use
10-7-2: Restoration, Alteration Or Repairs
10-7-3: Abandonment Of Use
10-7-1: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
It is the intent of this title to permit legal nonconforming uses to continue
until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the
intent of this title that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or relocated, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-7-2: RESTORATION, ALTERATION OR REPAIRS:
Nothing in this title shall prevent the restoration, alteration, repair and
continued use of any lawful nonconforming building or structure which,
subsequent to the date of this title, is:
   A.   Declared to be unsafe by a proper authority.
   B.   Damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, by more than sixty
percent (60%).
   C.   Rendered necessary by ordinary wear, tear, deterioration or
depreciation. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-7-3: ABANDONMENT OF USE:
If active and continuous operations are not carried on in a nonconforming use
during a continuous period of six (6) months, the building, other structure, or
tract of land where such nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter
be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume active
operations shall not affect the foregoing. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
CHAPTER 8
ZONING AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Initiation Of Amendments
10-8-2: Zoning Upon Annexation
10-8-1: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title may be initiated in accordance with Idaho Code section
67-6511. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
10-8-2: ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the city council shall request
and receive a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, on the
proposed plan and zoning ordinance changes for the unincorporated area. The
commission and the city council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures
delineated in Idaho Code section 67-6509. Concurrently or immediately following
the adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the city council shall amend the
comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. (Ord. 989, 6-4-1996)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-1-1: Authority
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Jurisdiction
11-1-4: Interpretation
11-1-5: Administration
11-1-6: Severability
11-1-7: Area Of City Impact
11-1-8: Enforcement And Penalties
11-1-1: AUTHORITY:
The regulations of this title are authorized by Idaho Code title 50, chapter
13, and title 67, chapter 65; and article XII, section 2 of the Idaho
constitution, as amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, and to provide for:
   A.   The harmonious development of the area.
   B.   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with other
existing or planned streets and roads.
   C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation.
   D.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities.
   E.   The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services; or
      2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
   F.   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      1.   Roads shall be created and improved; and
      2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections or other
facilities shall be approved as a condition to the approval of the plot.
   G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat.
   H.   The administration of this title by defining the procedures for the
equitable review and approval of all plats and subdivisions covered by this
title. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
This title shall apply to the subdividing and developing of all land within the
incorporated territory of the city of Hagerman, including the property within
the areas of impact 1  as defined in ordinance 933 under the requirements of
Idaho Code section 50-1306, as amended, or subsequently codified. (Ord. 981, 7-
5-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 8 of this code for area of city impact.
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
All subdivisions as herein defined shall be submitted for approval by the city
council and shall comply with the provisions of this title. This title shall
supplement all other regulations, and where at variance with other laws,
regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive requirements shall
apply. This title shall not apply to any subdivision created and forming a part
of any lot or lots forming a part of any subdivision created and recorded prior
to the effective date hereof, except for the further dividing of lots. (Ord.
981, 7-5-1995)
11-1-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Appointment Of Planning And Zoning Commission 1 : The city council
shall appoint a planning and zoning commission to carry out the provisions as
herein specified. The commission shall receive and make recommendations on all
subdivision applications or other issues related to city planning and zoning.
   B.   Council Assume Duties Of Commission: In the event the commission fails
to act or carry out its responsibilities according to the regulations contained
herein, the city council shall assume all the duties of the commission as
herein specified in relation to the application or issue concerned. (Ord. 981,
7-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 2. See also title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
11-1-6: SEVERABILITY:
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of
this title are held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall affect only that part so held invalid. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-1-7: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
The provisions of this title shall prevail in the area of city impact as
negotiated, adopted and amended by agreement with Gooding County and adopted as
part of this code. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-1-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: No subdivision plat required by this title or the Idaho
Code shall be admitted to the public land records of the county or recorded by
the county recorder until such subdivision plat has received final approval by
the city council. No public board, agency, commission, official or other
authority shall proceed with the construction of any of the public improvements
required by this title until the final plat has received the approval by the
council.
   B.   Penalties: Penalties for failure to comply with the provisions of this
title shall be as follows:
Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any
of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered as a separate offense. The landowner, tenant,
subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the council or any other public official or
private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or
prevent any violation of this title or of the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Interpretation Of Terms And Words
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-1: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   The present tense includes the past or future tense, the singular
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; and the word
"should" is preferred.
   C.   The masculine shall include the feminine. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESS: Legal means to enter a property from a public street.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Any structure not intended for human occupancy but that
serves an accessory function to the principal building on the property.
ADDRESS: Number given to a particular location by the city for means of
identification by location.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
BUILDING: A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or more
families, or a structure requiring all buildings to be set back a certain
distance from the lot line.
BUILDING SITE: An area proposed or provided and improved by grading, filling,
excavation or other means for erecting foundations or pads for buildings.
CEMETERY: A lot that has been platted for the selling of sites for the burial
of animal or human remains.
CITY: The city of Hagerman, Idaho, as specified by city ordinance.
COMMISSION: Duly appointed members of the planning and zoning commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An adopted document that herein may be referred to as a
comprehensive plan. The document shall show the general location and extent of
present and proposed development, including, but not limited to, housing,
industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks, schools and other community
facilities.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of: a) undivided interest in common in real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof; together with: b) a separate interest in real property, in an interest
or interests in real property or in any combination thereof.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Hagerman, Idaho.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder.
COVENANT: A written promise or pledge.
CULVERT: A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or driveway.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the
public. Land becomes dedicated either by ordinance, resolution, or entry in the
official minutes, or by the recording of a plat showing such dedication.
DEVELOPER: Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
DWELLING UNIT: A. Any building or other structure proposed or built for
occupancy by people; or
   B.   A prefab dwelling unit which is a building or other structure, proposed
or built for occupancy by people, that is designed for initial transportation
on streets and highways which arrives at a site where it is installed on a
permanent foundation.
   C.   Homes shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to
use land for specific purposes. Also, a right acquired by prescription.
ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the state to practice professional
engineering.
ESCROW ACCOUNT: An account set up by the subdivider which guarantees that the
subdivider will perform all actions required by an approved plat, and provides
that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an
approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages.
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, or watercourse or other body of water which has been or may be
covered by water of a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency. The floodplain
includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe, as described below along
with other terms.
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
Designated Floodway: A floodway whose limits have been designated and
established.
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by flow from
a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
Flood Of One Hundred Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the floodplain
adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
floodwater of any watercourse.
Floodway, Encroachment Lines: The lines limiting a designated floodway.
Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain which is beyond the floodway
encroachment lines limiting a designated floodway. Such areas will include
those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by a flood of one
hundred (100) year frequency but which may be developed for use under land use
regulations without material effect upon the floodwater levels. Such areas are
characterized by shallow flood depths and low velocities of water flow.
GOVERNING BODY: The mayor and city council of the city of Hagerman, Idaho.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or federal
agency.
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision, or portion thereof, having an average
slope of ten percent (10%) or more.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical construction
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision, the size of which consists of twenty
(20) or more lots or dwelling units (1/4 acre or smaller not exempt from
sidewalk requirements).
LOT: A parcel, plot, tract or other land area of suitable size as required in
this title and the existing zoning ordinance, and created by subdivision, for
sale, transfer or lease.
LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street, highway,
alley, road or other rights of way.
LOT TYPES: As used in this title, lot types are as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only one street.
Reversed Lot: A lot with frontage on a side street or other right of way other
than interior or corner lot.
Through Lot: A lot with frontage on more than one street other than a corner
lot. Also known as double frontage lots.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home
construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is
forty (40) body feet or more in length, and when erected on site is one
thousand (1,000) square feet or more in size, and which is built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes
shall not include travel trailers, or other similar recreational vehicles, and
shall not include manufactured homes or mobile homes constructed prior to the
year of the adoption of this title.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A park designed and intended for purposes of rental
spaces where residence is in manufactured homes exclusively.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for
exclusive manufactured home residential use where residence is in manufactured
homes exclusively and land owned by the occupant.
MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or
iron or steel rods, used to permanently establish any tract, parcel, lot or
street lines, as specified in Idaho Code section 50-1303.
OPEN SPACE: An area open to the sky for outdoor recreation activity. Streets,
buildings, or other covered structures are not included in computing these
areas.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat of record on
file in the office of the county recorder, or any unplatted contiguous parcel
of land held in one ownership and of record as of August 15, 1995.
OWNER: The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the
subdivider or his surety to the city clerk-treasurer which guarantees that the
subdivider will perform all actions required by an approved plat, and provides
that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an
approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of
the bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the approved
plat.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION: A use or a combination of residential,
commercial and industrial uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a
unit under single ownership or control, which is developed for the purpose of
selling or renting individual lots or estates, whether fronting on private or
dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more principal buildings as
governed by the zoning ordinance. The requirements of this title may be
modified by the council upon recommendation by the commission to achieve the
best possible planned development for the specific site under consideration.
PLAT: The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite or
other tract of land or a replatting of such including certifications,
descriptions and approvals:
   A.   Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by maps or drawings of
a proposed subdivision as required in this title; and
   B.   Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by maps or drawings of an
approved subdivision development, the original and one copy of which are filed
with the county clerk and recorder.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Rental space for recreational vehicles on a limited
basis, generally overnight but normally not longer than a week. This may
include motor homes and pickup campers.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a dedicated street or partial street and
adjacent property, which is reserved or held in public ownership for future
street extension or widening.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way,
which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street right of way outside the street surface
which is improved for pedestrian use.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Shall be the specifications as may be specified in
this title or as officially adopted by the city.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also
includes the terms "highway", "thoroughfare", "parkway", "road", "avenue",
"boulevard", "lane", "place" and other such terms.
Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
Arterial: A street designated for the purpose of carrying heavier traffic
movements.
Collector: A street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from minor
streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
Cul-De-Sac: A street connected to another street at one end only and provided
with a turnaround space at its terminus.
Dead End: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not having
provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
Frontage: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, which
has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
Minor: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
Partial: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required
street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.
Private: A street which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to one or more
properties; however, not accepted for public dedication or maintenance.
Side Street: A secondary street that provides access to a corner lot of which
the principal building is not oriented toward.
SUBDIVIDER: A subdivider shall be deemed to be the individual, firm,
corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity
that executes the application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of
land in accordance with the provisions of this title. The subdivider need not
be the owner of the property; however, he shall be an agent of the owner or
have sufficient proprietary rights in the property to represent the owner.
SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel
of land into more than two (2) parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership
or development; which shall also include the dedication of a public street and
the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. However, this title shall not
apply to any of the following:
   A.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does not
reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not change the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
   B.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a
court decree for the distribution of property;
   C.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined
and allowed in the Idaho Code;
   D.   Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan;
   E.   The acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in
conformance with the comprehensive plan; and
   F.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage of the
properties involved.
SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land surveyor to
do professional surveying.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, stormwater and similar facilities providing service to and used by
the public.
VARIANCE: A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where
such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing
to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.
VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in
relation to a larger area. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-3-1: Subdivision Approval Required
11-3-2: Preapplication
11-3-3: Preliminary Plat
11-3-4: Final Plat
11-3-1: SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to create a "subdivision" as herein defined 1  shall submit
all necessary applications to the city. No final plat shall be filed with the
county recorder or improvements made on the property until the plat has been
acted upon by the planning commission and approved by the city council. No lots
shall be sold until the plat has been recorded in the office of the county
recorder. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-2-2 of this title.
11-3-2: PREAPPLICATION:
   A.   Application: Prior to the filing of an application for approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit eight (8) copies of a sketch plan
to the commission. The sketch plan shall include the entire developmental
scheme of the proposed subdivision in schematic form and include the area
proposed for immediate development in such a form and content as required by
the commission and shall include the following:
      1.   The general layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;
      2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site;
      3.   Areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities; and
      4.   One vicinity map.
   B.   Fee: None required.
   C.   Commission Action: The subdivider shall submit the preapplication to
the members of the planning and zoning commission ten (10) days prior to the
regular meeting. A mailing list can be obtained from the city clerk-treasurer.
At the regular meeting, the subdivider shall present his preapplication and
intent to the commission for review and comment. The commission may, if it
deems necessary, request review of the preapplication by other agencies. The
commission will review the preapplication to determine its compliance with this
title as well as the following concerns:
      1.   The compliance of the proposed development with existing local or
state policies, goals and objectives or development plans;
      2.   Determination of additional special permits or ordinance conflicts
such as rezoning, conditional use permit or variance that may be needed and the
determination of the manner that such requirements can be combined into one
permit;
      3.   Advise the applicant of any unique environmental or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property, such as areas that have been designated by the state as areas of
critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like; and
      4.   Provide the subdivider with all necessary forms. (Ord. 981, 7-5-
1995)
11-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Application: Upon completion of the preapplication procedures, the
subdivider shall file with the commission a completed subdivision application
form and preliminary plat data as required in this title in such form and
content as required by the commission.
   B.   Combining Both Preliminary And Final Plats: The applicant may also
request that the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and
final plat if the following exist:
      1.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots;
      2.   No new street dedication or street widening is involved;
      3.   No major special development considerations are involved, such as
development in a floodplain, hillside development or the like; and
      4.   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form. A request to combine both preliminary plat
and final plat into one application shall be acted upon by the commission.
   C.   Contents Of Preliminary Plat: The contents of the preliminary plat and
related information shall be in such a form as stipulated by the commission;
however, any additional maps or data deemed necessary by the commission may
also be required. The subdivider shall submit to the commission at least the
following:
      1.   Eight (8) copies of the preliminary engineering plat of the proposed
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated; each
copy of the preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall have
dimensions of not less than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24"),
shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1"
= 100'), shall show the drafting date, and shall indicate thereon, by arrow,
the general northerly direction.
      2.   Eight (8) sets of preliminary engineering plans including a master
utility map for streets, water, sewers, sidewalks and other required public
improvement maps; said engineering plans shall contain sufficient information
and detail to enable the commission to make a preliminary determination as to
conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable regulations, ordinances
and standards as outlined in this title.
      3.   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat on
a form prescribed by the commission.
      4.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area, such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large scale development,
hazardous and unique areas of development.
   D.   Requirements Of Preliminary Plat: The following shall be shown on the
preliminary plat submitted or shall be submitted with the same:
      1.   The name of the proposed subdivision.
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the subdivider(s) and the
engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat.
      3.   The name and address of adjoining owners of property whether or not
bisected by a public right of way as shown on record in the county assessor's
office.
      4.   The legal description of the subdivision.
      5.   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision, such
as: residential single-family, two-family and multiple-family housing,
commercial, industrial, recreational or agricultural; and a showing of any
sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses.
      6.   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed
subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.
      7.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surrounding area (1/2 mile minimum radius, scale optional).
      8.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the
adjacent land.
      9.   Streets, street names, rights of way and roadway widths, including
adjoining streets or roadways.
      10.   Lot lines and the dimensions and numbers of each, and the total
number of lots by block.
      11.   A site report as required by the appropriate health district where
septic tanks are proposed.
      12.   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited to,
irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages, bridges, culverts, water mains, fire
hydrants, electric power lines, television cable lines, and their respective
profiles or indicated alternative methods.
      13.   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed
restrictions, or if none, a statement that none are proposed.
      14.   Any dedications to the public and/or easements together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such.
      15.   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in chapter 6 of this title.
      16.   A statement as to whether or not a variance will be requested with
respect to any provision of this title describing the particular provision, the
variance requested, and the reasons therefor.
      17.   At the commission's or council's request, the developer shall show
contours at five foot (5') intervals where land slope is greater than ten
percent (10%) and at two foot (2') intervals where land slope is ten percent
(10%) or less, with an established bench mark, including location and
elevation.
   E.   Fee: At the time of submission of an application for a preliminary
plat, a nonrefundable fee as set by resolution shall be paid. There shall be no
additional fee for the combining of the preliminary and final plats.
   F.   Submission Requirements: The subdivider shall submit eight (8) copies
of the preliminary plat and required supplemental material, along with the
required fee, to the commission at least ten (10) days prior to the regular
planning and zoning meeting. The submission shall also be in such form as
prescribed by the city.
   G.   Public Notification:
      1.   Notification To Property Owners: The subdivider shall notify all
adjoining property owners of the planning and zoning commission's meeting by
written notification and posting of the subject land under consideration. Such
written notification and posting shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior
to the planning and zoning commission's meeting, and shall be in the form of a
certified letter with return receipt.
      2.   Failure To Notify: The failure of the subdivider to comply with the
notification provision shall invalidate the city's action.
   H.   Commission Action:
      1.   At the next regular commission meeting following public
notification, the subdivider shall present the preliminary plat for action. The
commission may approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or table the
preliminary plat for additional information. Such action will occur within
thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first
considered. The action, and the reasons for such action, shall be stated in
writing by the commission and forwarded to the applicant.
      2.   The commission shall also forward a statement of the action taken
and the reasons for such action together with a copy of the preliminary plat to
the council for their action.
   I.   Council Action:
      1.   At the next regular council meeting, subdivider shall present the
preliminary plat for action. The council may approve, approve conditionally,
disapprove, or table the preliminary plat for additional information. Such
action shall occur within thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting.
      2.   If the commission's conclusion is favorable to the subdivider's
request and recommendation from the commission that the subdivision be
considered as both a preliminary plat and final plat, then a recommendation
shall be forwarded to the council in the same manner as herein specified for a
final plat. The commission may recommend that the combined application be
approved, conditionally approved or disapproved.
   J.   Appeals: Any person who appeals in person or writing before the
commission may appeal in writing the decision of the commission relative to any
action taken by the commission. Such appeal must be submitted to the council
within ten (10) days from such commission action.
   K.   Approval Period:
      1.   Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of
the final plat application by the developer within one year after action by the
council shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to be null and void,
unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the council prior to
the expiration date.
      2.   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in
successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of one year, may be considered for final
approval without resubmission for preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 981, 7-5-
1995)
11-3-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any part
thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the commission the
following:
      1.   Eight (8) copies and the original of the final plat.
      2.   Eight (8) copies and the original of the final engineering
construction drawings for streets, water, sewer, sidewalk and other public
improvements.
   B.   Content Of Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, and
shall be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to enable
the same to be placed on one sheet of eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x
24") drawing paper, with no part of the drawing nearer to the edge than one
inch (1"). The reverse of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the
drawing, but may contain written matter as to dedications, certifications and
other information. The final plat shall include, at least, the following:
      1.   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated
by the commission.
      2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat.
      3.   Such other and further information as the commission may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat.
      4.   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof.
      5.   Conform to all requirements and provisions of this title.
      6.   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards.
      7.   A copy of a performance bond or compatible escrow account shall be
required. (Ord. 991, 9-3-1996)
   C.   Fee: None required.
   D.   Commission Review:
      1.   Submittal Of Final Plat: The commission shall review the final plat
for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved preliminary plat. If
the council determines that there is substantial difference in the final plat
than that which was considered as a preliminary plat or conditions which have
not been met, the commission may require that the final plat be resubmitted in
the same manner as required in the preliminary plat process.
      2.   Submission To Council: Upon the determination that the final plat is
in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional requirements have
been met, the commission shall place the final plat on the council agenda
within forty five (45) days from the date that an acceptable final plat
application was received and acknowledged by the commission.
   E.   Agency Review: The council may transmit one copy of the final plat, or
other document submitted, for review and recommendation to the same departments
and agencies, or others as they may deem necessary to ensure compliance with
the preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review shall also include the construction standards of improvements,
compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all improvements and
the legal review of the performance bond.
   F.   Council Action: The council, at its next meeting following receipt of
the commission's report, shall consider comments from concerned persons and
agencies to arrive at a decision on the final plat. If said final plat conforms
to the requirements of this title applicable at the time of approval of the
preliminary plat, all rulings made by the commission on the preliminary plat,
and the requirements of the Idaho state law, the council shall approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove or table the final plat for additional information
within thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting at which the final
plat was first considered by the council.
   G.   Approval Period: Final plat and covenants, if any, shall be filed with
the county recorder within one year after written approval by the council.
Otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless, prior to said
expiration date, an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
council.
   H.   Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the council,
the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, and the inclusion of the
following signatures on the final plat to the county recorder for recording:
      1.   Certification and signature of local or state health agency that all
health requirements have been complied with.
      2.   Certification and signature of an engineer or building inspector
verifying that the subdivision meets the city requirements and has been
approved by the council and planning and zoning commission.
      3.   Certification and signature of the council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Minimum Design Standards Required
11-4-2: Dedication
11-4-3: Location
11-4-4: Specifications
11-4-5: Street Names
11-4-6: Intersections
11-4-7: Easements
11-4-8: Blocks
11-4-9: Lots
11-4-10: Planting Strips And Reserve Strips
11-4-11: Public Sites And Open Spaces
11-4-12: Large Scale Developments
11-4-1: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth hereinafter in this article; provided, however, that any higher
standards adopted by any highway district, state highway department or health
agency shall prevail over those set forth herein. Off site improvements may be
required if deemed necessary by the impact of the subdivision. (Ord. 981, 7-5-
1995)
11-4-2: DEDICATION:
Arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all cases;
in general, all other streets shall also be dedicated to public use. (Ord. 981,
7-5-1995)
11-4-3: LOCATION:
Street and road location shall conform to the following:
   A.   Street Location And Arrangement: When a major street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall
conform to such plans.
   B.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
   C.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement
of streets in a new subdivision shall be such that said streets extend to the
boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said
streets into adjacent areas. A reserve strip may be required and held in public
ownership.
   D.   Street Continuation And Extension: The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new
subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the city council or department having
jurisdiction over such streets.
   E.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to
topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
   F.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial
subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off street
loading and parking. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
   G.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than five
hundred feet (500') in length and shall terminate with an adequate turnaround
having a minimum radius of sixty feet (60') for right of way.
   H.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with this title and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of
the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street
shall be dedicated within such tract.
   I.   Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited. (Ord.
981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Street Rights Of Way Widths: Street and road rights of way widths shall
conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive development plan and
the rules of the state department of highways and the highway district or
department having jurisdiction. Minimum right of way standards are as follows:
(Ord. 991, 9-3-1996; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Highway And Street Types Widths
Expressway or freeway    160 – 2,600 feet
Major arterial           120 feet
Minor arterial           80 feet
Collector street         60 feet
Minor street             60 feet
 
(Ord. 991, 9-3-1996)
   B.   Street Grades: Street grades shall not exceed nine percent (9%) on
either minor or collector streets, and five percent (5%) for arterial streets.
No street grade shall be less than three-tenths foot (3/10') per one hundred
feet (100').
   C.   Street Alignment: Street alignment shall be as follows:
      1.   Horizontal Alignment: When street lines deflect from each other by
more than ten degrees (10°) in alignment, the centerlines shall be connected by
a curve having a minimum radius of five hundred feet (500') for arterial
streets, three hundred feet (300') for collector streets and one hundred fifty
feet (150') for minor streets. Between reverse curves on minor streets, there
shall be a minimum tangent distance of one hundred feet (100') and two hundred
feet (200') on collector and arterial streets respectively.
      2.   Vertical Alignment: Minimum sight distances shall be two hundred
feet (200') for minor streets and three hundred feet (300') for collector and
arterial streets. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-5: STREET NAMES:
The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
   A.   Duplication Of Names: Street names shall not duplicate any existing
street name except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street.
Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing
streets shall not be used.
   B.   New Streets: All new streets shall be named as follows: streets having
predominantly east-west direction shall have phonetic names; streets having a
predominantly north-south direction shall have numerical names; meandering
streets shall be named "drive", "lane", "path", and cul-de-sacs shall be named
"circle", "court", and "place".
   C.   Numbering Lots: Lots will be numbered in the following manner:
South: Even
North: Odd
East: Odd
West: Even
   D.   Responsibility: The developer will be responsible for name and street
signs. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-6: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following:
   A.   Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°)
or as closely thereto as possible. In no case shall streets intersect at less
than eighty degrees (80°).
   B.   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another
vehicle when each is eighty feet (80') from the center of the intersection.
   C.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   D.   "T" Intersections: "T" intersections may be used wherever such design
will not restrict the free movement of traffic.
   E.   Centerline Offsets: Street centerlines shall be offset by a distance of
at least one hundred twenty five feet (125').
   F.   Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A nearly flat grade with
appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat
section shall be extended a minimum of one hundred feet (100') each way from
the intersection. An allowance of two percent (2%) maximum intersection grade
in rolling terrain, and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain, will be permitted.
(Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-7: EASEMENTS:
Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines, rear
lot lines and/or side lot lines when deemed necessary. Total easement width
shall not be less than twelve feet (12'). Unobstructed drainageway easements
shall be provided as required by the council. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-8: BLOCKS:
   A.   Every block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots,
except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural feature or subdivision
boundary. Blocks shall not be less than three hundred feet (300') long in all
cases, nor exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
   B.   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to adequate sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated; the zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; the need
for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and
the limitations and opportunities of topography. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-9: LOTS:
Lots shall conform to the following:
   A.   Lot Sizes: No subdivision plat in the area included in a residential
district shall hereafter be approved by the city unless all lots shown thereon
shall have a frontage of seventy five feet (75') or more and a minimum area of
six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet. Corner lots shall have a
frontage of seventy five feet (75') or more and a minimum area of seven
thousand (7,000) square feet, except that lots fronting on cul-de-sac circles
may have reduced frontage as approved by the council, but shall not be less
than forty feet (40').
   B.   Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to
straight streets and shall conform to the radius of curved streets.
   C.   Width Related To Length: Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided.
   D.   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both streets.
   E.   Uninhabitable Areas: Land subject to flooding or which shall otherwise
be deemed to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential proposes or
for any other uses that may increase or create a danger to health, life, or
property or which may increase or create a flood hazard. Such land within a
subdivision shall be set aside for other uses such as parks, greenbelts, or
other open spaces.
   F.   Backup Lots: Lots shall back into such features as highways, arterial
streets, shopping centers, or industrial properties, except where there is a
minor access street provided. Such lots shall contain a landscaped easement
along the rear at least twenty feet (20') wide in addition to the utility
easement. The restricted access to the arterial street will minimize noise and
protect outdoor living areas.
   G.   Lot Frontage: All rectangular lots shall have at least seventy five
feet (75') of frontage upon a publicly dedicated street. Variances may be
permitted for an approved planned unit development.
   H.   Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots (such as when large lots are approved for septic tank
operations), the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for
future resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan
thereof shall be approved by the council prior to the taking of such action.
(Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-10: PLANTING STRIPS AND RESERVE STRIPS:
Planting strips and reserve strips shall conform to the following:
   A.   Planting Strips: Planting strips shall be required to be placed next to
incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial
uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screens shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') wide, and shall not be a part of the normal right
of way or utility easement.
   B.   Reserve Strips:
      1.   Private: Privately held reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited.
      2.   Public: A one foot (1') reserve may be required to be placed at the
end or along "stub", "dead end", or "half streets" which terminate at
subdivision boundaries. These reserves shall be deeded in fee simple to the
city for future street purposes. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-4-11: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following:
   A.   Public Uses: Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public
use shown on the comprehensive plan is located in whole or part within a
subdivision, a suitable area for this purpose shall be dedicated to the public
or reserved for public purchase. If within two (2) years of plat recording the
purchase is not agreed upon, the reservation shall be canceled or shall
automatically cease to exist.
   B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the subdivision. (Ord. 981,
7-5-1995)
11-4-12: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS:
Large scale development shall be governed by the following provisions:
   A.   Modification: This title may be modified in accordance with the
variance provisions of this title in the case of a subdivision large enough to
constitute a complete community or neighborhood. It must be consistent with the
comprehensive land use plan which provides and dedicates adequate public open
space and improvements for circulation, recreation, education, light, air, and
service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated.
   B.   Neighborhood Characteristics: A community or neighborhood of fifty (50)
lots or more shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, bounded by major
streets or natural barriers, and shall contain public areas of sufficient size
for school, playgrounds, parks and other public facilities to serve its
population. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
CHAPTER 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Purpose
11-5-2: Responsibility For Plans
11-5-3: Required Public Improvements
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be constructed by the subdivider as
conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the procedures and
responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and
agencies concerned with the administration, planning, design, construction, and
financing of public facilities and to further establish procedures for assuring
compliance with these requirements. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-5-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision
to have prepared by a registered engineer, a complete set of construction
plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications, and other supporting
data, for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans, which have been
approved with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with
the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the city or
building inspector and other responsible public agencies. All construction
plans shall be prepared in accordance with the public agencies' standards or
specifications. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-5-3: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
   A.   Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code section
50-1303.
   B.   Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the city council.
Vertical curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all collector and arterial
streets.
   C.   Curbs, Gutters And Drainage: Curbs and gutters shall be required on
minor streets and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the council. An adequate storm drainage system may be
required in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision
shall be established by the council and the appropriate construction shall
follow the specifications and procedures established for such facility.
   D.   Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities are recommended
and may be required by the council in areas where overhead facilities would not
be compatible with the surrounding properties.
   E.   Driveways: All driveway openings shall be as specified by the city,
highway district or state highway department. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
   F.   Water Supply System: When a proposed subdivision is to be serviced by a
public water supply system, fire hydrants and other required water system
appurtenances shall be provided by the subdivider. If there is no existing or
accessible public water supply system, the subdivider shall be required to
install a water supply system for the common use of the lots within the
subdivision as approved by the state department of environmental quality.
Individual wells may be permitted in accordance with the appropriate health
district. All subdivisions within or contiguous to the city limits may be
required to hook onto the city water system.
   G.   Sanitary Sewer System: When a proposed subdivision is to be served by a
public sanitary sewage system, sanitary sewers and other required appurtenances
thereto shall be provided by the subdivider as approved by the state department
of environmental quality. All subdivisions within or contiguous to the city
limits may be required to hook onto the city sewer system. Where it is
determined in the judgment of the council, based upon the advice of the Central
health department, that a subdivision cannot be feasibly connected with an
existing public or private sewer system or that a public or private sewer
system cannot be provided for the subdivision, then an approved disposal system
will only be authorized which shall comply with the appropriate health district
requirements. (Ord. 991, 9-3-1996; amd. 2010 Code)
   H.   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both
sides of the street. Where the average width of lots, as measured at the
frontage line or at the building setback line, is over one hundred feet (100'),
sidewalks on one side may be required by the council. Pedestrian walkways, when
required, shall have easements at least ten feet (10') in width and include a
concrete walk at least five feet (5') in width, located generally along the
centerline of the easement, dedicated as a public pedestrian walkway. Sidewalks
and crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications as adopted by the council.
   I.   Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be required to be installed at
intersections throughout the subdivision. In these cases, a subdivider shall
conform to the requirements of the city and the public utility providing such
lighting.
   J.   Bicycle Paths: Bicycle paths should be considered in all developments
and may be required by the council.
   K.   Private Improvements And Public Utilities: It shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to arrange and provide for the development,
installation, construction, or other improvement of private facilities and
public utilities within and for the subdivision in accordance with applicable
standards and requirements.
   L.   Construction Of Public Works:
      1.   The scope of this section is to define the respective areas of
responsibility of the subdivider and the city relative to the installation,
construction, or other improvements of public works en route to, and within the
boundaries of, a subdivision.
      2.   In certain instances, the city may require formal written agreements
with the subdivider that more fully and specifically describe their respective
obligations and responsibilities.
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to complete, at his
sole expense, all the development and construction of public works for and
within his subdivision, except as specifically provided otherwise to be the
obligation and responsibility of the city, or as may be accepted by the city as
being within the spirit and intent of its responsibilities.
      4.   The subdivider shall complete the installation or construction of
all the different phases of public works for which he is responsible before the
city will accept any of them. This requirement may be satisfied by completion
of a stage in a staged development as called for in the approved development
plan.
   M.   Guarantee Of Completion: Until the public works for which the
subdivider is responsible are completed, or an acceptable stage of the
development is completed, the city will issue no building permits for private
construction therein; unless a satisfactory performance bond or other suitable
guarantee of performance acceptable to the city is provided by the subdivider.
   N.   Evidence Of Completion:
      1.   The subdivider shall notify the city in writing when the public
works for which he is responsible have been completed.
      2.   The city shall also certify in writing, a copy of which shall be
sent to the subdivider, that the said public works have been inspected by its
authorized representative, and that the said public works have been completed
in accordance with applicable standards and specifications. As built
construction plans shall be submitted to the city upon completion.
      3.   Compliance with the foregoing provisions shall constitute the city's
acceptance of the public works. The city shall thereby accept said public works
and be responsible for their operation and maintenance in accordance with city
policies.
   O.   Streets:
      1.   The subdivider shall perform, install, construct, or otherwise
complete, at his sole expense, the following items relative to street
improvements for and within the boundaries of the subdivision:
         a.   Route for boundary surveys of the dedicated rights of way.
         b.   Construction surveys of line and grade.
         c.   Installation of sidewalks, if applicable.
         d.   Installation of curbs and gutters, if applicable.
         e.   Preparation of the subgrade.
         f.   Inspection of the roadway base course.
         g.   Inspection of all phases of construction to assure compliance
with applicable standards and specifications.
         h.   Installation of crushed gravel leveling course to be used as a
temporary wearing surface until a permanent asphalt pavement is installed.
         i.   Asphalt pavement is to be installed following the installation of
curbs and gutter.
      2.   The city shall perform, install, construct or otherwise complete, at
its sole expense, installation of traffic control signs and signals relative to
street improvements within the boundaries of the subdivision.
      3.   The city may also improve, to the extent it deems suitable, subject
to budgetary limitation, such existing rights of way it considers necessary to
provide adequate access to the subdivision.
   P.   Sanitary Sewage Collection System: The subdivider shall be responsible
for the installation of a sanitary sewage collection system within the
boundaries of the subdivision. The subdivider shall perform, install, construct
or otherwise complete, at his sole expense, the following items relative to
sanitary sewers: (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
      1.   Preparation of plans and specifications for the construction of the
sanitary sewer system, including extensions from the existing collection
system, and the approval of said plans and specifications by the Idaho
department of environmental quality. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   Construction surveys of line and grade within the subdivision.
      3.   Installation of the sewer system for and within the subdivision,
including sewers, manholes and other appurtenances, and, if applicable, sewage
pumping stations.
      4.   If sewer mains are located in a dedicated street or alley,
installation of a sewer service line to the property line of each lot.
      5.   Inspection of construction to assure compliance with the plans,
specifications, and applicable standards.
      6.   Installation of a sewer line extension from the existing collection
systems to a designated point of connection near the subdivision.
   Q.   Sewer And Hookup Charges: Connections to the sewers will be in
accordance with existing procedures and policies of the city; and the
subdivider will be liable for the payment of sewer assessment and hookup
charges as provided by city ordinances.
   R.   Water Distribution System:
      1.   The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of a
culinary water distribution system for and within the boundaries of the
subdivision on the public right of way. The subdivider shall perform, install,
construct, or otherwise complete, at his sole expense, the following items
relative to a culinary water distribution system: (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
         a.   Preparation of plans and specifications for the construction of
the water distribution system, including any required extensions from the
existing system, and the approval of said plans and specifications by the Idaho
department of environmental quality. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995; amd. 2010 Code)
         b.   Construction surveys of line and grade within the subdivision.
         c.   Installation of the water distribution system within the
subdivision, including water lines, control valves, fire hydrants, and
appurtenant facilities as approved by the city.
         d.   If water mains are located in a dedicated street or alley,
installation of a water service line to the property lines of each lot.
         e.   Inspection of construction to assure compliance with the plans,
specifications, and applicable standards.
         f.   Installation of a water line extension or extensions as indicated
in subsection F of this section.
      2.   Connections to the water mains shall be in accordance with existing
procedures and policies of the city; and the subdivider shall be liable for the
payment of water assessment and hookup charges as provided by city ordinances.
   S.   Reimbursement For Oversizing: In the event the city requires the
subdivider to install oversized pipelines or other excess facilities to make
provisions for present or future service needs in excess of the requirements
for the subdivision, the city shall reimburse the subdivider for the additional
costs of material and installation resulting therefrom.
   T.   Building Line Setback: In all new subdivisions, the building line
setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the property line. In the
event that a new subdivision is located along a street with existing
residences, the setback line shall be not less than other structures along the
street and preferably should be set back as an average of the existing
structures.
   U.   Side And Rear Lot Clearance: In all new subdivisions, no building of
any nature shall be placed or constructed nearer than ten feet (10') from the
side or rear property line. Where utility rights of way or other easements are
provided along property lines and lot lines, no structure of any nature shall
be permitted in such rights of way or easements, except for the purpose for
which they were provided. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Hillside Subdivisions
11-6-3: Planned Unit And Condominium Subdivisions
11-6-4: Manufactured Home Subdivisions
11-6-5: Manufactured Home Parks
11-6-6: Travel Trailer Parks
11-6-7: Large Scale Development Subdivisions
11-6-8: Cemetery Subdivisions
11-6-9: Subdivision Within Floodplain
11-6-10: Subdivision Within Area Of Critical Concern
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify the various types of special
developments that normally pose special concern to the city council and elected
officials when reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests. Therefore, this
chapter outlines the general plan submittal requirements and design standards
that shall be taken into consideration when acting on special developments. The
provisions of this chapter are in addition to the plan requirements and design
standards that are required by chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this title. The required
information shall be submitted to the council with the preliminary plat. (Ord.
981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-2: HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS:
In the event that a hillside subdivision is proposed, guidelines will be
adopted to consider the proposal. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-3: PLANNED UNIT AND CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
Planned unit and condominium developments shall be subject to requirements set
forth in the zoning ordinance and also subject to all provisions within this
title.
   A.   Minimum Area: A planned unit development for the following principal
uses shall contain an area of not less than:
      1.   Two (2) acres or one normal city block for residential use, or for a
manufactured home subdivision or park.
      2.   Three (3) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or
industrial use.
      3.   Seven (7) acres for commercial use.
      4.   Seven (7) acres for industrial use.
   B.   Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the council with a
colored rendering of adequate scale to show the completed development that will
include at least the following:
      1.   Architectural style and building design.
      2.   Building materials and color.
      3.   Landscaping and drainage.
      4.   Screening.
      5.   Garbage areas.
      6.   Parking.
      7.   Open space.
   C.   Private Streets: Private street construction standards shall be based
upon recommendations from the city engineer and council. Adequate construction
standards may vary depending on the size of the development and the demands
placed on such improvements.
   D.   Homeowners' Association: The homeowners' association bylaws and other
similar deed restrictions, which provide for the control and maintenance of all
common areas, recreation facilities or open space shall meet with the approval
of the council. Any and all powers as specified in such agreements may be
required to also be assigned to the jurisdictional agency to ensure continued
and adequate maintenance of all such common areas, recreational facilities and
open space, ability to assess property for delinquencies and enforcement of
motor vehicle speed to protect the best interests of the owners involved and of
the general public.
   E.   Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated
needs of boats, campers and travel trailers. For typical residential
development, one adequate space shall be provided for every three (3) living
units. This may be reduced by the council if there is a showing that the needs
of a particular development are less.
   F.   Parking Space: One additional parking space beyond that which is
required by the zoning ordinance may be required for every three (3) dwelling
units to accommodate visitor parking.
   G.   Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size
and location to be determined by the type and service needed for the necessary
repair and maintenance of all common areas.
   H.   Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the
development and shall be of such shape and area to be usable and convenient to
the residents of the development.
   I.   Control During Development: Single ownership or control during
development shall be required and a time limit may be imposed to guarantee that
the development is built and constructed as planned. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-4: MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   General: Manufactured home subdivisions shall in general be treated the
same as any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set
forth in the zoning ordinance and also subject to the special requirements set
out in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Special Requirements: Manufactured home subdivisions shall be subject
to the following special requirements:
      1.   Development as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area
for the planned development of two (2) acres.
      2.   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided.
      3.   The site shall be suitable for residential development and not be
subject to hazards such as insect or rodent infestation, objectionable smoke,
noxious odors, unusual noise, or the probability of flooding or erosion.
      4.   Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste
disposal.
      5.   Protection of existing ground cover.
      6.   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant area, and
existing natural or manmade barriers.
      7.   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for
the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
      8.   Creation of a homeowners' association to assure that all common
areas are adequately maintained. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-5: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 1 :
   A.   General: Manufactured home parks shall in general be treated the same
as any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth
in the zoning ordinance and also subject to the special requirements set out in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Special Requirements: Manufactured home parks shall be subject to the
following special requirements:
      1.   Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for
the planned development of two (2) acres.
      2.   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided.
      3.   The site shall be suitable for residential development and not be
subject to hazards such as insect or rodent infestation, objectionable smoke,
noxious odors, unusual noise, or the probability of flooding or erosion.
      4.   Adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste
disposal.
      5.   Protection of existing ground cover.
      6.   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas, and
existing natural or manmade barriers.
      7.   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for
the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 5, and section
   10-4A-2 of this code.
11-6-6: TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
   A.   General: Travel trailer parks shall in general be treated the same as
any residential subdivision, subject to any special requirements set forth in
the zoning ordinance and also subject to the special requirements set out in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Special Requirements: Travel trailer parks shall be subject to the
following special requirements:
      1.   Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for
planned development of one acre.
      2.   Essential community facilities and services for the type of
development under consideration is available, or provisions shall be made to
assure that these facilities will be provided.
      3.   Adequate provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste
disposal.
      4.   Protection of existing ground cover.
      5.   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living plant areas, and
existing natural or manmade barriers.
      6.   The width and construction of access streets shall be suitable for
the vehicular traffic requirements of the property served. No lot within the
development shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
      7.   Maximum density shall be no more than twelve (12) rental units per
lot. No travel trailer, motor home or camper shall be parked any closer than
twelve feet (12') to each other. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-7: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
Due to the impact that large scale development would have on public utilities
and services, the developer shall submit the following information along with
the preliminary plat:
   A.   Identification of all public services that would be provided to the
development that will occur as a result of the subdivision (regarding: fire
protection, police protection, central water, central sewer, road construction,
recreation, maintenance, schools and other).
   B.   Estimate the public service costs to provide adequate service to the
development.
   C.   Estimate the tax revenue that will be generated from the development.
(Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-8: CEMETERY SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Function: The developer shall provide the commission with written
documentation that will sufficiently explain if the proposed cemetery will be
used for either human or animal remains and the functions that are anticipated
on the property.
   B.   Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written
statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the
compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural management requirements
that are outlined in Idaho Code title 27. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-9: SUBDIVISION WITHIN FLOODPLAIN:
   A.   Flood Areas:
      1.   For any proposed subdivision that is located within or partially
within a floodplain, the developer shall provide the city council with a
development plan of adequate scale and supporting documentation that will show
and explain at least the following:
         a.   Location of planned improvements.
         b.   The location of the floodway and the floodway fringe per
engineering practices as specified by the federal emergency management agency
(FEMA).
         c.   The location of the present water channel.
         d.   Any planned rerouting of waterways.
         e.   All major drainageways.
         f.   Areas of frequent flooding.
         g.   Means of floodproofing buildings.
         h.   Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures within the floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood; and, for new
construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to or above the level of
the 100-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall be floodproofed up to the level of the 100-year flood.
   B.   Justification For Development:
      1.   Upon the determination that buildings are planned within the
floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated within the
floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the developer shall
demonstrate conclusively to the council that such development will not present
a hazard to life, limb or property; will not have adverse effects on the
safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel or the natural
environment.
      2.   No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills,
structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually
or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages. If any
part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the council shall limit
development to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent
with that determination.
      3.   Subdivisions shall be reviewed to assure that:
         a.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
         b.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages.
         c.   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and require on site
waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or
contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-6-10: SUBDIVISION WITHIN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
   A.   General: Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as an area of
critical concern by the city council or by the state. Special consideration
shall be given to any proposed development within an area of critical concern
to assure that the development is necessary and desirable and in the public
interest in view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous or unique areas
that may be designated as areas of critical concern are as follows:
      1.   Sanitary landfills, dumps.
      2.   Earthquake locations.
      3.   Unstable soils.
      4.   Scenic areas.
      5.   Historical significance and national parks.
      6.   Floodplain.
      7.   Other areas of critical concern.
   B.   Plan Submission: The developer shall prepare and submit an
environmental assessment along with the preliminary plat application for any
development that is proposed within an area of critical concern.
   C.   Content Of Environmental Assessment: The content of the environmental
assessment shall usually be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of
professionals that shall provide answers to the following questions:
      1.   What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a
result of the proposed development?
      2.   What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur
so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
      3.   What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
      4.   What beneficial or detrimental effect would the development have on
the environment such as social concerns, economic, cultural resources, noise,
visual, hazardous waste, and others? (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
CHAPTER 7
VACATIONS, DEDICATIONS AND VARIANCES
SECTION:
11-7-1: Vacations And Dedications
11-7-2: Variances
11-7-1: VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Application: Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing
subdivision, public right of way or easement, or desiring to dedicate a street
right of way or easement shall complete and file an application with the city
council and also file such other applications as are otherwise required by law.
These provisions shall not apply to the widening of any street, which is shown
in the comprehensive plan, or the dedication of streets, rights of way, or
easements to be shown on the recorded plat of a subdivision.
   B.   Commission Recommendation: The commission shall review the request and
all agency responses and make a recommendation to the council for approval,
conditional approval or denial.
   C.   Council Action:
      1.   When considering an application for vacation procedures, the council
shall establish a date for a public hearing and give such public notice as
required by law. The council may approve, deny, or modify the application.
Whenever public rights of way or lands are vacated, the council shall provide
adjacent property owners with a quit claim deed for said vacated rights of way
in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
      2.   When considering an application for dedication procedures, the
council may approve, deny, or modify the application. When a dedication is
approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed or a bond
furnished assuring the construction, prior to acceptance of the dedication. To
complete the acceptance of any dedication of land, the owner shall furnish to
the council a deed describing and conveying such lands to be recorded with the
county recorder. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-7-2: VARIANCES:
   A.   Recommendations; Hardship Determination:
      1.   The commission may recommend to the city council a variance from the
provisions of this title on a finding that undue hardship may result from
strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of this title or
that application of such provisions or requirements is impractical.
      2.   Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be
shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result
in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography or
other physical conditions which are not self-inflicted, or that these
conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this
title, the council may declare that variance, modification or a waiver of these
requirements be granted.
      3.   The council shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary
to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the council
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity.
      4.   No variance shall be recommended unless the council finds, after a
public hearing:
         a.   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property that the strict application of the provisions of this title would
clearly be impracticable, or unreasonable; in such cases, the subdivider shall
first state his reasons in writing to the specific provisions or requirements
involved.
         b.   The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said
property is situated.
         c.   Such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code.
         d.   Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of this title and the comprehensive land use plan.
   B.   Planned Unit Development Variance:
      1.   The developer may request a variance from specified portions of this
title in the case of a planned unit development. Upon considering the request
for variance, the commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed
use of the land and existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons
to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity, adequate open
space, light, air and other needs.
      2.   The commission's findings and report to the council shall include
whether:
         a.   The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable
community development and be in compliance with the comprehensive development
plan.
         b.   The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas.
         c.   The proposed project will be served with adequate public
facilities. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
CHAPTER 8
AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-8-1: Council Authority
11-8-2: Commission Public Hearing
11-8-3: Recommendation By Commission
11-8-4: Action By Council
11-8-5: Resubmission Of Application
11-8-1: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this title in the manner prescribed by Idaho Code
to better serve the city and outlying community. A proposed amendment,
supplement, or repeal may be originated by the council or by petition from the
public at large. In all cases, the proposal shall be reviewed by the council
before any action is taken on the issue. Adequate public notice shall be given
to obtain comments from the public, either for or against, prior to any action
taken. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-8-2: COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on
proposed amendments.
   B.   The commission, prior to recommending a subdivision ordinance amendment
to the city council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing, notice of time and place and the amendment shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-8-3: RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION:
Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the
commission shall transmit its recommendation to the council. The commission may
recommend that the amendment be granted, or it may recommend a modification to
the amendment, or it may recommend that the amendment be denied. The commission
shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for amendment are in accordance
with the comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives. (Ord. 981, 7-
5-1995)
11-8-4: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
   A.   Consideration Of Commission Recommendation: The city council shall
accept the recommendation of the commission's report unless rejected by a vote
of one-half (1/2) plus one member. If the council makes a material change from
what was recommended by the commission, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the council adopts the amendment. The hearing shall be as
prescribed in subsection
11-8-2B of this chapter.
   B.   Council Specifications: Upon granting or denying an application to
amend this title, the council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial.
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   C.   Approval Of Amendment: In the event the council shall approve the
amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made a part of this title upon
the preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
11-8-5: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for amendment which has been denied by the council shall be
resubmitted in either substantially the same form or with reference to
substantially the same premises for the same purposes within a period of six
(6) months from the date of such final action, unless there is an amendment in
the comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions as applying
to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 981, 7-5-1995)
