CITY CODE
OF
HARRISON, IDAHO
Code current through:
Ord. 489, passed 1-11-2024
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Harrison, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 489, passed January 1, 2024. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
CITY OF HARRISON ORDINANCE NO. 495
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HARRISON, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE OF
IDAHO, REPEALING ORDINANCE 464, CODIFIED AS MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 7-2-14(F)
SEWER SYSTEM “SPECIAL REGULATIONS”, PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CONFLICTING
ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR A SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY CLAUSE, AND PROVIDING FOR
AN EFFECTIVE DATE UPON PASSAGE AND PUBLICATION.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
HARRISON AS FOLLOWS:
WHEREAS, the City of Harrison provides sewer service to properties within the
City through a sewerage system maintained by the City; and
WHEREAS, Idaho Code § 10-1030 only allows the City to collect rates, tolls and
charges for sewer services it provides through its sewer works; and
WHEREAS, Harrison City Code 7-2-3 requires owners to repair the portion of
sewer facilities outside the stub sewer at the owner’s expense; and
WHEREAS, the City enacted Ordinance No. 464 adding Section 7-2-14(F) providing
for the City to pay for private septic tank pump outs; and
WHEREAS, such practices resulted in the expenditure of public funds for the
direct benefit of private property owners, which exceeded the City’s
responsibility under the statute;
WHEREAS, the City Council desires to conform with Idaho Code regarding the
proper division of responsibility between the City and private property owners
with respect to sewer facilities, to ensure transparency, fiscal
responsibility, and consistency in the delivery of sewer services;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
HARRISON AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: Ordinance 464, codified as Municipal Code Section 7-2-14(F), is
hereby repealed.
SECTION 2: Repeal of Conflicting Provisions: All ordinances or parts of
ordinances of the City of Harrison which conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
   SECTION 3: Severability: This ordinance is hereby declared to be severable.
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force
and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance
before the declaration of partial invalidity.
   SECTION 4: Effective Date: This ordinance shall be effective upon passage
and publication as provided by law.
 
   PASSED by the City Council under suspension of the rules upon a roll call
vote of 4 ayes, 1 nays and APPROVED by the Mayor on the 14th day of October,
2025.
 
 
 
ATTEST:                            By: _____________________________
By: _____________________________
MIRIAH PFEIFFER                    WANDA IRISH,
CITY CLERK                         MAYOR
 
First Reading: 10/14/25
 
 
Publish: 10/15/25
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
HARRISON CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Adoption Of City Code
1-1-2: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1-1-3: Applicability Of Existing Ordinances
1-1-4: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1-1-1: ADOPTION OF CITY CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-903 through 50-906, there is
adopted the Harrison city code, which shall be known as the HARRISON CITY CODE,
and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as "this code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Harrison city code and
such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or
subsection as it appears in the code.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the city codified pursuant to the provisions
of Idaho Code 50-903 through 50-906. (1983 Code §§ 1.01.005, 1.01.050,
1.01.060)
1-1-2: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner effect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (1983 Code §
1.01.080)
1-1-3: APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances: The legislation in this code, so far
as the provisions are substantially the same as those of previously existing
ordinances, must be construed as continuations thereof, and not as new
enactments; any ordinances previously adopted in conflict with the ordinances
set out herein are repealed, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-503.
(1983 Code § 1.01.010)
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of ordinances as provided in
subsection A of this section shall not affect any right which has accrued, any
duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced
under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed, nor the tenure of office of any
person holding office at the time when they take effect; nor shall the repeal
of any ordinance thereby have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore
repealed or superseded. (1983 Code § 1.01.020)
   C.   Publication Of Ordinances:
      1.   All the ordinances of the city of a general and permanent character
shall be revised and codified in binder form. Such changes, alterations,
modifications, additions and substitutions shall be made therein to the end
that a complete simplified code of the general and permanent ordinances of the
city, in force at the time such codification is completed, be presented with
errors, inconsistencies, repetitions and ambiguities eliminated. (1983 Code §
1.01.030)
      2.   Such ordinances, when codified and passed by the city council and
approved by the mayor, shall be in full force and effect and no further
publication of any ordinances contained in such revision will be necessary to
make the same effective. (1983 Code § 1.01.040)
   D.   Reference To Specific Ordinances: The provisions of this code shall not
in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise
connected with ordinances which are herein specifically designated by number or
otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be
construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(1983 Code §
   E.   Repeal Of Existing Ordinances: So far as the provisions of this code
are the same in effect as those of previously existing ordinances, they shall
be construed as continuations thereof; but subject to the above limitation and
the provisions of the next section, all ordinances and resolutions of the city,
heretofore in force (except such as are of a private, local or temporary
nature, including franchises, street vacations, grants, dedications, budget or
appropriation ordinances, and specific levies for local assessments), are
repealed. (1983 Code § 1.01.100)
1-1-4: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner
effect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of
any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances; nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty or
the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu required to be posted, filed or
deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder
appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (1983 Code § 1.01.010)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-2-1: Interpretations
1-2-2: Definitions
1-2-3: Catchlines
1-2-1: INTERPRETATIONS:
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved
usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed
and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (1983 Code §
1.04.030)
The provisions of this code and of all proceedings under them are to be
construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (1983
Code § 1.04.080)
   A.   Grammatical Rules: The following grammatical rules shall apply in this
code unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:
      1.   Gender: Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
      2.   Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
      3.   Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the
future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
      4.   May/Shall: May is permissive; shall is mandatory. (1983 Code §§
1.04.010, 1.04.040)
   B.   Title Of Office: Use of the title of any officer, employee, department,
board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or
commission of the city. (1983 Code § 1.04.020)
   C.   Acts By Agent: When an act is required by any provision of this code,
the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the
principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts
performed by an authorized agent. (1983 Code § 1.04.050)
   D.   Computation Of Time: Except when otherwise provided, the time within
which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a
holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (1983 Code § 1.04.070)
   E.   Prohibited Acts: Whenever in this code any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (1983 Code §
1.04.060)
1-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code, shall be construed
as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is
intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more
particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
CITY: The city of Harrison, Idaho, or the area within the territorial limits of
the city of Harrison, Idaho, and such territory outside the city over which the
city of Harrison has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or
statutory provision.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city. The phrase "all its members" or
"all council members" means the total number of council members holding office.
COUNTY: The county of Kootenai.
LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state
of Idaho, the ordinances of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules
and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
MONTH: The calendar month.
OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part
of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: The next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places,
squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
WRITTEN: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise
reproduced in permanent visible form.
YEAR: The calendar year. (1983 Code § 1.04.010; amd. Ord. 347, 1-9-1998)
1-2-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Penalty
1-3-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanors:
      1.   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of any provision of this code or other
ordinance of the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Except in cases where a
different punishment is prescribed, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under
the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 347, 1-9-1998)
      2.   Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code, or
ordinances of the city, is committed, continued or permitted by any such
person, and he is punishable accordingly. (1983 Code § 1.20.010)
   B.   Infractions: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no incarceration may be
imposed 1 . (2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 18-113A.
CHAPTER 4
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-4-1: Mayor
1-4-2: Council President
1-4-3: Presiding Officer
1-4-4: Regular Meetings
1-4-5: Special Meetings
1-4-6: Passage Of Ordinances
1-4-7: Rules Of Procedure
1-4-8: Annual Budget
1-4-1: MAYOR:
The mayor shall have general supervisory control over the affairs of the city.
In addition:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the mayor to preside at all meetings of the
city council, and he shall have a casting vote therein when the city council is
equally divided. He shall have a supervisory control over all other officers
and city employees, and shall, with prior input from the personnel committee,
evaluate their performance periodically. He shall have power to veto or sign
any ordinance passed by the city council. He shall from time to time
communicate to the city council such information or recommend such measures as,
in his opinion, may improve, ornament or promote the general prosperity of the
city.
   B.   It shall be the further duty of the mayor to prepare an estimate by
July 1 of each year of the anticipated revenues and expenditures for the
upcoming fiscal year for consideration by the administrative committee. (Ord.
348, 1-9-1998)
1-4-2: COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
   A.   Election: The president of the city council shall be elected by the
members of the city council at the first meeting after such election at which
members of the city council are elected. (1983 Code § 2.04.040)
   B.   Powers And Duties: The president of the city council shall have the
powers and perform the duties of the mayor in case of his absence or
disability, and in case of vacancy in the office of mayor, until such vacancy
is filled. (1983 Code § 2.08.030)
1-4-3: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council but he shall have
no vote unless the city council is otherwise equally divided, in which event he
shall cast the deciding vote. In the event of absence of the mayor, the
president of the city council shall be the presiding officer and in the event
of the absence of both the mayor and the president of the city council, the
city council shall appoint one of their members as the temporary presiding
officer. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
1-4-4: REGULAR MEETINGS:
   A.   Time And Place: The official meeting night of the city council is
established as the first Tuesday of each month through the calendar year. (1983
Code § 2.04.010)
   B.   Quorum: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the city
council, and the city council shall be empowered to act if a quorum is present.
(1983 Code § 2.04.050)
   C.   Order Of Business: When the city council shall have convened, the roll
call shall be called and all absentees noted in the minutes of the city
council, and the regular order of business shall be as follows:
      1.   Roll call;
      2.   Consideration of motion to approve consent calendar;
      3.   Consideration of items removed from the consent calendar by
objection;
      4.   Presentations by guest speakers;
      5.   Report of officers;
      6.   Report of committees;
      7.   Presentation of petitions, remonstrances, communications, bills and
matters of like kind;
      8.   Unfinished business;
      9.   New business; and
      10.   Adjournment. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
1-4-5: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings of the city council may be called by the chair, or by any
three (3) council members, by notice in writing from the city clerk served upon
the other members of the city council. (1983 Code § 2.04.020)
1-4-6: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES:
   A.   Presentation: All proposed ordinances of the city shall be typewritten
or printed, and presented to the city council by a member at any regular or
special meeting.
   B.   Readings: Every proposed ordinance shall be read in meetings of the
city council on three (3) different days. At each reading of an ordinance it
shall be open to discussion and amendment and may be referred to a committee
and shall be passed to the next reading unless by vote at the meeting some
other disposition is made. On final passage, the yeas and nays shall be called
and recorded and a concurrence of a majority of the city council members
present and voting shall be required for passage; provided, however, that one-
half (1/2) plus one of the full city council may dispense with the portions of
this subsection requiring all ordinances to be read on three (3) different
days, and on the vote upon the motion to dispense with the above provisions,
the yeas and nays shall be called and recorded. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998; amd. 2004
Code)
   C.   Passage And Approval By Mayor: When any proposed ordinance is passed,
it shall be signed by the city clerk, and the date of its passage by the city
council shall be added thereto, and within three (3) days it shall be presented
to the mayor, or, in the case of his absence from the city, to the president of
the city council for his approval. If the proper officer approves the same, he
shall attach his signature thereto. Should the mayor refuse or neglect to sign
such ordinance and return the same with his objection in writing at the next
regular meeting after the same has been presented to him, it shall become a law
without his signature. The city clerk shall annex to such ordinance a
certificate to the effect that the mayor has failed to sign or veto the same,
and it has therefore become a law without his signature. (1983 Code § 2.04.090)
   D.   Veto By Mayor; Reconsideration: Should the mayor not approve the
ordinance, he shall, before the next regular meeting after such ordinance is
presented to him for his approval, return the same to the city council with his
objections to the same in writing. When any ordinance is so returned by the
mayor, it shall be reconsidered by the city council at the first regular
meeting thereafter. If, on such reconsideration, one-half (1/2) plus one of the
full members elected to the city council shall vote in the affirmative, the
ordinance shall become a law notwithstanding the mayor's veto 1 . In such case,
the city clerk shall annex a certificate to the ordinance stating that the same
was vetoed by the mayor and that, on its reconsideration, it received the
required majority of votes. (1983 Code § 2.04.100; amd. 2004 Code)
   E.   Recording Ordinances: It shall be the duty of the city clerk to safely
keep the original ordinances, and after final passage he shall copy the same at
length in a book to be known as the "Ordinance Book of the City of Harrison No.
    ", which book is to be provided by the city council for that purpose and
shall be kept as a permanent record of the city. (1983 Code § 2.04.110)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-611.
1-4-7: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preserve Order: The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum,
and may speak to points of order in preference to other members; and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to the city council, on which
appeal no member shall speak more than once without permission of the city
council. (1983 Code § 2.04.120)
   B.   Motion Under Debate: When a motion is under debate, no motion shall be
received except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone to a certain day,
to refer, to amend or to postpone indefinitely; which several motions shall
have precedence in the order in which they are stated. (1983 Code § 2.04.130)
   C.   Motion For Adjournment: A motion for adjournment shall always be in
order, except when once put and voted down, the same shall not again be in
order until some other business shall have been taken up, and the motion shall
always be decided without debate. (1983 Code § 2.04.140)
   D.   Voting: Every member who shall be present when the question is put
shall vote for or against the same, unless the city council shall excuse him;
but no member shall be permitted to vote on a question when the ayes and nays
are called for unless present when his name is called in regular order; except
that after having once voted, the member may change his vote if he so desires
at any time before the vote is announced by the presiding officer. (1983 Code §
2.04.150)
   E.   Consideration Of Motions: No motion shall be considered unless the same
shall be recorded. When a motion is recorded, it shall be stated by the
presiding officer before debate. It shall be reduced to writing if desired by
any member of the city council; but the mover may withdraw it at any time
before a decision or amendment is made to it. (1983 Code § 2.04.160)
   F.   Roll Call Vote: Upon a division of the city council, the names of those
voting for and those who voted against a question shall be entered upon the
journal, when requested by the mayor or any member of the city council, and in
such case, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to enter on the journal the
names of the members so voting. (1983 Code § 2.04.170)
   G.   Majority Vote Determines Question: All questions, unless otherwise
fixed by this chapter, shall be determined by majority vote. (1983 Code §
2.04.180)
   H.   Suspension Of Rules: No standing rule or order of the city council
shall be suspended except by vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present;
nor shall the order of business established by the rules of the city council be
postponed or changed except by vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members;
and the ayes and nays of all present shall be recorded on any proposition to
suspend a rule. (1983 Code § 2.04.190; amd. 2004 Code)
   I.   Vote Of Presiding Officer: A member of the city council acting as
presiding officer may vote on all questions presented to the city council.
(1983 Code § 2.04.200)
   J.   Alteration Or Amendment. These rules and order of business may be
altered, amended or repealed only by one-half (1/2) plus one vote of the whole
city council, and any member desiring to have the rules so altered, amended or
repealed, must give notice in writing at a previous meeting. (1983 Code §
2.04.210; amd. 2004 Code)
   K.   Time Limit For Adding Business To Agenda: Any matters to be brought to
the attention of the city council, and upon which the city council will be
requested to consider or make a decision, or both, must be submitted, in
writing, to the city clerk not later than twenty four (24) hours prior to the
commencement of the meeting at which such matters are to be considered or
decided. Any matters not presented to the city clerk and placed upon the agenda
in accordance with this section shall not be taken up, or acted upon, by the
city council. (1983 Code § 2.04.220)
   L.   Consent Calendar:
      1.   When the mayor determines that any item of business requires action
by the city council, but is of a routine and noncontroversial nature, he may
cause such item to be presented at a regular meeting of the city council as a
part of a consent calendar.
      2.   The consent calendar shall be introduced by a motion "to approve the
consent calendar", and shall be considered by the city council as a single
item.
      3.   There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the city
council regarding any item on the consent calendar, beyond asking questions for
simple clarification.
      4.   On objection by any member of the city council or public to
inclusion of any item on the consent calendar, that item shall be removed from
the consent calendar forthwith. Such objection may be recorded at any time
prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent calendar.
All such items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they
were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent calendar.
      5.   Approval of the motion to approve the consent calendar shall be
fully equivalent to approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution
or other item of business thereon, as if each had been acted upon individually.
      6.   The city clerk shall record in the city council minutes each item
passed under the consent calendar individually and in full or, if possible,
separately. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
1-4-8: ANNUAL BUDGET:
   A.   The city council shall, prior to passing the annual appropriation
ordinance, prepare a budget, estimating the probable amount of money necessary
for all purposes for which an appropriation is to be made, including interest
and principal due on the bonded debt and sinking fund, itemizing and
classifying the proposed expenditures by department, fund or service, as nearly
as may be practicable, and specifying any fund balances accumulated under Idaho
Code 50-1005A.
   B.   To support such proposed expenditures, the city council shall prepare
an estimate of the total revenue anticipated during the ensuing fiscal year for
which a budget is being prepared, classifying such receipts by source as nearly
as may be possible and practicable, said estimate to include any surplus not
subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-1004 and 50-1005A, nor shall said
estimated revenue include funds accumulated under Idaho Code 50-236.
   C.   The proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall list expenditures
and revenues during each of the two (2) previous fiscal years by fund and/or
department.
   D.   Following tentative approval of the revenues and expenditures estimated
by the city council, the same shall be entered at length in the journal of
proceedings.
   E.   Prior to certifying to the county commissioners, a notice of time and
place of public hearing on the budget, which notice shall include the proposed
expenditures and revenues by fund and/or department including the two (2)
previous fiscal years, and a statement of the estimated revenue from property
taxes and the total amount from sources other than property taxes of the city
for the ensuing fiscal year, shall be published twice at least seven (7) days
apart in the official newspaper of the city. At said hearing any interested
person may appear and show cause why such proposed budget should or should not
be adopted. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Officers Designated
1-5-2: Salaries
1-5-3: Provisions Relating To Officers
1-5-4: City Clerk
1-5-5: City Treasurer
1-5-6: City Attorney
1-5-7: City Supervisor
1-5-1: OFFICERS DESIGNATED:
The elected officials of the city shall be the:
   Mayor
   Six (6) council members
   President of the city council
The officers of the city shall be the:
   City clerk
   City treasurer
   City attorney
   City supervisor
(Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
1-5-2: SALARIES:
The following elected officers, appointed officers and employees of the city
shall receive the following compensation:
   A.   The salaries of the mayor and council members shall be set by the city
council by ordinance passed and published at least seventy five (75) days
before any general city election. Such ordinance shall take effect on January
1, following said election and continuing until changed pursuant to this
section.
      1.   Mayor: The mayor shall receive the sum of six thousand dollars
($6,000.00) per year payable in equal monthly installments. The salary is to be
paid from the general fund and charged to each fund in accordance with the
annual budget set by the city council.
      2.   Council Members: Each member of the city council shall receive the
sum of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per year, payable in equal quarterly
installments from the general fund and charged to each fund in accordance with
the annual budget set by the city council. (Ord. 462, 7-7-2015)
1-5-3: PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS:
   A.   Official Bonds: The city clerk and city treasurer are required to be
bonded, with good and sufficient sureties thereon to be purchased and approved
by the city council, running to the city and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his trust as such city clerk or city treasurer and for the
faithful accounting and safekeeping of the monies belonging to the city. The
bond shall be in such penal sum as the city council shall from time to time
determine by resolution, which penal sum shall be not less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) at any one time, and shall be at all times sufficient to
save the city from any loss. The bond shall be obtained immediately after his
appointment and before entering upon the duties of his office, and his
bondability shall be one of the requisite conditions of his qualifications.
B.   Appointment: The mayor, with the consent of the council shall appoint a
city clerk, a city treasurer, a city attorney, a city supervisor, and such
other officers as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the
city.
   C.   Discharge Or Resignation: Appointive officers of the city are at will
and subject to removal without cause and without notice or hearing. The mayor
may remove any appointive officer for any cause deemed sufficient by the mayor
by and with the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of
the full council. Provided however, the city council, by the unanimous vote of
all its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointive officer.
   No resignation of a city officer shall take effect until the same has been
transmitted, in writing, to the city council and the resignation has been
accepted by a majority of the city council. Provided, however, that if the city
council, upon reasonable evidence, finds that an officer has wilfully and
intentionally abandoned his office with the intent not to return, or has become
incapacitated and unable to carry out the duties of his office and such
incapacity appears likely to continue for an indeterminate period of time, the
city council may, upon a majority vote, determine that such office is vacant
and instruct the mayor to submit a new appointment for the city council's
approval. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998; amd. Ord. 446, 2-7-2012; Ord. 2019-480, 12-3-
2019)
1-5-4: CITY CLERK:
   A.   General Duties:
      1.   The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council and
keep a correct journal of its proceedings and shall also keep a book or record
of all ordinances of the city in which all of the ordinances adopted by the
city council and approved by the mayor, or which may be adopted without his
approval, together with the proof of their publication, shall be recorded in
regular order. He shall keep an index of such book of ordinances and journal of
proceedings.
      2.   He shall have the custody of all the records of the city council,
and of the corporate seal; he shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds
against the city, showing the number, amount and date of each, to whom issued
and when paid or canceled. He shall keep a complete set of double entry books
and enter therein everything appertaining to the finances of the city,
including the amount distributed and expended for each particular item or
appropriation, according to estimation of the administrative committee, and
shall furnish an income and expense report to the city council each month,
reporting at the same time the balance remaining in each fund.
      3.   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance
or fixed by the laws of the state of Idaho.
   B.   Water And Sewer Department Duties:
      1.   The city clerk shall be the clerk of the water and sewer department
and shall do all the clerical work necessary for conducting the business of
said department including the sending out of the water, sewer and garbage
service bills for service fees due from the consumers to the city, and all such
service fees due from the consumers to the city shall be due and payable to the
city. Upon the request of any person paying any money into the treasury, he
shall give a receipt therefor, showing the date of the payment and on what
account paid. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
      2.   In the event of the failure of a water or sewer consumer of the city
to make payments at the time and in the manner prescribed by the ordinances of
the city, it shall be the duty of the city clerk, as clerk of the water and
sewer department, to enforce the same by directing and ordering the water and
sewer turned off on delinquent users, and also to issue necessary orders for
the turning on of water and sewer of delinquent users when the users have
complied with the rules and regulations of the department and have paid the
delinquent bills as prescribed in the ordinances of the city. (1983 Code §
2.08.060)
1-5-5: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Records And Reports: The city treasurer shall be the custodian of all
monies that belong to the city; he shall keep a separate accounting of each
fund or appropriation and debits and credits belonging thereto. He shall give
to every person paying any money into the treasury a receipt therefor, showing
the date of the payment, and on what account paid; he shall at the end of each
month, and as often as may be required, render to the city council, under oath,
an account showing the state of the treasury at the date of such account, and
the balance on hand, accompanying such report with copies of all warrants
redeemed during said month. A failure on the part of the city treasurer for the
space of ten (10) days after demand, or from the end of each month, to render
such account, shall be cause for the city council to declare his office vacant,
and they may fill such vacancy by appointment. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
   B.   Deposit Of City Monies: The city treasurer may be required to keep all
money in his hands belonging to the city at such place or places of deposit as
may be approved by ordinance; provided, however, that such place of deposit
must either be in some regularly organized and Federally insured bank or in the
State investment pool administered by the Treasurer of the State of Idaho.
(Ord. 343, 3-1-1997)
1-5-6: CITY ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the City Council. The City
Attorney shall commence, prosecute and defend all suits and actions necessary
to be commenced, prosecuted or defended on behalf of the City, or that may be
ordered by the City Council. The City Attorney shall attend all regular
meetings of the City Council as requested by the Mayor and/or City Council and
provide legal advice on any matter submitted either orally or in writing. The
City Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance.
(Ord. 465, 12-1-2015)
1-5-7: CITY SUPERVISOR:
Subject to the order of the Mayor, the City Supervisor shall have supervisory
control over the City water and sewer systems, all City property including the
parks and cemetery, all street improvements and sidewalks. It shall be his duty
to see that all defects in the streets and sidewalks are repaired immediately
on notice of the same; provided, however, that this shall not authorize him to
construct, alter or modify said systems or property, or to construct new walks
or grade new streets, except by order of the City Council. (Ord. 348, 1-9-1998)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENTS
(Reserved)
CHAPTER 7
COMMITTEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment Of Committees
1-7-2: Administrative Committee
1-7-3: Public Works Committee
1-7-4: Economic Development Committee
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of the mayor, upon the organization of the council on the
first Tuesday of January following its election, to appoint the following
committees of the council, consisting of three (3) council members, and an
alternate, each as follows:
   A.   Public works committee.
   B.   Administrative committee.
   C.   Economic development committee. (Ord. 454, 8-5-2014)
1-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the administrative committee to audit, review
and recommend for approval all claims presented to the city council for
allowance; to check and audit all accounts and reports of the several officers
of the city; to work with the mayor each fiscal year to prepare a preliminary
budget and present to the city council for their approval, the upcoming city
budget; to keep advised of the amount of money in the hands of the city
treasurer in the several funds; to advise the city council in case the money
from any fund shall be exhausted before the allowance of any claim upon such
fund, and to provide assistance to the mayor in matters concerning the general
supervision over the financial affairs of the city.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the administrative committee to study and
review the current administrative ordinances, policies and procedures of the
city and to make recommendations to the mayor and the city council as to
changes or revisions needed.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the administrative committee to review staffing
needs of the city, job descriptions, salary ranges and employee benefits, and
to make recommendations to the mayor and the city council as to changes or
revisions needed.
   D.   To undertake any study, task or duty requested by the mayor. (Ord. 454,
8-5-2014)
1-7-3: PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the public works committee to provide
assistance to the mayor in matters concerning the city cemetery, the city parks
and city campground, the city waterfront, the city water and wastewater
systems, the city streets, and other public works owned and maintained by the
city, and to make recommendations to the mayor and city council when
maintenance and repair are required.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the public works committee:
      1.   To review the condition of the buildings and equipment and to make
recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding possible repair,
replacement or corrective action as needed.
      2.   To report to the mayor and the city council on the condition of the
streets, alleys and sidewalks of the city, or lighting of the streets, and to
make recommendations pertaining to needed repairs, including oiling, grading,
paving, and plowing, expansions and vacations.
   C.   To undertake any study, task or duty requested by the mayor. (Ord. 454,
8-5-2014)
1-7-4: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE:
It shall be the duty of the economic development committee to see to matters
related to economic development for the benefit of the city, including
neighborhood development, improvement, stabilization, and urban affairs and to
make recommendations to the mayor and the city council regarding these matters.
The economic development committee shall undertake any study, task or duty
requested by the mayor concerning community and economic development, business
recruitment and retention, workforce development, cultural activities and the
arts, and long range planning. The economic development committee will research
available grants and funding sources for economic development, act as a liaison
to the Harrison chamber of commerce, or to a private economic group or council
formed for economic development, and will report and make recommendations to
the mayor and the city council. (Ord. 454, 8-5-2014)
CHAPTER 8
CORPORATE BOUNDARIES AND IMPACT AREAS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Corporate Boundaries
1-8-2: Area Of City Impact
1-8-1: CORPORATE BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Legal Description: The boundaries and corporate limits of the city,
including all annexed territory, whether heretofore annexed or annexed
hereafter, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk at the city
hall, and shall constitute the official boundaries and corporate limits of the
city. (1983 Code § 1.12.010)
   B.   Territory Subject To Municipal Jurisdiction: All of the territory
bounded and described and included within the legal description of the city
kept on file at the office of the city clerk is declared and ordained to be
within the corporate limits of the city, and to be constituted the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of the city. (1983 Code § 1.12.020)
   C.   Jurisdiction Over Waters Of Lake Coeur d'Alene:
      1.   The city limits shall extend along its western boundary, where that
boundary runs to the shoreline of Lake Coeur d'Alene according to the recorded
plat thereof in the Kootenai County recorder's office, over the waters of Lake
Coeur d'Alene for a distance of one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320'), measured from the low water mark of said lake 1 , including an area
of submerged lands and related waters of Lake Coeur d'Alene consisting of 7.35
acres lying within the boundary of the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation, to be
known as the "area of tribal consent", and which is specifically described as
follows:
      The following described area, located within the Coeur d'Alene Indian
Reservation, including Government Lot 1 in Section 2, Township 47 North, Range
4 West, B.M., and including area below the high water mark of Coeur d'Alene
Lake, more specifically described as follows:
      Commencing at the point of the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation boundary
on the east bank of the mouth of the Coeur d'Alene River, the POINT OF
BEGINNING, thence, Southerly, along the boundary of the Reservation, a distance
of 800 feet, thence, NORTH 45°00'00" West to a point that lies on the boundary
of the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation, 800 feet westerly of the point of
beginning, thence, Easterly along the Reservation boundary, a distance of 800
feet to a point on the east bank of the mouth of the Coeur d'Alene River, the
POINT OF BEGINNING,
      Encompassing 7.35 acres, more or less, within the Coeur d'Alene
Reservation, in Kootenai County, Idaho,
   and excepting therefrom all other submerged lands and related waters lying
within the boundary of the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation, all as depicted on
that certain map dated June 15, 2010, attached to the ordinance codified herein
as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference as part of this subsection.
      2.   All of the area encompassed within the area described in subsection
C1 of this section shall be subject to all of the rules, regulations,
ordinances and other laws in effect or hereafter enacted by the city council,
excepting therefrom the area of tribal consent. The area of tribal consent and
all tribal submerged lands and related waters of the lake lying within the
boundary of the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation shall remain subject to the
tribe's jurisdictional control and shall not be subject to any of the rules,
regulations, ordinances and other laws in effect or hereafter enacted by the
city council. The city shall not take any action to authorize any development,
occupation or use of the tribal submerged lands and related waters within the
reservation, including within the area of tribal consent.
      3.   The city agrees that should its corporate or municipal boundaries
outside of the area of tribal consent become contiguous, as defined by Idaho
law, to the lands of the Powderhorn Peninsula annexed by Harrison ordinance
2010-437, or if the application for annexation by Powderhorn Ranch, LLC, dated
May 11, 2009, is withdrawn by Powderhorn Ranch, LLC, or such application is not
finally approved by the city within two (2) years of the effective date of the
"government to government agreement between the Coeur d'Alene Tribe Of Indians
and the city of Harrison, Idaho" approved by the city on August 17, 2010, the
city shall act immediately to withdraw the extension of its boundary over the
area of tribal consent.
      4.   The city agrees that it shall not take action in the future to
include within its corporate or municipal boundaries any tribal submerged lands
or related waters within the current boundaries of the Coeur d'Alene Indian
Reservation without the prior written consent of the Coeur d'Alene tribal
council. (Ord. 438, 9-21-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-221.
1-8-2: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
   A.   Legislative Purpose: The purpose for establishing an area of city
impact is to identify a logical urban fringe area adjoining the city. The urban
fringe area is realizing, or will realize, growth and development pressures
that must be planned and managed in an orderly fashion. The area of city impact
recognizes trade area, geographic factors and the potential delivery of public
services as being associated with the city and comprised of areas that may
reasonably be annexed to the city in the near and distant future.
   B.   Geographic Area Of City Impact: The officially adopted and agreed upon
"area of city impact for Harrison, Idaho" is established by ordinance 330 and
by Kootenai County, Idaho, and is set forth therein on the map entitled "Area
Of City Impact For Harrison, Idaho" dated December 15, 1994, and the
description of such boundaries are on file in the office of the city clerk.
   C.   Applicable Documents:
      1.   Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments
thereto, as officially adopted by Kootenai County, shall apply to the area of
city impact within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County. If in conflict,
the city shall amend its comprehensive plan to be consistent with the Kootenai
County comprehensive plan.
      2.   Subdivision Ordinance: The subdivision ordinance and subsequent
amendments thereto, as officially adopted by Kootenai County, shall apply to
the area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County. The
subdivision ordinance of the county shall also prevail over any city ordinances
pertaining to the division of original parcels of record, plat amendments, lot
line adjustments, minor subdivisions, short plats or administrative lot splits.
      3.   Zoning Ordinance: The zoning ordinance, zoning map and subsequent
amendments thereto, as officially adopted by Kootenai County, shall apply to
the area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Kootenai County.
   D.   Review: The county acknowledges that the city is currently working on a
subdivision and zoning ordinance and may wish to reopen this agreement upon
completion of those ordinances to review whether they should be applied within
the area of impact.
   E.   Administration And Enforcement:
      1.   The county shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the plan and ordinances listed in subsection C of this section,
and shall receive all permit fees for inspection performed to recapture direct
costs of inspections, administration, legal publications and other costs
arising from the process.
      2.   Amendments to the county's comprehensive plan, requests for
preliminary and final plats or the vacation thereof, requests for zone changes
or any other type of development applications, with the exception of building
permits or development applications for agricultural purposes, involving
property located in the area of city impact within the unincorporated area of
Kootenai County being proposed, shall be reviewed by the city council upon
recommendation of the city planning and zoning commission in accordance with
Idaho Code titles 67 and 50, who will give a recommendation to the county for
approval, disapproval or the placement of certain conditions.
   The county shall notify the city within twenty (20) days of receiving an
application for development of any type within the area of city impact. Copies
of such application shall be forwarded to the city with notification. The city
shall return a recommendation within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
application but at least fifteen (15) days prior to any public hearing set for
the matter. The city agrees to return a response even if they have no comment
on the application to acknowledge receipt of the application. If no
acknowledgment is received within the time period, the county agrees to confirm
that notice was received by the city. (Ord. 330, 12-15-1994)
      3.   The city reserves the right to renegotiate the area of impact
boundaries in the future. Upon a request for annexation, the city agrees to
notify the county and allow the county thirty (30) days to comment on such
request. The county agrees to return a response even if they have no comment on
the application. If no acknowledgment is received within the time period, the
city agrees to confirm that notice was received by the county. (Ord. 436, 4-28-
2010)
      4.   Maintenance of public streets located in the area of city impact
shall be the exclusive responsibility of the Eastside highway district unless
otherwise stipulated by written agreement between the highway district and the
city.
      5.   Law enforcement and fire services in the area of city impact shall
remain the responsibility of Kootenai County, the Eastside fire protection
district and the St. Maries rural fire district unless otherwise stipulated by
written agreement between the county and/or fire district and the city.
      6.   The city shall appoint a member on its planning and zoning
commission to represent the area of city impact. This representative shall
reside within the area of city impact and shall be reappointed upon any vacancy
by citizens also residing within the area of city impact.
   F.   Renegotiation: The area of city impact agreement shall be reviewed by
the city and Kootenai County at least once every five (5) years and shall be
renegotiated at any time upon the request of either party. Renegotiation shall
begin thirty (30) days after written request by either the city or county and
shall follow procedures for the original negotiation, as set forth in Idaho
Code 67-6526. (Ord. 330, 12-15-1994)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Corporate Seal
1-9-2: Public Hearings
1-9-3: Polling Hours For City Elections
1-9-4: Official Newspaper
1-9-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The following described seal is hereby adopted as the official seal of the
city. The corporate seal shall be circular in form with inner and outer
circles. The outer circle shall be one and nine-sixteenths inches (19/16") in
diameter, measured from the outside of the circle; and the inner circle one
inch (1") in diameter, measured from the outside of the circle. It shall bear
upon the space between the two (2) circles the words "City of Harrison,
Kootenai County, Idaho", and upon the space within the inner circle the words,
"Corporate Seal". (1983 Code §§ 1.16.010, 1.16.020)
1-9-2: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Purpose And Application: It is the policy and intent of the city to
adopt standard procedures for conducting all hearings which may hereafter be
required under the provisions of Idaho Code title 67 or this code, so as to
ensure that all applicants and other interested persons are provided with
proper notice of such hearings, and an opportunity to be heard before an
impartial fact finding body. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
hearings conducted before the planning and zoning commission, and to all
hearings before the city council arising under title 9, "Zoning", of this code,
and to such other hearings before the city council arising under other titles
of this code, which the city council may hereafter, by separate ordinance, make
the provisions of this section applicable by reference.
   B.   Open Meeting Law Applicable: All hearings under this code shall be open
to the public, and the provisions of the Idaho open meetings law 1  shall be
applicable thereto.
   C.   Notice Of Hearings: Unless otherwise provided by Idaho law, written
notice of all hearings shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date scheduled for the public hearing by posting said notice on the
bulletin board on the front of the city hall and at least one other location
within the city which is frequented by the public, and by publishing the notice
of hearing in the city's official newspaper, or a paper of general circulation
within the city. The notice of hearing shall contain, at a minimum, the date,
time, location and brief summary of the subject matter of the hearing.
Additional notice of hearing on certain types of applications shall be provided
as follows:
      1.   In the case of applications for a special use permit, a conditional
use permit, a variance or a zoning district boundary change, additional notice
of the hearing shall be provided by mail to property owners or purchasers of
record within the land being considered, and within three hundred feet (300')
of the external boundaries of the land being considered, and any additional
area that may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the planning
and zoning commission, or by the city council. Notice shall also be posted in
at least one conspicuous place on the land covered by the application at least
one week prior to the hearing.
      2.   The member of the planning and zoning commission or the city
official posting said notice shall file a certification of the date, time and
location where the notice was posted.
   D.   Records Transcribed:
      1.   Required: A transcribable verbatim record of all hearings shall be
made of all hearings, and the same shall be kept for a period of not less than
six (6) months after a final decision on the subject matter of the hearing. Any
method of recording the hearing that will ensure the availability of a
transcribable verbatim record is acceptable, and may include videotaping of the
hearing.
      2.   Expense: Upon written request within the time period provided for
the retention of the record of any hearing, any person may have the record
transcribed at his expense. The secretary of the planning and zoning
commission, or the city clerk, as the case may be, may require the person
requesting the transcript to pay the estimated costs of transcribing the record
in advance.
   E.   Minutes:
      1.   Required: In addition to making appropriate provisions for the
recording of hearings, the secretary of the planning and zoning commission
shall take, and permanently keep, written minutes of all hearings before the
commission, and the city clerk shall take, and permanently keep, written
minutes of all hearings before the city council.
      2.   Contents: The written minutes of all hearings shall include, at a
minimum, the following information:
         a.   All members of the commission or city council, as the case may
be, present;
         b.   All motions, resolutions or recommendations proposed and their
disposition; and
         c.   The results of all votes, and upon request, the vote of each
member or council member by name.
   F.   Conduct Of Hearings:
      1.   Presiding Officer: The chair of the planning and zoning commission
shall preside over all hearings before the planning and zoning commission; and
the mayor shall preside over all hearings before the city council. The
presiding officer may prescribe such rules of procedure and conduct, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section or other applicable law, as he
may deem appropriate and expedient for the conduct of each hearing.
      2.   Sequence Of Events: The order of business in all hearings under this
section shall be as follows:
         a.   Explanation of the hearing procedure and ground rules by the
presiding officer;
         b.   Presentation by the applicant;
         c.   Written correspondence or testimony;
         d.   Testimony by persons supporting the application;
         e.   Testimony by persons uncommitted on the application;
         f.   Testimony by persons opposing the application;
         g.   Rebuttal by applicant;
         h.   Closing of the hearing and initiation of deliberations;
         i.   Development of findings of fact and conclusions of law.
   G.   Written Findings Required: Within twenty (20) days after the conclusion
of a hearing, the planning and zoning commission or the city council, as the
case may be, shall adopt written findings of fact and conclusions of law
pertaining to the subject matter of the hearing, which shall include a summary
of the testimony and other evidence presented at the hearing. (Ord. 327, 3-1-
1994)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 67-2340 – 67-2347.
1-9-3: POLLING HOURS FOR CITY ELECTIONS:
The polls for all general and special city elections shall be open from eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. Pacific time and remain open until eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. Pacific time. (Ord. 392, 10-7-2003)
1-9-4: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The "St. Maries Gazette Record", which is the nearest Idaho newspaper of
general circulation to the city of Harrison, and which has also been determined
to be the newspaper of general circulation with the highest number of city
subscribers, and which historically has been used by the city of Harrison as
the official newspaper for all legal notices and publications, is hereby
confirmed, ratified and established as the official newspaper of the city of
Harrison. (Ord. 428, 12-16-2008)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL TAXES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Definitions
1-10-2: Imposition And Rate Of Certain Non-Property Taxes
1-10-3: Duration Of Taxes
1-10-4: Purposes For Which The Revenues Derived From Said Non-Property Taxes
Shall Be Used
1-10-5: Creation of a Property Tax Relief Fund
1-10-6: Authorization For The Treasurer To Administer, Regulate And Collect
Said Non-Property Taxes
1-10-7: Permits Required And Issuance Of Permits
1-10-8: Method For Payment Of Taxes
1-10-9: Audits; Deficiency Determinations
1-10-10: Re-Determination Of Deficiency
1-10-11: Appeals, Interest On Deficiency
1-10-12: Collection And Enforcement
1-10-13: Refunds, Limitations, And Interest
1-10-14: Responsibility For Payment Of Taxes
1-10-15: Period Of Limitation Upon Assessment And Collection
1-10-16: Successors’ Liability
1-10-17: General Administration
1-10-18: Penalties
1-10-19: Penalty Charges
1-10-20: Exemptions
1-10-21: Confidentiality Of Information
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
ALL OTHER TAXABLE RETAIL SALES: A sale for any purpose other than resale in the
regular course of business where the sale, which includes the lease of rental
of tangible personal property, is taxable under Idaho Code Section 63-3612, and
includes the following exception: sales or admission fees for any event
provided that the organization conducting the sale or function is exempted by
Section 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
IN THE CITY OF HARRISON: Within the municipal boundaries of the City of
Harrison, Kootenai County, Idaho.
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK: The retail sale of alcohol for consumption on licensed
and/or catered premises. Includes, without limitation:
   Alcohol: The product of the distillation of any fermented liquor is
rectified either once or more often, whatever may be the origin or synthetic
ethyl alcohol.
   Spirits: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation mixed
with drinkable water and other substances in solution, including, among other
things, brandy, rum, gin, and whiskey.
   Wine: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
sugar content of fruits (grapes, apples, etc.) or other agricultural products
containing sugar (honey, milk, etc.).
   Beer: Any alcoholic beverage obtained from the fermentation of sugar,
barley, hops, malt, yeast, and similar ingredients.
Any liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, or wine and
susceptible to being consumed by a human being, for beverage purposes.
   Exempt Sales: The retail sale of alcohol at special events and activities
sponsored by the community or not-for-profit organizations obtaining an Idaho
State Permit, whose proceeds are used for the benefit of the community, shall
be considered exempt sales, and will not be subject to the Harrison Local
Option Tax.
LODGING OCCUPANCY CHARGE: The total Sales Price for the-rental use or temporary
occupancy of a Lodging Rental.
LODGING RENTAL: Any business including hotels, motels, hotel rooms, motel
rooms, condominiums, homes, rooms, campgrounds, or any other residential unit
or business that rents or leases for occupancy temporary lodging, sleeping
accommodations, or recreation vehicle spaces to individuals with or without
meals, for a period of thirty (30) days or less.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association,
temporary vendor, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
PREPARED MEALS: The term means any food or meals prepared and sold by
restaurants, cafes, and bars operating within the City. Prepared meals also
include food and meals prepared by catering services or assembled, within the
City of Harrison. Prepared meals do not include pre-packaged or bulk foods or
meals, not intended to be consumed on-premise, which are sold incidental to
grocery, deli, or gasoline sales.
TAXPAYER: Any person subject to or liable for any taxes imposed by this
chapter. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-2: IMPOSITION AND RATE OF CERTAIN NON-PROPERTY TAXES:
   A.   The City of Harrison, hereby imposes and shall collect certain local-
option non-property taxes, as follows:
      1.   An additional one percent (1%) sales tax on the Lodging Occupancy
Charge from all Lodging Rentals; and
      2.   An additional one percent (1 %) sales tax upon liquor by the drink
and prepared meals; and
      3.   An additional one percent (1%) sales tax on all other taxable retail
sales, except for groceries.
   B.   The retailer shall calculate the tax upon the entire amount of
purchases of the consumer made at a particular time subject to this chapter,
and not separately upon each item purchased.
   C.   All monies collected and/or retained under the provisions of this
chapter shall be held in trust for the City of Harrison and for payment thereof
to the City Clerk in the manner and at the times provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-3: DURATION OF TAXES:
The non-property taxes authorized and collected under this chapter are hereby
imposed for a duration of ten (10) years from the effective date of this
chapter. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-4: PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE REVENUES DERIVED FROM SAID NON- PROPERTY TAXES
SHALL BE USED:
The local-option non-property tax revenue derived from and collected under this
chapter shall be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Streets, sidewalks, boardwalks, parking; and
   B.   Public safety services including EMS helipad; and
   C.   Public parks, waterfront improvements, recreational services; and
   D.   City Infrastructure and capital projects; and
   E.   Any excess revenues received will be placed in a designated property
tax relief fund; and
   F.   The city will retain the cost of collecting and administering the tax.
(Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-5: CREATION OF A PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FUND:
Pursuant to Idaho Code § 50-1045, there is hereby created a fund to be
designated as the "Municipal Property Tax Relief Fund." Any revenues collected
under this chapter in excess of the amount budgeted by the City Council for the
use of said revenues shall be placed into the Municipal Property Tax Relief
Fund. Such excess revenues shall be used to replace City property taxes in the
ensuing fiscal year by the amount of all excess revenues placed in said
Municipal Property Tax Relief Fund. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-6: AUTHORIZATION FOR THE TREASURER TO ADMINISTER, REGULATE AND COLLECT
SAID NON-PROPERTY TAXES:
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to administer, regulate
and collect payment of all non-property taxes adopted and imposed by this
chapter. The City Treasurer shall have all of the powers set forth in this
chapter together with those additional powers necessary and proper to carry out
the provisions of this chapter. The City of Harrison shall have the right to
review and audit the records of collection thereof and returns of taxpayers
relating to this tax. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-7: PERMITS REQUIRED AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
   A.   Every person desiring to engage in or conduct the business of a Lodging
Rental; to sell liquor by the drink or prepared meals, or to sell any other
taxable retail product, except for groceries, within this City shall file with
the City Clerk an application for a City of Harrison local-option non-property
tax permit for each place of business. A separate permit is required for each
place of business within the City. Every application for said permit shall be
made upon a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall set forth the name
under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the
location of the business or places of businesses, and such other information as
the City Clerk may require. The application shall be signed by the owner, if
they are a natural person; or in the case of an association or partnership, by
a member or partner, in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or
other person authorized by the corporation to sign the application.
   B.   Upon filing an application that meets the requirements set out above,
the City Clerk shall issue to each applicant a permit for each place of
business. A permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the
person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the
place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at
the location for which it was issued. Issuance of a permit may be subject to
additional requirements as set forth in this chapter.
   C.   On the face of the permit shall be fixed a municipal non-property tax
number which shall be used by the applicant as an identifying number on all
filing, payment, and correspondence with regard to the non-property tax imposed
under this chapter.
   D.   Any violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to section
1-10-18. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-8: METHOD FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
   A.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed and paid for each
calendar month unless said person has been permitted in writing by the Idaho
State Tax Commission to file quarterly sales or use tax returns. Said taxes are
due and payable to the City Treasurer on or before the 20th day of the
succeeding month. The amount of tax paid shall be computed on all sales subject
to taxation under this chapter. Each person required to hold a City of Harrison
local-option non-property tax permit and number shall file a City of Harrison
local option non-property tax return and a copy of their Idaho State Sales Tax
Return for the month at the same time said taxes are paid to the City Treasurer
unless said person has been permitted in writing by the Idaho State Tax
Commission to file quarterly sales or use tax returns. Persons who have been
permitted to file other than monthly returns shall notify the City Treasurer in
writing and the City Treasurer may require reporting State Tax Returns over
some other period.
   B.   The first payment of taxes under this chapter shall be due and payable
together on the 20th day of February, 2024, for that period beginning January
1, 2024, and ending December 31, 2033. Thereafter all payments shall be made
monthly, or quarterly.
   C.   A City of Harrison local-option non-property tax return shall be filed
each and every month, or quarter if authorized by the Idaho State Tax
Commission and the City of Harrison, by every person engaging in sales subject
to taxation under this chapter regardless of whether or not any tax is due.
Returns shall be signed by the person required to file the return or by a duly
authorized agent.
   D.   A valid sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Idaho State Tax
Commission upon filing a copy thereof with the City Clerk shall have the same
effect to exempt the sale from the taxes imposed hereunder as in the Idaho
Sales Tax Act. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-9: AUDITS; DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   The City Treasurer may order an audit of any taxpayer under this
chapter for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness or completeness of any
return or payment.
   B.   If any error or omission is discovered in such audits or in any other
way, the City Treasurer may compute and determine the amount of tax due upon
the basis of facts obtained from such information within its possession and
assert a deficiency. One or more deficiency determinations may be made for the
amount due for one or for more than one period. In making such a determination,
the City Treasurer may offset overpayments against amounts due. Further, said
determinations shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the
person fails to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is
in the City's possession.
   C.   The City Treasurer shall give written notice of its determination and
the amount of its deficiency, including interest, at the rate of twelve percent
(12%) per annum from the date due to the person from whom such deficiency
amount is due. Such notice may be given personally or mailed to the person at
the address furnished in the non-property tax permit application. (Ord. 489, 1-
11-2024)
1-10-10: RE-DETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY:
   A.   Any person against whom a deficiency determination is made under this
chapter, or any person directly interested, may petition in writing for a re-
determination within thirty (30) days after service upon the person of notice
thereof. If the petition for re-determination is not filed within the thirty
(30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the
period.
   B.   If a petition for re-determination is filed within the thirty (30) day
period the City Council shall reconsider the determination and, if the person
so requests in the petition, grant the person an oral hearing and give said
person ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing personally or
by mail addressed to the person at the address furnished to the City Clerk in
said person's application for a local option non-property tax permit. (Ord.
489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-11: APPEALS, INTEREST ON DEFICIENCY:
   A.   When a re-determination is made, the City Treasurer shall give notice
to the taxpayer against whom the re-determination is made. Within thirty (30)
days of the date upon which such notice of re-determination is mailed or
served, the taxpayer may file an appeal with the City Council or may file a
complaint with the District Court for review of the City's re-determination. An
appeal from the re-determination shall be made in accordance with the laws of
the state of Idaho with regard to claims against municipalities.
   B.   There shall be no right of review to the City Council nor to the
District Court on the determination of taxes due made unless a re-determination
has been timely filed. No assessment of a deficiency in respect to the tax
imposed by this chapter or proceeding to collect for its collection shall be
made, begun, or prosecuted until such notice has been mailed to the taxpayer
and expiration of such thirty (30) day period after notice of re determination,
nor if a protest is filed until a decision on the protest becomes final. If the
taxpayer does not protest to the City Council or file an action in District
Court within the time prescribed in this section, the deficiency shall be
assessed and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand.
   C.   Interest upon any deficiency shall be assessed at the same time as the
deficiency and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand and shall be
collected as part of the tax at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum from
the date prescribed for payment of the tax. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-12: COLLECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
As soon as practical after the monthly local-option non-property tax return and
payment are filed, the City Treasurer shall examine the same and determine the
correct amount of the tax to be collected by the City of Harrison. For the
purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any payment determining the amount
of tax due where none has been made, determining the liability of any person
for any tax payable under this chapter, or the liability at law or in equity of
any person in respect to any tax provided by this chapter or collecting any
such liability, the City Treasurer or duly authorized agent, is authorized (1)
to examine the books, papers, records, or other data which may be relevant or
material to the inquiry; (2) to summons the person liable for the tax or any
officer, agent or employee of such person, or any person having possession,
custody or care of books of accounting containing entries relating to the
business of the person liable for the tax, to appear before the City Treasurer,
or authorized agent, at a time and place named in its summons to produce such
books, papers, records or other data and/or give such testimony under oath as
may be relevant or material to such inquiry. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-13: REFUNDS, LIMITATIONS. AND INTEREST:
   A.   If the City Treasurer determines that any amount due under this chapter
has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
computed, the City Treasurer shall set forth that fact in its records and the
excess amount paid or collected may be credited on any amount due or payable
for non-property taxes from that person, and any balance refunded to the person
by whom it was paid or to his successors, administrators or executors.
   B.   No such credit or refund shall be allowed or made after one (1) year
from the time the payment was made unless before the expiration of such period
a claim, therefore, is filed by the taxpayer.
   C.   Interest shall be allowed on the number of such credits or refunds at
the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum from the date that such tax was
paid.
   D.   Appeal from the decision denying in part or in whole a claim for refund
shall be made in accordance with the laws of the State of Idaho with regard to
claims against municipalities. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
Every person with a duty to account for or pay over any tax imposed by this
chapter on behalf of a corporation, as an official employee of the corporation,
or on behalf of a partnership, as a member employee of the partnership shall be
personally liable for payment of such tax, plus penalties and interest. (Ord.
489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-15: PERIOD OF LIMITATION UPON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The amount of taxes imposed under this chapter shall be assessed within
three (3) years of the time the return upon which the tax asserted to be due
was or should have been filed, whichever is later; provided, however, if a
deficiency determination or assessment has been made within the prescribed
time, such tax may be collected within a period of six (6) years after
assessment. The running of limitations provided by this section shall be
suspended for the period during which the City is prohibited from making the
assessment or from collecting or proceeding in Court due to a petition for re-
determination or an appeal therefrom, and for thirty (30) days hereafter.
   B.   In the case of taxes due during the lifetime of a decedent, the tax
shall be assessed, and any proceeding in court without assessment for the
collection of such tax shall be begun, within six (6) months after the written
request, therefore (filed after the return is made) by the executor,
administrator, or other fiduciary representing the estate of such decedent
unless the assessment is stayed by a petition for re-determination or any
appeal therefrom.
   C.   In the case of a false or fraudulent return with the intent to evade
tax, or of a failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding
in Court for collection of such tax may be begun without assessment, at any
time within three (3) years after the date of the discovery of the facts
constituting the fraud. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-16: SUCCESSORS' LIABILITY;
   A.   If a vendor liable for any amount of tax under this chapter sells out
his business or stocks and goods, the vendee shall make an inquiry to the City
Treasurer and withhold from the purchase price any amount of tax that may be
due under this chapter until such time as the vendor produces receipt stating
that no amount is due.
   B.   If the purchaser of business or stock of goods fails to withhold from
the purchase price as above required, they are personally liable for the
payment of the amount required to be withheld by them. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-17: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The City Treasurer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may
prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to its
administration and enforcement. The Treasurer may employ qualified auditors for
the examination of taxpayers' books and records, and shall also employ such
accountants, investigators, assistants, clerks, and other personnel as are
necessary for the efficient administration of this chapter, and may delegate
authority to its representatives to conduct hearings or perform other duties
imposed by this chapter.
   B.   Taxpayers in the City of Harrison shall keep such records, receipts,
invoices, and other pertinent papers as the City Treasurer may require. Each
such taxpayer who files tax payments required under this chapter shall keep all
such records for not less than four (4) years after making such payments unless
the City in writing authorizes their destruction.
   C.   The City Treasurer, or any person authorized in writing by the
Treasurer, may examine the books, papers, records, and equipment of any
taxpayer or any person liable for any tax, and may investigate the character of
the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made,
or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount
required to be paid. Any taxpayer whose pertinent records are kept outside of
the City must bring the records to the City Treasurer for examination upon
request, or by agreement with the City Treasurer, permit an auditor designated
by the City Treasurer to visit the place where the records are kept, and there
audit such records. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-18: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six (6) months in the county jail, and/or
a One Thousand Dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both. Furthermore, each month in
which a person fails to report, or intentionally fails to compute accurately,
or intentionally fails to disclose accurately the total amount of sales or
rentals or the amount of tax to be paid, as imposed under this chapter, shall
be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have his
City of Harrison local option non-property tax permit and tax number revoked.
The City Clerk shall send a written notice of revocation of said permit and tax
number to the permit holder by mailing the same by certified mail, to the
address given on the permit application. The permit holder shall have ten (10)
days from the date said notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal
with the City Council, challenging said revocation. If no appeal is timely made
said revocation becomes final. After the revocation of the local option non-
property tax becomes final, the City of Harrison shall have the right to revoke
any other permits issued by the City of Harrison to the person violating any
provision of this chapter. Whenever a person subject to this chapter has had
said permit and tax number revoked, the City Clerk shall not reissue said
permit nor issue a new permit to said person until said person places with the
City Clerk a bond or other sufficient security in the amount equal to three (3)
times the actual, determined, or estimated average monthly amount of tax
payable by such person pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   The City Clerk, whenever it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter, may require any person subject to this chapter to place with
it such security as it may determine. The amount of said security shall not be
greater than three (3) times the estimated average monthly amount payable by
such persons pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security may be
increased or decreased by the City Clerk at any time, subject to the
limitations set forth above.
   D.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have all
City of Harrison local option non-property tax permits revoked.
   E.   Any amount of tax due under this chapter for which a person fails to
report or accurately compute shall become a lien upon the property of said
taxpayer on the date that the same becomes due, and the City may seek to
enforce said lien and collect all taxes and interest due, together with the
reasonable costs of collection, including attorney's fees, in a Court of
competent jurisdiction.
   F.   For the purposes of proper administration of this chapter, and to
prevent evasion of said local-option non-property taxes, the burden of proving
that a rental is not a rental under this chapter is upon the person who owns
the property in question. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-19: PENALTY CHARGES:
   A.   Any person who is required to collect and pay over any tax imposed by
this chapter and fails or refuses to pay over to the City the same when due in
accordance with Section IX, hereinabove, shall be liable and pay a penalty
charge equal to five percent (5%) of the tax not paid, or a minimum of $10
(whichever is greater). The City Treasurer shall assess and collect said fee at
the time any delinquent tax payment is tendered. The permit holder shall have
ten (10) days from the date payment is made to file a written appeal with the
City Council challenging said penalty determination. If no appeal is timely
made as herein provided, said penalty determination shall be final.
   B.   Any person who is required to collect, truthfully account for, and pay
over any tax imposed by this chapter and who willfully fails to collect such a
tax or truthfully account for or pay over such a tax, or willfully attempts in
any manner to evade or defeat such a tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition
to other penalties provided by law, be liable to a penalty equal to the amount
of the tax evaded, or not collected, or not accounted for or paid over. The
City Treasurer shall determine and assess such penalties, and the same shall
become due and payable upon notice and demand. The City Treasurer shall send
written notice of such penalty charge to the permit holder by mailing the same
by certified mail to the address given on the permit application. The permit
holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said notice is mailed to file a
written request of appeal with the City Council challenging said penalty charge
determination. If no appeal is timely made as herein provided, said penalty
charge determination shall be final. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-20: EXEMPTIONS:
Only those transactions which are exempted from the taxes imposed by the State
of Idaho pursuant to the Sales Tax Act, as that Act may be amended, are also
exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 489, 1-11-2024)
1-10-21: CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION:
   A.   No Treasurer, agent or employee shall divulge or make known to any
persons, in any manner, any information whatsoever submitted or obtained,
directly or indirectly, pursuant to this chapter, or to permit any local option
non-property tax return or information supplied with regard thereto, or any
copy thereof, or any paper or book so obtained, to be seen or examined by any
person except as provided by law; provided that in any action or proceeding
brought for the collection, remission, cancellation, or refund of the whole or
any part of a tax imposed under this chapter, or for enforcing the penalties
prescribed for making false or fraudulent returns, any and all information
contained in or provided with said returns may be made accessible to the
elected and appointed officials, officers, and representatives of said City
charged with enforcing or defending the same, all such returns, information,
statements and correspondence relating thereto may be produced into evidence in
any action, civil or criminal, directly pertaining to such returns or the tax
imposed on the basis of such returns.
   B.   The Harrison City Council, under such rules and provisions as it may
prescribe, may permit, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter as to
confidentiality, the Internal Revenue of the United States or its delegate or
the proper officer of the Idaho State Tax Commission authorized to inspect the
local option non-property tax returns or information provided or obtained in
connection therewith, or may furnish to such officer, or his authorized agent,
copies or an abstract thereof.
   C.   Nothing in the Ordinance shall prohibit a taxpayer, or authorized
representative upon proper identification, from inspecting and copying his own
local option non-property tax returns and information supplied therewith. (Ord.
489, 1-11-2024)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Licenses Required
2-1-2: Application For License
2-1-3: Issuance; Payment Of Fees
2-1-4: Conditions Of License
2-1-5: Records Kept
2-1-6: Violation; Penalty
2-1-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person shall be engaged in, prosecute or carry on any trade, business or
profession within the corporate limits of the city for which a license may be
required by this title until he shall first have obtained a license therefor as
herein provided. (1983 Code § 5.04.010)
2-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Each license issued under the provisions of this title shall contain the name
and place of business of the applicant, the kind of business or occupation
authorized, the term for which the license is effective, and the amount paid
therefor, and shall authorize the continuance of the business named therein by
the licensee at the place named therein for the term of such license, but shall
not authorize, the conducting of such business at any other place, unless the
place named in the license shall first have been closed, and in such cases the
city clerk shall be notified of the change and shall note the same in his
register of licenses. (1983 Code § 5.04.030; amd. Ord. 350, 1-9-1998)
2-1-3: ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF FEES:
   A.   Procedures For Issuing Licenses: Every person required by any ordinance
or state law to obtain a license from the city to engage in any trade, business
or profession, shall pay to the city treasurer the sum or sums required by
ordinance to be paid therefor; the city treasurer shall issue to the applicant
his duplicate receipt for the sum so paid; such receipt and the stub therefor
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the kind of license sought, the time
for which it is to be issued, and the place where the business authorized
thereby is to be conducted; all of such receipts and stubs shall be numbered.
The applicant shall then present his original receipt to the city clerk who
shall take up the same and preserve it as his voucher and shall issue the
license in accordance with such receipt upon compliance by the applicant with
the provisions of all ordinances relating to obtaining licenses for the
business, trade or profession for which such license is required. (1983 Code §
5.04.020; amd. Ord. 350, 1-9-1998)
   B.   Payment Of Fee: All licenses required by this title shall be paid in
advance. Any license issued without payment in advance of the full sum for the
term for which it is to run, as required by this title, is void and will be no
defense to a prosecution for operation without a license. (1983 Code §
5.04.050)
2-1-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Nontransferable: No license shall be transferable.
   B.   Display: Any person engaged in any trade, business, occupation,
profession or employment for which a license is required shall, upon demand of
any officer of the city at his place of business, produce his license, and if
after reasonable opportunity he shall fail to do so, he shall be deemed to have
no license.
   C.   Compliance Required: All licenses shall be conditioned upon the
licensee conforming to all laws of the United States and of the state of Idaho
having reference to the business or occupation for which such license is
granted, and to all orders, resolutions, ordinances and regulations of the city
applicable to such trade, business, occupation, profession or employment.
   D.   Fee And Term: Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with the city's fee schedule, as
set by resolution, to the city treasurer, with collected revenue to be used for
improvements to the Harrison city parks, waterfront and grant matching funds.
The first or initial license fee shall be paid at the time the license is
issued. Thereafter the license fee shall be paid on or before January 10 of
each year.
   E.   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to
all wholesale and retail businesses and all activities, occupational callings,
trades, pursuits or professions that conduct business from any location within
the city of Harrison with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage.
   F.   Separate Licenses: A separate license must be obtained for each branch
establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for
each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall
authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed
thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided,
that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental
to a business or branch establishment licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch
establishments.
   G.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Rental property which is not a service property.
      2.   A personal garage or yard sale.
      3.   Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who
exclusively or primarily sell to or solicit orders for future delivery from
local retailers, local businesses, local governments, local schools or
wholesale firms (however, such businesses shall comply with the provisions of
the city's peddler ordinance when applicable).
      4.   The sale of farm or garden products, i.e., farmers' markets.
      5.   The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person
engaged in both the delivery and sales of a newspaper.
      6.   The occasional sale of admission by local students to a function of
their school, or fundraising at community events sponsored by local service
clubs or the local government.
      7.   Small children's refreshment stands. (Ord. 443, 7-5-2011)
2-1-5: RECORDS KEPT:
The city clerk shall keep a register of licenses issued in which shall be noted
the name of the person to whom the license is issued, the location of the place
of business of the applicant, the kind of business, trade or profession
licensed, the term for which the license is issued and the amount paid for the
license. (1983 Code § 5.04.070)
2-1-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, including a failure
to obtain the required license, or a failure to exhibit such license when
requested, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in
the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code, and shall be required to pay the costs of prosecution and
the fee charged by the city for the license which should have been procured.
(1983 Code § 5.04.080; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
2-2A-1: Definitions
2-2A-2: Licenses Required
2-2A-3: Qualifications And Application
2-2A-4: License Fees
2-2A-5: Hours Of Sale
2-2A-6: Revocation Of License
2-2A-7: Violation; Penalty
2-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall be given the
following interpretations. All other words and phrases used in this article,
the definition of which is not given, shall be given the ordinary and commonly
understood meaning:
APPLICANT: Every person, persons, partnership, corporation, organization or
association making application to the mayor and city council and/or to the
director of law enforcement for a license to sell liquor by the drink.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under the
state of Idaho and this article.
LICENSE: A license issued by the city to a qualified person under which it
shall be lawful for the licensee to sell and dispense liquor by the drink at
retail as provided by law.
LICENSEE: A person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of the law
and of this article.
PERSON: Every individual, partnership, corporation, organization or association
holding a state retail liquor license, whether conducting the business
singularly or collectively. (1983 Code § 5.08.010)
2-2A-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It will be lawful to sell within the city, liquor by the drink, as provided in
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9 providing a license shall first be obtained from
the city as provided in this article, and subject to the rules, regulations and
provisions concerning the licensing and operation of such establishments as
provided by this chapter and by Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9. (1983 Code §
5.08.020)
2-2A-3: QUALIFICATIONS AND APPLICATION:
   A.   License Application; Contents:
      1.   All applicants shall deposit with the city treasurer the amount of
the license fee for the time which such license is to run, and the city
treasurer shall issue his receipt therefor in duplicate; the applicant shall
file the receipt together with his application for such license with the city
clerk for appropriate action thereon by the city council. The application shall
state the name of the applicant, the location where the business is to be
operated, that a license has been issued by and a bond furnished to the state
of Idaho as required by Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, that he has all the
qualifications required by state law and none of the disqualifications, and
shall be signed and duly verified by the applicant or his duly authorized
agent. A copy of the state license issued shall be presented to the city clerk
together with the application. Upon thorough examination, the mayor and city
council shall determine whether all of the substantial facts set forth in such
application are true or false; and if any substantial allegations in such
application are found to be untrue or false then such application shall be
forthwith denied and rejected by the mayor and city council and the applicant
shall be notified of such denial and rejection.
      2.   In the event the mayor and city council find that all of the
allegations and facts set forth in such application are true, then the mayor
and city council shall determine whether such application will be denied and
rejected, approved conditionally or granted. If denied and rejected, then the
applicant shall be notified in writing by the city clerk of such denial and
rejection and the reason therefor; but if approved conditionally, then the
Mayor and City Council, through the City Clerk, shall immediately notify the
applicant in writing that the application of the applicant has been
conditionally approved and that if the applicant, within sixty (60) days,
obtains a license to sell liquor by the drink in the City from the Director of
Law Enforcement of the State of Idaho, and submits such license obtained from
the Director of Law Enforcement of the State, together with an authenticated
copy of the application for such license filed with the Director of Law
Enforcement of the State, to the Mayor and City Council, and the Mayor and City
Council, upon examination, are fully satisfied that the application of the
applicant filed with the Director of Law Enforcement of the State on which the
license issued by the Director of Law Enforcement of the State is based sets
forth substantially the same facts that were set forth by the applicant in the
application for a license filed with the Mayor and the City Council, and that
the applicant has furnished a bond or bonds to the Director of Law Enforcement
of the State as is provided for in said law, and that the applicant has fully
complied with all the provisions required by State law, then in that event if
applicant pays the license fee as provided for in this article, the City Clerk,
upon the authorization and direction of the Mayor and City Council, shall issue
a license to such applicant to sell liquor by the drink in the City. (1983 Code
§ 5.08.030)
   B.   Persons Ineligible For License: No license shall be granted to any
applicant who is disqualified under the laws of the State of Idaho and Kootenai
County to hold such a license, nor to any applicant whose water, sewer and
garbage account with the City is more than sixty (60) days past due. (Ord. 351,
6-2-1998)
2-2A-4: LICENSE FEES:
Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall pay an annual
license fee to the City Treasurer at the time of application in an amount set
by resolution of the City Council. The license fee shall be payable in advance,
and the first or initial license fee shall be paid at the time the license is
issued. Thereafter the license shall run concurrent with the license issued by
the State. (Ord. 470, 2-26-2018)
2-2A-5: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   Liquor:
      1.   Liquor by the drink to be consumed on the premises may be sold only
between ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M., prevailing local
time. It is unlawful for any person to sell liquor by the drink between the
hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., prevailing local
time.
      2.   In addition to the days on which liquor may be sold pursuant to
title 23, chapter 9 of the Idaho Code, liquor may be sold on Sunday, Memorial
Day and Thanksgiving, during the times stated in subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Liquor shall not be sold by the drink between two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. on Christmas Day (December 25) until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the
following day (December 26).
      4.   Liquor shall not be sold by the drink on any day of a general or
primary election until the polls are closed. (Ord. 400, 3-1-2005)
2-2A-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council, on its own motion, or upon the verified complaint of anyone
with knowledge of the facts, may institute a proceeding looking to the
suspension or revocation of any license issued under this article. Should it
appear to the City Council that there is probable cause for the revocation or
suspension of any license, the City Council shall order the licensee to appear
before it at a time and place named; such order and a copy of any complaint
which might have been filed against the licensee shall be served upon the
licensee at least five (5) days before the day on which he is ordered to so
appear. In case personal service of such order and notice cannot be had, the
same may be mailed to such licensee at his last known address. No further
pleading shall be necessary. Such hearing and investigation shall be informal
and the rules of evidence observed by courts shall not apply. If the City
Council finds that cause exists, it may order the revocation of such license or
may suspend the license for a period not exceeding six (6) months or may refuse
to renew the license. The licensee is entitled to appear by person or by
counsel, but his failure to appear shall in no way interfere with the right of
the City Council to proceed with the matter. (1983 Code § 5.08.150)
2-2A-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violations of any of the provisions of this article by any licensee, agent,
employee, servant or any other person acting on behalf of the licensee, shall
be deemed to be a violation of the license, and any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in the general penalty in
section
1-3-1 of this Code. (1983 Code § 5.08.160)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE B. BEER
SECTION:
2-2B-1: Definitions
2-2B-2: Licenses Required
2-2B-3: Qualifications And Application
2-2B-4: Issuance Of License
2-2B-5: Contents Of License
2-2B-6: License Fees
2-2B-7: Conditions Of License
2-2B-8: License Suspension And Revocation
2-2B-9: Violation; Penalty
2-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOTTLE BEER: Beer in the original bottle which is sold only in the original
container and not by the glass or broken package.
DRAUGHT BEER: Beer in kegs, barrels or other containers which is to be sold and
dispensed on draught by the glass or otherwise. (1983 Code § 5.12.010)
2-2B-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the sale of malt liquors, commonly known as beer,
permitted to be sold by the laws of the state of Idaho, within the limits of
the city without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this
article. (1983 Code § 5.12.020)
2-2B-3: QUALIFICATIONS AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Application For License: All applicants for license shall deposit with
the city treasurer the amount of the license fee for the time which such
license is to run, and the city treasurer shall issue his receipt therefor in
duplicate; the applicant shall file the receipt together with his application
for such license with the city clerk for appropriate action thereon by the city
council. The application shall state the name of the applicant; shall be signed
by the applicant or its duly authorized agent; shall state the place of
business where such beer is to be sold; shall be on a form furnished by the
city clerk which shall require such information as the mayor and the city
council may require; and shall be duly verified. (1983 Code § 5.12.040)
   B.   Persons Ineligible For License: No license shall be granted to any
applicant who is disqualified under the laws of the state of Idaho and Kootenai
County to hold such a license, nor to any applicant whose water, sewer and
garbage account with the city is more than sixty (60) days past due. (Ord. 351,
6-2-1998)
2-2B-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and city council for a
period of one year running concurrent with the license issued by the state. A
full year's license fee shall be collected at the time of application. The city
council shall grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time
it is filed with the city clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension the
licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to Idaho Code 23-1016. Whenever
the mayor and city council denies an application, they shall specify in
writing:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 396, 10-19-2004)
   B.   In all cases where the city council is considering applications for
licenses, transfers or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of the
proceeding shall be made. If the applicant for a license, transfer or renewal
is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall be kept
for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the
matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for retention
of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his expense. The
City Council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of the
proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by
law. (1983 Code § 5.12.044)
2-2B-5: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall state the place of business at which the
applicant will sell such liquors, the term for which it is granted, the amount
paid therefor, the time for which it is issued, and any other matter that may
be prescribed by the Mayor and City Council. Appropriate forms shall be
supplied by the City Clerk. (1983 Code § 5.12.050)
2-2B-6: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a beer license shall be set by resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. 470, 2-26-2018)
2-2B-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Transfer Of License: The licenses issued under this article shall be
nontransferable. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to create a vested
right in such license nor to permit any person to make an assignment, or to
secure a renewal or reissuance of any license, or the right to assign any
license, or the right to issue a power of attorney for a license. (1983 Code §
5.12.070)
   B.   License To Be Posted: All licenses shall be posted in conspicuous
places on the premises and shall be kept posted for the full period of time for
which the license is issued. (1983 Code § 5.12.100)
   C.   Hours Of Sale: Beer may be sold only between six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and two o'clock (2:00) A.M., prevailing local time. It is unlawful for any
person to sell beer between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., prevailing local time. (Ord. 400, 3-1-2005)
2-2B-8: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Suspension Or Revocation: Any license issued hereunder may be revoked
or suspended because of the failure of the licensee to observe the requirements
of this article, any ordinance of the City or any law of the State of Idaho or
of the United States, or for any misrepresentation in the application for a
license or a failure by the licensee to run and maintain a clean and orderly
establishment. Proof that any law has been violated on the premises on which
the sale of such beer is licensed shall be prima facie evidence that cause
exists for such revocation or suspension. The licensee shall be conclusively
presumed to be responsible for the acts of all servants and employees during
the hours of shifts when such servants or employees are actually employed on
the premises. (1983 Code § 5.12.080)
   B.   Procedures: Whenever any person has knowledge of facts which may or
might subject any license issued hereunder to revocation or suspension, he may
make complaint in writing and under oath setting forth such facts to the City
Council. Should it appear to the City Council that there is probable cause for
the revocation or suspension of such license, the City Council shall order the
licensee to appear before them at a time and place therein named, and such
order and a copy of the complaint shall be served upon the licensee at least
five (5) days before the day on which he is ordered to so appear. In case
personal service of such order and notice cannot be had, the same may be mailed
to such licensee at his last known address. No further pleading shall be
necessary. Such hearing and investigation shall be informal and the rules of
evidence observed by courts shall not apply. If, upon hearing, the City Council
finds that cause exists, it may order the revocation or suspension of such
license. The licensee is entitled to appear by person or by counsel, but his
failure to appear shall in no way interfere with the right of the City Council
to proceed with the matter. (1983 Code § 5.12.090)
2-2B-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as
set forth in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this Code, and his license shall be subject to revocation or
suspension by the City Council in accordance with section 2-2B-8 of this
article. (1983 Code § 5.12.120)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE C. WINE BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
2-2C-1: Licenses Required
2-2C-2: License Fees
2-2C-3: Conditions Of License
2-2C-4: Violation; Penalty
2-2C-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
From and after January 1, 1984, any person holding a valid and existing City
and State retail beer license may procure from the City a license for the
retail sale of wine, authorizing wine to be sold by the drink in such premises
during the same hours and under the same ordinances, rules and regulations as
govern the sale of beer in such premises 1 . (1983 Code § 5.16.010)
 
Notes
1 1. See article B of this chapter.
2-2C-2: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a wine by the drink license shall be set by resolution of
the City Council. (Ord. 470, 2-26-2018)
2-2C-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Term: The license shall run for a period of one year concurrent with
the license issued by the State. (Ord. 396, 10-19-2004)
   B.   Hours Of Sale: Wine sold at retail may be sold only between six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M., prevailing local time. It is unlawful
for any person to sell wine between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M., prevailing local time. (Ord. 400, 3-1-2005)
2-2C-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth in the
general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this Code. (1983 Code § 5.16.040)
CHAPTER 3
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Transportation And Sale Of Inflammables
2-3-1: TRANSPORTATION AND SALE OF INFLAMMABLES:
   A.   Sale And Delivery Requirements: The sale and delivery of gasoline,
diesel fuel and other petroleum products used or intended to be used as fuel
for motor vehicles or boats within the corporate limits of the city shall only
be made by or under the direct supervision and in the presence of the seller or
the officers, employees or agents of the seller. (1983 Code § 5.24.010)
   B.   Tank Capacity Restrictions: No gasoline tanker having a tank capacity
of greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons shall be used for the
delivery of gasoline within the city to be sold at retail outlets. (1983 Code §
5.24.020)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be punished as set forth in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code and, in addition, any tanker truck maintained in violation
of the provisions of this section, or any tanker truck operating in violation
hereof, shall be deemed a public nuisance. (1983 Code § 5.24.030)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Definitions
2-4-2: License Required
2-4-3: License Fees
2-4-4: License Conditions
2-4-5: Violation, License Seizure
2-4-6: Prohibited Acts
2-4-7: Right To Cancel Purchases
2-4-8: Penalty
2-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
PEDDLER: Any person, from any place, who travels by automobile, pickup truck,
truck, foot, wagon, horse, cart, pushcart or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house, from business to business, from street to
street, without invitation, carrying, conveying or transporting any
merchandise, wares, goods, products or provisions, including any food products,
offering and exposing them for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the
same from an automotive stall, railroad car, pickup bed, wagon or other vehicle
or conveyance. The word "peddler" shall include the words hawker, huckster, and
itinerant merchant.
SOLICITOR: Any person, from any place, who travels by automobile, pickup truck,
truck, foot, wagon, horse, cart, pushcart or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house, from business to business, from street to
street, taking or attempting to take orders, without invitation, for sale of
wares, merchandise or any personal property of any nature whatsoever, for
future delivery or for services, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sales or whether he is
collecting advance payment on such sales or not. (2004 Code)
2-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: No person shall engage in, prosecute or carry on any business
or vocation within the city for which a license is required by this chapter,
until such license has been obtained; provided, that the following are exempt
from payment of licenses:
      1.   Nonprofit organizations soliciting funds on their own behalf wholly
for charitable or nonprofit purposes.
      2.   Any for profit organization which is peddling or soliciting for
profit and sharing that profit with any nonprofit organization. Such
organization shall file an application for license, but shall not be subject to
the applicable fee.
   B.   Applications: Applications for licenses by solicitors and peddlers
shall be made to the city clerk, to his designate or to the chief of police,
and shall be sworn in writing and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name of applicant;
      2.   Permanent address of applicant;
      3.   Temporary address of applicant, if any;
      4.   A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted
and the goods to be sold, and if the goods are farm or orchard products, a
statement as to the point of origin for the product;
      5.   If the products are imported into the state from an area outside the
state, the person receiving the application may require a certificate that the
product is disease free, insect free, properly fumigated and will in no way
spread any disease, fungi, bacteria, insect or animal illnesses or diseases of
any kind;
      6.   A statement as to whether the applicant is self-employed or working
for an employer;
      7.   If the applicant is selling goods for another, a statement as to
whom the owner of the goods is;
      8.   A statement that in the event that the product causes any damage to
any resident of the city, the applicant acknowledges the jurisdiction of the
Idaho courts to resolve any disputes;
      9.   The length of time for which the license requested shall be needed;
   10.   A description of the vehicle to be used in the solicitation or
peddling, together with the license number thereof;
   11.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant or applicant's employer
has been convicted of any crime in violation of any consumer protection laws or
of any peddler or solicitor ordinances. (2004 Code)
2-4-3: LICENSE FEES:
A business license will be issued for a specified period and in accordance with
the fee schedule, as the same may be changed from time to time by the city
council. Payment for the licenses shall be made upon filing of the application
with the proper authority and shall be made in lawful currency of the United
States.
The city shall collect business license fees in the amounts set by resolution
of the city council. (Ord. 410, 7-11-2006)
2-4-4: LICENSE CONDITIONS:
   A.   License Nontransferable: No license issued or granted by the city shall
in any manner be assignable or transferable or authorize any person other than
the one therein named to do business or authorize any other business than is
therein mentioned to be done or authorize the transaction of such business at
any other place than is specified in the license.
   B.   City Liability Or Endorsement: By accepting a fee and issuing a
license, the city does not assume any liability for any actions or any conduct
engaged in by the licensee. The city, nor any of its employees, shall endorse
any products or services sold by any licensees, and the city, employees of the
city and any licensees shall not represent to any person that the city has any
interest in any business carried on by the licensee.
   C.   Bond: All applicants for licenses shall post with the city clerk at the
time of application, a general liability bond, a peddlers bond, a permit bond
or an itinerant peddler bond in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), to cover any and all damages which may be incurred by the city or
members of the public, but for the presence of the licensee. (2004 Code)
2-4-5: VIOLATION, LICENSE SEIZURE:
In the event that the licensee shall violate any of the terms or conditions of
the license, or in the event that any product offered by the licensee is a
stolen item, or in the event that the licensee violates any municipal ordinance
in reference to the business, the police shall be authorized to seize and
confiscate the license and hold the same pending a hearing before the city
council. No business shall be conducted without a license. (2004 Code)
2-4-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A licensee, or any person acting on behalf of a licensee, or any agent of a
licensee, shall not:
   A.   Shout, make an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device
or musical instrument, including any loud speaking radio or sound amplifying
system, on any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the
city, or on any private premises within the city, where sound of sufficient
volume is emitted or produced therefrom, to be capable of being plainly heard
on the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose
of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such licensee
proposes to sell.
   B.   Have any mechanical devices in human or animal form or otherwise
designed to create lights, sound or motion to attract passersby.
   C.   Have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, shall
not be permitted a stationary location and shall not be permitted to operate in
any congested area where licensee's operations might impede or inconvenience
the public. For purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the judgment of any
police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether or not an area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced
by the presence of the licensee.
   D.   Sell or offer for sale goods, wares, or merchandise from vehicles on
any of the public streets of the city. Licensees shall not be allowed to double
park or in any way impede the normal flow of traffic or create a hazard or a
nuisance upon any public roadway.
   E.   Be allowed to solicit or peddle from sundown to nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M., or at any time when a sign has been clearly posted on a fence, driveway,
front, back or side yard, or doorway which clearly informs a licensee that
there shall be no solicitors or no peddlers, either using those words or in
words to that effect. Provided, however, that a licensee may call upon the
occupant of a residence at other times when he has been given prior permission
from such occupant to do so.
   F.   Make any representation that he is soliciting or peddling for any
nonprofit organization or for charitable or religious purposes if he in any way
shall personally benefit by the funds or properties solicited.
   G.   Cast, throw, distribute, deposit, scatter, pass out, give away,
circulate or deliver any commercial or business handbills, dodgers, circulars
or other advertising materials or devices to any residents or businesses, or
leave the same upon any porch, doorstep, entryway, vestibule or in any yard or
public hallway, or in any vacant lot or upon other private property in the
city, without first having obtained the expressed consent of the owner or
lessee, or without the written or expressed request of any adult resident or
occupant thereof.
   H.   Make any false statement or claims as to the quality, value, origin,
condition, durability or purpose as to any product.
   I.   Make false representations as to any product which he is soliciting for
or peddling.
No licensee shall distribute, sell or hand out as a sample any consumable food
products which have not been properly approved by any state or federal agency
which has jurisdiction as to the quality or wholesomeness of any foodstuffs
designed for human consumption. (2004 Code)
2-4-7: RIGHT TO CANCEL PURCHASES:
Any person purchasing from any solicitor or peddler or salesperson pursuant to
any home solicitation shall have three (3) business days from the day of sale
to cancel any sale or any security or any contract created during the
consummation of the sale. Any licensee, salesperson, solicitor or peddler shall
have an affirmative duty to inform any purchaser of that person's right of
cancellation. In the event of cancellation, the purchaser must make the product
available to the seller at the purchaser's residence in as good a condition as
the product was when it was received for a period of twenty (20) days after the
notice of cancellation. If the salesperson does not retrieve the product within
twenty (20) days from the date of notice of cancellation, the purchaser may
retain or dispose of the products without any further obligation. If, however,
the purchaser fails to make the goods available to the seller during regular
business hours, or if the purchaser agrees to return the goods to the seller at
an agreed upon location and fails to do so, then the purchaser will remain
liable for performance of all of the obligations under the contract. To cancel
any transaction pursuant to this section, a purchaser must mail or deliver a
signed and dated copy of the cancellation to the seller at the seller's place
of business, not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of the third
business day following the consummation of the sale. Business days are defined
as Monday through Friday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. Notice of cancellation shall not be required to carry the specific words
"cancel" or "cancellation", but shall simply be worded in such a manner that
any reasonable person would be on notice that the transaction has been
absolutely and unequivocally cancelled. (2004 Code)
2-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person who shall do any act, or transact any business, exercise or engage
in or carry on, directly or indirectly as principal, agent or employee, within
the city limits, any trade, business, occupation, vocation or employment for
which a license is required to be paid, without first obtaining or procuring
said license or any bonds required, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, may be fined as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SHORT-TERM RENTAL AND VACATION RENTAL LICENSING
SECTION:
2-5-1: Purpose
2-5-2: Definitions
2-5-3: Authorized Agent Or Representative
2-5-4: Permit Required
2-5-5: Operational Requirements
2-5-6: Violations
2-5-7: Penalties
2-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the use of
residential dwellings as short-term rentals to protect the integrity and safety
of the city's residential neighborhoods, to safeguard the welfare of the city's
residents and occupants of short-term rentals, to establish a system to track
the short-term rental inventory in the city, to provide a means of contact for
the operator and occupant of a short-term rental, to establish a Good Neighbor
Policy for occupants of short-term rentals, and to allow private property
owners the right to fully and efficiently utilize their property without undue
regulation or interference. (Ord. 484, - -)
2-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICABLE LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS: Any laws, rules, regulations and codes
(whether local, state or federal) pertaining to the use and occupancy of a
privately owned dwelling unit as a short-term rental.
APPLICANT: The owner of a tourist home or the owner's authorized agent or
representative.
APPLICATION FEE: The fee set by city resolution due and payable at the time the
operator applies for a short-term rental operator permit(s).
GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY:A document prepared by the city that summarizes the
general rules of conduct, consideration, and standards of respect and are
required to be provided to occupants utilizing short-term rentals within the
city.
LOCAL CONTACT PERSON: The person designated by the owner, or the owner's
authorized agent or representative, who shall be available twenty-four (24)
hours per day, seven (7) days per week while the tourist home is rented.
OCCUPANT: The person or persons who contract with the operator for use of the
short-term rental.
OPERATOR: The owner or designated agent or representative of the owner who is
responsible for compliance with this chapter with respect to the tourist home.
OPERATOR PERMIT: A permit issued to the applicant of a short-term rental.
Multiple properties may be listed on one application, however, each individual
residential dwelling used as a short-term rental must be issued a separate
permit which is posted at the respective property.
OWNER:The person(s) or entity(ies) that hold(s) legal title to the subject
tourist home.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person(s) or entity(ies) that hold(s) legal title to
the subject tourist home.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: A residential dwelling which is rented for thirty (30) days
or fewer, and which is also referred to as a "tourist home" or "vacation home".
This term does not include a bed-and-breakfast facility, hotel or motel where
an owner or manager is on site. (Ord. 484, - -)
2-5-3: AUTHORIZED AGENT OR REPRESENTATIVE
   A.   An owner shall, or shall designate an agent or a representative to,
comply with the requirements of this chapter on behalf of the owner.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the owner shall not be
relieved from personal responsibility or personal liability for noncompliance
with any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy
of the subject short-term rental regardless of whether such noncompliance was
committed by the owner, operator, local contact person, responsible person, or
other occupants or their guests of the owner's tourist home. (Ord. 484, - -)
2-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   The operator of a tourist home is required to obtain a short-term
rental operator permit before renting any privately owned residential dwelling
to any person for a period less than a monthly basis.
      1.   A short-term rental permit is valid only for the residential
dwelling(s) identified in the application. An applicant shall obtain a separate
permit for each residential dwelling to be used as a short-term rental.
      2.   A short-term rental permit is non-transferable and is not a
grandfathered use.
   B.   A short-term rental operator permit shall be renewed on an annual
basis. All permits shall expire on January 30 and a new permit shall be
required to be purchased on or before January 31 in order for the continued
operation of a tourist home to remain valid.
   C.   Those tourist homes which are in operation at the time this chapter
goes into effect, shall be required to obtain a short-term rental operator
permit which will expire on the date above.
   D.   Prior to offering a short-term rental to the public, the owner of the
residential dwelling shall complete an application on a form provided by the
city. The application shall include:
      1.   Owner's name, telephone number, both physical and mailing addresses,
and email address.
      2.   The operator's information including, name, telephone number, both
physical and mailing addresses, and email address.
      3.   The Local Contact Person's information including name, address, and
twenty-four (24) hour telephone number.
      4.   The address of the short-term rental(s).
      5.   The signatures of the owner and operator agreeing and acknowledging
that they are responsible for the compliance by the occupant and any guests
with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the use and
occupancy of the short-term rental, and for any unreasonable noise,
disturbances or disorderly conduct by the occupant and/or guests.
      6.   The fee established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 484, -
-)
2-5-5: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A responsible Local Contact Person must be available twenty-four (24)
hours a day seven (7) days per week while the tourist home is rented for the
purpose of responding within sixty (60) minutes to complaints regarding the
condition of the short-term rental or the conduct of the occupant of the short-
term rental and/or their guests.
   B.   The Operator shall post on or near the front door of the short-term
rental a notice which includes the address of the rental, emergency contact
numbers, and a copy of the Good Neighbor Policy.
   C.   No sign indicating that the residence is a short-term rental or that it
is for rent of lease shall be displayed such that it is visible from any other
public or private property.
   D.   Trash and refuse shall not be left stored within public view except on
scheduled trash collection day.
   E.   No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, tent, or other temporary
shelter shall be used as a short-term rental or in conjunction therewith to
provide additional sleeping areas or otherwise.
   F.   Marketing for use as Weddings, Receptions, or Similar Private or Public
Events is not allowed. (Ord. 484, - -)
2-5-6: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner to offer for rent a short-term rental or
to operate a short-term rental without a city permit.
   B.   The tenants of the dwelling have created noise, disturbances, or
nuisances, in violation of this code, or violations of state law pertaining to
the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs, or have disrupted the
peaceful enjoyment
   of neighbors. Each incident shall be counted as a separate violation, even
within the same day.
   C.   It is a violation of this article if the owner, owner's representative,
or occupant knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this article.
(Ord. 484, - -)
2-5-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   The city shall provide the owner or owner's representative with written
notice of any violation of this article.
   B.   For a first offense, the violator shall be subject to a civil penalty
in an amount established by resolution of the City council.
   C.   For any subsequent offense, the violator shall be subject to a
misdemeanor, pursuant to section
1-3-1  of this code.
   D.   In addition to any other remedy or procedure authorized by law, for
three (3) or more violations of or failure to comply with any of the standards
of this article the City Council may revoke any or all of the owner's permits
and in, addition, may order that no new permit shall be issued for up to three
(3) years.
   E.   Prior to the revocation of any permit or the denial of a permit for
repeated violation of the provisions of this article, written notice of the
reasons for such action shall be served on the owner or owner's representative
by certified mail at the address(es) on the permit application. Revocation
shall become final within ten (10) days of service unless written request for a
hearing is received. by the city within twenty (20) days.
   F.   The hearing before the City Council shall be informal and strict rules
of evidence shall not apply. The owner or representative may be represented by
legal counsel, present oral and written evidence and cross examine witnesses.
   G.   The City Council shall issue a written decision within a reasonable
time after the close of the hearing.
   H.   If the owner or representative fails to appear at the hearing or fails
to request a hearing, it shall be conclusively established that this chapter
was violated and civil sanctions shall apply. (Ord. 484, - -)
TITLE 3
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Administration And Enforcement
3-1-3: Container Requirements
3-1-4: Collection Contracts
3-1-5: Collection Fees
3-1-6: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
3-1-7: Violation; Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including
vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding
recognizable industrial byproducts, and shall include all such substances from
public and private establishments and from all residences.
REFUSE: All solid wastes including garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible wastes. (1983 Code § 8.04.010)
3-1-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Sanitation Department Established: There is established a department of
sanitation in the city consisting of such department personnel who may be
appointed by the mayor and city council.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The sanitation department shall supervise its
operations and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall perform such
other and further duties as may be assigned to it by the mayor and city
council. (1983 Code § 8.04.020)
3-1-3: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General: No owner, tenant or lessee of any public or private premises
shall permit to accumulate upon his premises any garbage or refuse except in
covered containers approved by the city council. Such containers shall be
constructed of metal or plastic in such a manner as to be strong, with a
capacity of not more than thirty two (32) gallons and shall have tight covers,
which shall be in place at all times except when garbage or refuse is being
deposited therein or removed therefrom. In the event that garbage and one or
more types of refuse are disposed of separately, separate containers must be
had if required by the superintendent of the sanitation department. Boxes,
papers, tree cuttings and all odd articles shall be crushed and/or bundled in
lengths not to exceed five feet (5') and not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in
weight, except articles in special hauls. (1983 Code § 8.04.030)
   B.   Location Requirements:
      1.   Where an alley is accessible, containers for garbage and all types
of rubbish, and rubbish not placed in containers as prescribed by this chapter,
shall be located on the private premises adjacent to the property line on the
alley, and at a point readily accessible to the collectors.
      2.   No garbage containers or rubbish containers or piles of rubbish
shall be placed in or upon the alley right of way. (1983 Code § 8.04.040)
      3.   Where no alley is accessible, containers or rubbish shall be placed,
as near to the street as reasonably possible, in front of the premises by the
owners or occupants of such premises. (1983 Code § 8.04.040; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Collection Schedule: Refuse shall be collected from all residential
premises within the city at least once each week. The city council shall
establish a collection schedules, and pick up shall be between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the scheduled pick up
day. (2004 Code)
3-1-4: COLLECTION CONTRACTS:
   A.   Authority To Contract: The mayor and city council may provide for the
collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse within the city and may contract for
the collection and disposal thereof with any qualified person lawfully engaged
in the business of collection and disposal of garbage or refuse in the Harrison
area. (1983 Code § 8.04.070)
   B.   Contract Required: No person shall collect, transport or dispose of
garbage or other refuse within the city limits, except their own personal
garbage or refuse, who has not contracted with the city to provide such service
and who does not possess a license or franchise from the city, and no person
shall be granted such contract, permit or license who is not capable of
complying with the requirements of this chapter. (1983 Code § 8.04.080)
3-1-5: COLLECTION FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule: A schedule of fees shall be adopted by the mayor and city
council for the collection and disposal of refuse, which schedule shall be
filed with the city clerk and which may be amended or altered by the mayor and
city council from time to time, but which fees shall produce only an amount
necessary to provide services for the collection and disposal of garbage
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (1983 Code § 8.04.090; amd. 2004
Code)
   B.   Payment: Such fees shall be paid by the persons responsible for the
same at the office of the city clerk and are due on the first of each month,
and receipt of such fees must be received by the city clerk by the seventh day
of each month or penalties will be assessed as outlined in title 7, chapter 5
of this code.
   C.   Applicability: Rules and regulations on fees may cover charges for
services for residents and for business premises, applications for exemptions
from charges and method of establishing rates for a multiple residence. Such
rules and regulations shall be in accordance with state department of
environmental protection and health rules and regulations. (1983 Code §
8.04.090)
   D.   Billing And Payment: All charges for the removal of refuse shall be
collected by the city through the office of the city clerk, and the charges
shall be payable together with the water and sewer charges assessed by the city
for provision of water and sewer to the premises and will be billed together
with such water and sewer bills. For failure to comply with the terms of this
chapter, the city may suspend garbage service to any person or premises failing
to abide by and comply with this chapter. (1983 Code § 8.04.050; amd. 2004
Code)
   E.   Owner Liable For Payment: All occupied premises including residence and
business premises within the city shall be required to subscribe to and make
use of the garbage collection and disposal system herein established. In the
event of delinquent garbage charges under this chapter and under the schedule
of rates herein authorized, the owner or proprietor of the premises shall be
held liable and responsible for the amount of such delinquency whether such
owner or proprietor is the actual occupant of said premises or not. (1983 Code
§ 8.04.060)
3-1-6: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Accumulation Prohibited: Permit or suffer to accumulate in or about any
yard, lot, place or premises or upon any street, alley or sidewalk adjacent to
such lot, yard, place or premises, owned or occupied by such person, any
garbage or refuse so as to cause such yard, lot, place or premises to cause or
create a nuisance or offensive odor, atmosphere or rodent harborage or thereby
be or become or cause or create a public nuisance. (1983 Code § 8.04.100)
   B.   Throwing Or Depositing: Throw away, dump or discard any type or nature
of garbage or refuse on any public lands, rights of way or private land
belonging to another. (1983 Code § 8.04.110)
3-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor for any person to violate the
provisions of this chapter. Upon conviction of violations of this chapter, the
offender shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. In addition thereto, the court shall have power to issue an
injunction against further or continued violation of the terms or intent of
this chapter. (1983 Code § 8.04.110)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Animal Refuse
3-2-2: Offensive Or Dangerous Accumulations
3-2-3: Obstructions
3-2-4: Open Burning
3-2-5: Trees
3-2-6: Noxious Weeds
3-2-7: Violation; Penalty
3-2-1: ANIMAL REFUSE:
No person shall cast or leave or keep in or adjoining any street, lane, square
or public place, or in any yard, lot, block or other premises within the city
limits any putrid, unsound, unwholesome or refuse meat of any animal, or any
hides or skins of any kind, or the whole or any part of any dead fish or
animal, or any stagnant or impure water, or garbage or the offensive waste or
manure of any animal or animals. (1983 Code § 8.12.010)
3-2-2: OFFENSIVE OR DANGEROUS ACCUMULATIONS:
   A.   Garbage And Stagnant Water: No person shall permit or suffer to
accumulate in or upon any yard or premises, lot or places within the city
limits or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting upon any lot,
block, place or premises occupied by him, or for which he may be agent or
agents, within the city limits, any stagnant or impure water, refuse,
vegetables, decayed or decaying substances, garbage or filth of any kind; shall
not suffer such yard, lot or premises to be or to remain in such condition as
to cause or create a noisome or offensive smell or atmosphere, or thereby to be
or become, cause or create a public nuisance. (1983 Code § 8.12.020)
   B.   Explosive Substances: It is unlawful for any person to keep or store in
any building, or elsewhere, within the city limits, more than twenty five (25)
pounds of gunpowder, nitroglycerin, dynamite, blasting powder or other highly
explosive substance, and when so kept or stored, it must be placed in some iron
receptacle, so that in case of fire it can be conveniently moved. (1983 Code §
8.12.040)
   C.   Inflammable Materials: It is unlawful to allow an accumulation of
brush, fallen limbs, slashings and other inflammable material within the city
limits. (1983 Code § 8.12.050)
3-2-3: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Streets: It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any of the streets
and avenues in the city limits by placing and leaving thereon any lumber, logs,
poles, wagons, machinery and such other articles and matter which will have a
tendency to obstruct or blockade such streets and avenues. (1983 Code §
8.12.030; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Gutters And Drains: It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to
obstruct any of the gutters on any street within the city or in any artificial
watercourse, or carrier or conductor of surface water, or any pipe, drain or
other carrier or conductor of water on, above or underneath any street or
property within the city by placing therein or thereon any dirt, refuse, snow,
ice or any matter or thing which shall in any manner prevent the free discharge
and drainage of water through, over, upon or in such gutters, pipes or other
watercourses or drains. (1983 Code § 8.12.060)
3-2-4: OPEN BURNING:
Burning of paper, grass, brush, lumber or other burnable refuse shall be
prohibited between June 1 and September 30 unless a burning permit is issued by
the city clerk. The burning of paper, grass, brush, lumber or other burnable
refuse shall be permitted without a permit between October 1 and May 31. (1983
Code § 8.12.100)
3-2-5: TREES:
   A.   Nuisances Declared: All trees growing in a natural state on lots
adjoining residences or buildings on other lots, all or any part of which is
likely to fall and injure such buildings or to fall on the property of others,
or to do injury to life or property of others, are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. (1983 Code § 8.12.070)
   B.   Removal Required: The mayor is hereby authorized, empowered and
directed, on request of any resident of the city owning property menaced by
such standing trees to serve on such party or parties owning or occupying such
land on which said trees are located, a notice requiring their immediate
destruction; provided that, should said owner or occupier be a nonresident or
not found in the city, notice may be served by mailing same to his last known
address. The notice shall require the removal of said trees within five (5)
days from receipt of notice. In default of removing said trees after notice,
the mayor may proceed forthwith to hire such labor as may be required, to
remove the same and abate the nuisance, all at the property owner's expense.
(1983 Code § 8.12.080)
   C.   Removal Of Certain Trees By Private Citizens: The owner of any lot or
building near or adjacent or contiguous to said trees and likely to be damaged
by the falling of said trees, may secure permission of the mayor or city
council to, and at his own expense may, remove and abate said nuisance and cut
such trees. (1983 Code § 8.12.090)
3-2-6: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
   A.   Noxious Growths Defined: The following named weeds and growths shall be
considered noxious within the meaning of this section: wild mustard, thistles,
and all growths commonly known as weeds. (1983 Code § 8.08.010)
   B.   Failure To Cut: Any person who shall, within the city limits, allow any
noxious growths to grow and remain uncut on any property owned in whole or in
part, or occupied by such person, shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a
nuisance; and the continuance of the same for every day after having been
notified by the mayor to cut or destroy such noxious growths, shall be
considered as a separate offense. (1983 Code § 8.08.020)
   C.   Noxious Growths On Public Ways: It shall be the duty of the mayor to
cut or destroy all noxious growths upon the streets, alleys and public highways
of the city, and for such purposes he may employ and hire all labor and help as
may be necessary under the direction of the city council. (1983 Code §
8.08.030)
   D.   Notice Of Violation: Before a person is convicted of an offense as
defined in subsection B of this section, it shall be made to appear that such
person shall have been served with a reasonable notice, either verbal or
written, from the mayor to abate the same; and that he failed or neglected to
do so; and in case of violation of subsection B of this section, the mayor
shall enter a complaint before a proper magistrate to enforce the penalty set
out herein. (1983 Code § 8.08.040; amd. 2004 Code)
3-2-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in
section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 8.12.110)
CHAPTER 3
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
3-3-1: Title
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Antinoise Regulations
3-3-4: Exceptions
3-3-5: Penalties
3-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the HARRISON ANTINOISE AND PUBLIC
NUISANCE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2019-476, 5-7-2019)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
NOISE SENSITIVE UNIT: Any building or portion thereof, vehicle, boat or other
structure used as a business, church, daycare center, hospital, farm property
with animals, nursing care center, school, or place used for overnight
accommodations of persons, including, but not limited to, individual homes,
individual apartments, trailers and nursing homes.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound for which the information content of that sound is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to,
understandable spoken speech, comprehensible musical rhythms or vocal sounds.
(Ord. 2019-476, 5-7-2019)
3-3-3: ANTINOISE REGULATIONS:
   A.   General Regulation: It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or
cause to be made or continued, any noise, which unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person
of normal sensitivity in a noise sensitive unit. The standard which shall be
utilized in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter
exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The volume of the noise;
      2.   The intensity of the noise;
      3.   Whether the origin of the noise is usual or unusual;
      4.   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
      5.   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
      6.   Whether the noise is plainly audible within a noise sensitive unit;
      7.   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
      8.   The density of the inhabited area within which the noise emanates;
      9.   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
      10.   The duration of the noise;
      11.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
   B.   Specific Violations: The following noises and disturbances are hereby
declared to be a violation of this chapter; provided, however, that the
specification of the same is not hereby to be construed to exclude other
violations of this chapter not specifically enumerated:
      1.   Electronic Or Mechanical Devices: The playing of any radio,
phonograph, television or other electronic or mechanical sound producing
device, including any sound amplifying device upon any vehicle on the streets
of the City, or any musical instrument, in such a manner or with such volume as
to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons.
      2.   Yelling On Public Street: Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on
the public street between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. or at any time or place so as to unreasonably upset or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
      3.   Animals: The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which emanates
frequent or extended noise which shall disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity, such as allowing or permitting any dog to bark
repeatedly in any area where such barking can be clearly heard from nearby
residential property.
      4.   Construction: The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building or premises in any part of the City, including the
streets and highways, in such a manner as to emanate noise or disturbance to
other persons, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. on any day, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety. In such case, a permit shall be obtained from the
City Clerk or Code Enforcement Officer in the City, which permit shall limit
the periods that the activity may continue.
      5.   Machinery: The operation of any machinery, equipment or mechanical
device so as to emit unreasonably loud noise which is disturbing to the comfort
or repose of any person between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      6.   Other: Making any noise between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., such that the noise level is plainly
audible more than one hundred feet (100') from the sound origination point.
(Ord. 2019-476, 5-7-2019)
3-3-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City from allowing amplified
sound systems to be operated on public or private property in association with
a special event, schedule of events, or other permitted event or activity,
subject to such reasonable conditions as the City may deem necessary and
appropriate.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to emergency vehicles or City vehicles
being operated in their work and/or designated capacity. (Ord. 2019-476, 5-7-
2019)
3-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any person found violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be deemed guilty of an infraction and issued a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Each day that a violation shall continue is to constitute a
separate offense. Provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by suit for
injunction, damages or other appropriate legal action. (Ord. 2019-476, 5-7-
2019)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Title And Authority
3-4-2: Purpose And Jurisdiction
3-4-3: Definitions
3-4-4: Retail Sales
3-4-5: Public Displays And Other Events
3-4-6: Conditions Of Permits
3-4-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
3-4-8: Penalties
3-4-1: TITLE AND AUTHORITY:
This chapter shall be known as the FIREWORKS ORDINANCE of the city of Harrison,
and is authorized under Idaho Code title 50, chapter 3. (Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-2: PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety and public
welfare of residents of the city and visitors by regulating the use, possession
and sale of fireworks, and this chapter shall apply to the storage, use,
possession and sale of fireworks within any incorporated areas within the city.
(Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply within this chapter:
CITY: The city of Harrison, Idaho.
DEPARTMENT: The department of insurance, division of the state fire marshal.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
Fireworks includes items classified as common or special fireworks by the
United States bureau of explosives or contained in the regulation of the United
States department of transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or UN 0336
1.4G. The term "fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety flares, toy
guns, toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy guns or toy
cannons, party poppers, popits or other devices which contain twenty-five
hundredths (0.25) of a grain or less explosive substance.
NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS: Any fireworks such as ground spinners, fountains,
sparklers, smoke devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the ground and
not to travel outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle above a height of
twenty feet (20').
PERMIT: An authorization given by the authority having jurisdiction pursuant to
Idaho Code 39-2604 or 39-2605.
SPECIAL FIREWORKS: Any firework designed primarily for display and classified
as special fireworks by the United States bureau of explosives or designated as
UN 0335 1.3G. (Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-4: RETAIL SALES:
   A.   Permit Required: The city hereby requires a permit for the retail sale
of nonaerial common fireworks.
   B.   Application: An application for a permit hereunder shall include the
name and address of the applicant; or the names of all partners, if a
partnership; the name of the corporation and the corporate officers, if a
corporation; or the name of the limited liability company and all of its
members, if a limited liability company; the primary location of the business;
each location at which fireworks are to be stored; and the applicant's Idaho
sales tax seller's permit number, if applicable.
   C.   Insurance: A bond or valid certificate of public liability and property
casualty insurance providing coverage of up to five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for personal injury and property damage shall be required at the
time of application:
   D.   Fee: The city shall assess a fee for issuing a permit under this
section which shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). This fee may be amended
from time to time by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Valid Dates: The permit shall be issued if the application is complete
in compliance with applicable law, shall be valid for twelve (12) months from
the date of issuance and shall be nontransferable.
   F.   Display: The permit shall be displayed in public view at the location
listed on the permit.
   G.   Revocation: The permit required under this section may be revoked if
the permittee violates any provisions of this chapter or of state or federal
law. (Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-5: PUBLIC DISPLAYS OR OTHER EVENTS:
The city may, at its discretion, issue a permit for a public display or other
event in the following circumstances:
   A.   After determining that the public display will be supervised by a
qualified person and will not constitute an unreasonable hazard to persons or
property. Appropriate national fire protection association or uniform fire code
provisions may be used as guidance for this determination.
   B.   After determining that sales and use of fireworks outside the normal
sales period provided in Idaho Code 39-2606, or proposing the use of fireworks
in addition to nonaerial common fireworks will not constitute an unreasonable
hazard to persons or property.
   C.   An application for a permit for public display or other event shall be
on a form approved by and contain the information reasonably requested by the
city.
   D.   The permit shall be nontransferable, shall list the specific date or
dates upon which the display or event shall occur and the types of fireworks
and uses that will be allowed.
   E.   A bond or valid certificate of public liability and property casualty
insurance providing coverage of up to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage may be required at the time of application
for public display of special fireworks.
   F.   The city may assess a fee for issuing a permit for public display under
this section which shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   G.   Alteration of fireworks may be performed by a person in possession of a
valid public display permit.
   H.   If a public display or other event using fireworks is to be held over a
lake, river or other navigable waterway in the city, the applicant must obtain
a marine event permit from the Kootenai County sheriff. (Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-6: CONDITIONS OF PERMITS:
   A.   Authorized Dates: Nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail and
used beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on June 23 and ending at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 5, and beginning at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight on December 26 and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
January 1.
   B.   Temporary Fireworks Stands: Temporary fireworks stands shall be
governed by Idaho Code 39-2607.
   C.   Short Term Storage: Short term storage of fireworks shall be governed
by Idaho Code 39-2608. (Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
Except in compliance with this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Alter any fireworks;
   B.   Throw any fireworks from, into or at a moving vehicle or at any person;
   C.   Sell, use or possess any fireworks at a time not permitted under this
chapter;
   D.   Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based
on the vegetative conditions during the current fire season, as determined by
the county commission or authority having jurisdiction, provided that notice of
such areas is given in advance or the area is posted with appropriate notices
at points of access.
   E.   Fail to obtain a permit from the authority having jurisdiction for a
public display or other event using fireworks before holding the public display
or other event using fireworks.
   F.   Fail to obtain a permit from the authority having jurisdiction before
engaging in retail sales of nonaerial common fireworks. (Ord. 393, 3-2-2004)
3-4-8: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the rules issued
hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in the
general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. Fireworks being used, sold or possessed in violation of
this chapter may be confiscated by the city or by any peace officer. (Ord. 393,
3-2-2004)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1A
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. DOGS
SECTION:
4-1A-1: License Requirements
4-1A-2: Dogs At Large
4-1A-3: Dogs On Public Or Private Property
4-1A-4: Impoundment Procedures
4-1A-5: Enforcement; Penalty
4-1A-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required; Term And Fees: It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor
or keep in his possession or under his control any dog of either sex without
having first paid an annual license fee provided in subsection B of this
section therefor to the city, which said license fee shall authorize the
keeping of said dog, but only one dog per person maximum, for only one year
from the date thereof, and all licenses issued under and by virtue of this
article shall date from the first Monday in January of each year and expire on
December 31 of the same year. (Ord. 334, 3-7-1995)
   B.   License Fees: Every person owning, harboring, keeping or having in his
possession or under his control any dog, shall immediately upon becoming the
owner, harborer or keeper, pay to the city treasurer the license fee as
follows:
 
An unspayed female dog          $5.00
A male dog or spayed female dog 3.00
 
   On the first Monday in January of each year, the owner shall also provide,
at the time of licensing, proof that the dog's rabies shots are current. All
persons becoming the owner of or harboring a dog on or after the first Monday
in January of each year must take out a license for the animal within ten (10)
days after becoming the owner, harborer or keeper of the animal. (Ord. 352, 2-
3-1998)
   C.   Contents; Issuance: It shall be the duty of the city clerk, upon the
payment of said license fee, to issue to the person paying the same a receipt,
which receipt shall specify the date thereof, the amount paid, a description of
the dog for which said license is issued sufficient for identification, the
name of said dog, together with the name of the person obtaining said license,
and the sex of the dog. At the time of issuing the receipt, the city clerk
shall furnish and deliver to such party a license in the shape of a metal tag,
bearing the words "Harrison Dog Tax," and the year for which the same is issued
stamped thereon. (1983 Code § 6.04.030)
   D.   Tag Required To Be Worn: The person to whom said license is issued
shall cause said tag to be attached to a collar to be worn by the dog for which
said license fee was paid, during the time which said dog is allowed to run;
and it is unlawful for any dog of either sex to run at large within the city
limits unless the metal tag so issued is attached to its collar. (1983 Code §
6.04.040)
   E.   Records Kept: It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a register
of each license issued, which shall contain a description of the dog covered by
said license, sufficient for identification, and shall state the sex of the
dog, its name and the name of the person obtaining said license, together with
the date and expiration of the license. (1983 Code § 6.04.050)
   F.   Compliance Required: Any person owning, harboring, keeping or having in
his possession or under his control any dog of either sex without having paid
upon said dog the license fee for the current year as provided in the
subsection B of this section, or without having said metal tag for the current
year attached to the collar worn by said dog, and without having complied with
all the other provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
in addition to the penalty prescribed, shall be compelled to pay the license on
said dog for the current year. (1983 Code § 6.04.060)
4-1A-2: DOGS AT LARGE:
   A.   Prohibited: Any person who wilfully or negligently permits any dog
owned, possessed or harbored by him to be or run at large within the limits of
the city, or who wilfully and negligently fails and refuses to keep such dog
securely confined within the limits of his own premises, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1983 Code § 6.04.070)
   B.   Destruction Of Dog; Exception: It shall be the duty of the mayor to
kill, or cause to be killed, all dogs of either sex found running at large
which cannot, by reasonable means, be impounded and dealt with pursuant to
section 4-1A-4 of this article; but nothing herein contained shall authorize
the killing of any dog owned or kept by any person residing outside of the city
when such person shall have brought such dog into the city the intention of
moving him therefrom forthwith. (1983 Code § 6.04.080)
   C.   Vicious Dogs Prohibited: Any person being the owner or keeper of any
vicious dog who shall permit the same to run at large within the limits of the
city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1983 Code § 6.04.090)
   D.   Dogs In Heat: It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any
female dog to knowingly permit it to run at large while in heat,
notwithstanding such person may have a license for such dog as provided in this
article. (1983 Code § 6.04.100)
4-1A-3: DOGS ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any owner to allow or permit any dog, whether licensed or
not, to be or remain upon any street or alley within the city or upon any
public place thereon, or upon any premises other than the premises of the owner
of such dog or the one having charge thereof unless:
   A.   Such dog is in the charge of a person and controlled by a leash not
exceeding eight feet (8') in length; or
   B.   Such dog is confined in a motor vehicle. (1983 Code § 6.04.110)
4-1A-4: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the mayor, or any suitable person under his
direction, to impound any dog running at large in violation of the provisions
of this article, and to hold such dog for a period of two (2) days, and
immediately notify the owner of such dog, if the owner's name is disclosed in
the registry of licensed dogs, that such dog is held and impounded. If the dog
is held for the reason that it is running loose unleashed, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the owner thereof may, within said period of time,
redeem said dog by paying the impounding officer the charges of impounding said
animal.
   B.   If, within the said time, the dog is not redeemed by the owner as above
provided, the mayor or any suitable person under his direction, shall cause
said dog to be killed in a humane manner and its carcass buried or otherwise
disposed of. (1983 Code § 6.04.120)
4-1A-5: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Administration: The city council shall have power to appoint and employ
competent persons to enforce the provisions of this article. (1983 Code §
6.04.130)
   B.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. Every day upon which any person violates any of the
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (1983 Code §
6.04.140)
CHAPTER 1B
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE B. DOMESTICATED AND FERAL CATS
SECTION:
4-1B-1: Definitions
4-1B-2: Responsibilities Of Domesticated Cat Owners
4-1B-3: Harboring Of Feral Cats Prohibited
4-1B-4: Enforcement; Penalty
4-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
ATTRACTANT: Any substance, including, but not limited to, food, garbage,
blankets, heating devices or shelter which draws feral cats to a particular
location whether intended or not.
DOMESTICATED CAT: A cat that is socialized to humans, is generally under the
physical control and restraint of the owner, and is regularly provided food by
its owner.
FERAL CAT: A cat that is born in or has reverted to the wild, and is not
domesticated or tamed.
NUISANCE: Conduct by stray or feral cats that disturb the public health, safety
or welfare including, but not limited to, habitually or continually howling or
crying or habitually and significantly destroying, desecrating or soiling
property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal or who keeps or
harbors an animal or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who
knowingly permits an animal to remain on any premises owned or controlled by
him.
STRAY CAT: A cat that is regularly off the property of the owner, is not under
the physical control and restraint of the owner, and is not regularly provided
food by its owner. (Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
4-1B-2: RESPONSIBILITIES OF DOMESTICATED CAT OWNERS:
   A.   An owner of a domesticated cat shall provide appropriate and adequate
food, water and shelter to the cat.
   B.   An owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to guard
against the cat creating a nuisance.
   C.   An owner of a domesticated cat shall not abandon the cat. (Ord. 448, 9-
17-2012)
4-1B-3: HARBORING OF FERAL CATS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to feed or provide food, water or other
attractants to feral or stray cats within the city limits.
   B.   It is unlawful to wilfully or inadvertently provide shelter or other
protection for feral or stray cats.
   C.   Property owner and tenants of property are required to mitigate access
to their property by feral or stray cats. (Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
4-1B-4: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Administration: The city council shall have the power to appoint and
employ competent persons to enforce the provisions of this article.
   B.   Impound: The city council and/or its designee has the authority to trap
and remove any cat where:
      1.   The cat has not been vaccinated against rabies or which is
demonstrating signs of the disease;
      2.   The cat is not spayed or neutered;
      3.   The cat is creating a nuisance; or
      4.   Removal is necessary for public health or public safety reasons.
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. Every day upon which a person violates any of the
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 448, 9-
17-2012)
CHAPTER 1C
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE C. OTHER ANIMALS
SECTION:
4-1C-1: Cruelty To Animals
4-1C-2: Horses And Cows
4-1C-3: Livestock
4-1C-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
Any person who shall cruelly beat, torture, misuse, deprive of food and water
or otherwise treat any animal with cruelty within the city limits shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in the general
penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 6.16.010; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
4-1C-2: HORSES AND COWS:
   A.   Barn Requirements; Location Restrictions: Any person keeping within the
city limits one or more horses or cows shall have and maintain a barn or place
where said animals shall be kept; and said barn or building where such animals
are so kept shall be at least fifty feet (50') from any building occupied as a
residence in the city, or any lot belonging to another person and suitable as a
residential building site. (1983 Code § 6.08.010; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
   B.   Violations; Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 6.08.040; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
4-1C-3: LIVESTOCK:
   A.   Running At Large: No horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, poultry or animals or
fowl of a similar nature shall be allowed to run at large in any of the
streets, lanes or alleys of the city. No person shall permit the animals or
fowl described to run at large, and all animals so running at large may be
taken up by the mayor and impounded with proper care, food and water while so
confined. (1983 Code § 6.12.010; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
   B.   Impoundment:
      1.   Owner Notified: The mayor shall immediately give notice to the
owners of any impounded animals, if known, and if such owners are not known, by
posting notice in three (3) conspicuous places in the city. (1983 Code §
6.12.020; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
      2.   Disposition: At the expiration of five (5) days, after giving
official notice, the mayor shall sell, for cash at public auction to the
highest bidder, the animals so impounded. The mayor shall collect the same fees
for the making and posting of the notices mentioned in subsection B1 of this
section as are allowed by law to constables for sale notices and legal fees for
any notice published in a newspaper and for all costs incurred impounding said
animals. Out of the proceeds of any sale of such animal or animals or poultry
under this section, the mayor shall deduct all the costs and charges aforesaid;
and shall, if the owner is unknown to him, pay the remainder into the city
treasury, and, in case the owner is known, to such owner. (1983 Code §
6.12.030; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
      3.   Redemption: The owner of such animals or fowl may redeem such
animals or fowl at any time before the sale by satisfactory proof of his
ownership and payment of the cost of care and keeping of such animals and fowl,
the costs incurred in posting and publishing notices and the sum of ten dollars
($10.00). (1983 Code § 6.12.040; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
   C.   Keeping Of Pigs And Hogs: It is unlawful for any person to keep any
pigs or hogs within the city limits. (1983 Code § 6.12.050; amd. Ord. 448, 9-
17-2012)
   D.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to do any of the
following acts:
      1.   Herd cattle or horses within the city limits;
      2.   Stake out upon any public thoroughfare of the city any cow, horse,
cattle, horses or stock of any kind;
      3.   Stake out on any vacant lot or lots within the city limits any cows,
horses or any other kind of stock in such a manner as to permit said animals to
go upon, or to cross, any of the walks or public thoroughfares of the city;
      4.   Tie up or hitch any horse or mule upon any of the public streets of
the city; (1983 Code § 6.12.060; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
      5.   Leave any horse team or teams hitched to any vehicle of any kind
unattended upon any of the public streets of the city. (1983 Code § 6.12.060;
amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
   E.   Violation; Penalty: In addition to the provisions provided for in
subsection B of this section, a wilful violation of any of the other provisions
of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the general
penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 6.12.070; amd. Ord. 448, 9-17-2012)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Littering
4-2-2: Public Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages (Rep. by Ord. 406, 10-4-2005)
4-2-3: Curfew For Minors
4-2-1: LITTERING:
Any person who shall throw or deposit in any street, alley, sidewalk or
pedestrianway of the city any broken glass, bottles, crockery, nails or other
substance whatever whereby automobile tires or the feet of horses, pedestrians
or any beast of burden may be injured; or shall throw, deposit or sweep into or
upon any street, sidewalk or footpath of the city any paper or other substance
whatever, except snow or dirt, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in
section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 9.16.010)
4-2-2: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 406, 10-4-2005)
4-2-3: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   Curfew Designated: It is unlawful for any person under the age of
sixteen (16) years or compulsory school age to be upon, loiter or stroll upon
the streets, alleys, avenues, parks or other public places in the city, after
the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and before the hour of five o'clock (5:00)
A.M., unless such person shall be accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or
other adult person lawfully and properly accompanying said minor person;
provided, that the curfew shall be extended to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and
before the hour of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any night designated by school
officials as an "activity night", by notification to the police authorities by
the school officials. (1983 Code § 9.36.010; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Parental Responsibility: It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian
or any other adult person having the legal care and custody of any minor person
under the age of sixteen (16) years, to allow or permit any such person to go
upon, or be upon any street, alley, park or in any public place in the city
after the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and before the hour of five o'clock
(5:00) A.M., without being accompanied by the parent, legal guardian or other
adult person. (1983 Code § 9.36.020; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Violators Taken Into Custody; Parents Notified: Any police officer or
other law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to take charge of any
person under the age of sixteen (16) years violating the provisions of this
section, and it shall be the duty of such officers to take such person to the
police or city hall, and notify immediately the parent, guardian or adult
person having the care and custody of such minor of the violation of the terms
of this section and to inform the said person that the minor will be held at
the police or city hall until called for by such parent, guardian or legal
custodian. (1983 Code § 9.36.030)
   D.   Failure To Take Charge Of Minor: It is unlawful and shall be considered
a separate offense under this section for any parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the legal care and custody of any person under the age of sixteen
(16) years to refuse to come immediately, upon being notified to do so by the
police, to the police or city hall and take charge of such minor. (1983 Code §
9.36.040)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: State Vehicle Laws Adopted
5-1-2: Municipal Authority
5-1-3: Obedience To Traffic Officers
5-1-4: One-Way Streets
5-1-5: Speed Limits
5-1-6: Leaving Vehicles Unattended
5-1-7: Violation; Penalty
5-1-1: STATE VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED:
   A.   Intent: It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to
aid and assist by whatever means possible for the utmost consistency in traffic
regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having such jurisdiction. Toward
that end, adoption of the Idaho motor vehicle laws by the cities of Idaho is a
necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the state.
   B.   Adoption Of Laws: There is hereby adopted for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets and public
thoroughfares of the city, that certain code, identified as the latest edition
of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, more particularly Idaho Code title 49,
published by the Idaho department of transportation, and as the same may
hereafter be revised by the Idaho legislature or amended by the city council,
and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as
fully as though set forth at length herein.
   C.   Copy On File: One copy of the Idaho motor vehicle laws, together with
any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on
file in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. (2004
Code)
5-1-2: MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Local Traffic Regulations: In all matters relating to traffic control
not covered in the stipulations of this traffic code, the city council shall
have full power to make necessary regulations governing the same. In all points
of dispute as to the interpretation of the stipulations of this code, the city
council's decision shall be final and binding on all parties. (1983 Code §
10.04.040)
   B.   Signs And Signals: The city council has full power to erect or cause to
be erected proper signs or signals on any street or street intersection or at
any railroad crossing directing the method and time of parking, the character
of vehicles allowed to park or stop and directing that vehicles shall stop or
slow down at designated points; or notifying the public of the locations of
schools and hospitals and dangerous street intersections or crossings or of any
other conditions affecting the traffic and control of same. (1983 Code §
10.04.010)
5-1-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC OFFICERS:
All persons driving or operating vehicles, riding horseback or walking on the
streets and alleys shall at all times obey the orders, direction and signals of
all traffic officers or city police directing traffic. (1983 Code § 10.04.030)
5-1-4: ONE-WAY STREETS:
The city, acting through its city council, may designate any street or roadway
under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic, and shall cause to be erected
appropriate signs at intersections giving notice thereof. (1983 Code §
10.04.050)
5-1-5: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Maximum Limits Set: No person shall drive a vehicle on any side street
within the city at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 320,
9-3-1991)
   B.   Specific Limits:
      1.   The speed limit on the section of highway legally described as state
highway 97 within the city, from where it enters the city at the southwest
boundary to Woodlawn Street shall be forty five (45) miles per hour.
      2.   The speed limit on the section of highway legally described as state
highway 97 within the city, from Woodlawn Street to Yamhill Street (vacated)
shall be thirty five (35) miles per hour.
      3.   The speed limit on the section of highway legally described as state
highway 97 within the city, from Yamhill Street (vacated) to the eastern
boundary of the city shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 360, 5-1-
2000)
   C.   Penalty  1 : Violation of the provisions of this section shall be an
infraction, and subject to punishment as provided in Idaho Code section 18-
113A. (Ord. 320, 9-3-1991; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-3-1B of this code.
5-1-6: LEAVING VEHICLES UNATTENDED:
No motor propelled vehicle shall be left unattended on any street or alley in
the city while any part of the machinery of said vehicle is in motion. (1983
Code § 10.12.080)
5-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who disregards or
disobeys or fails to observe any traffic sign or signs regulating traffic
within the city, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 10.04.080; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
5-2-1: Authority
5-2-2: Parking In Alleys
5-2-3: Municipal Parking Lots
5-2-4: Restricted Parking
5-2-5: Prohibited Parking
5-2-6: Violation; Penalty; Impoundment
5-2-7: Vehicle Ownership As Evidence; Exception
5-2-1: AUTHORITY:
   A.   In all cases where parking regulations are not provided for by
ordinance, the city council shall have power and it is made their duty to
promulgate rules and regulations governing parking of vehicles in the city.
(1983 Code § 10.12.010)
   B.   The city council is empowered to limit the time for which motor
vehicles may be parked within the city and to provide loading and unloading
zones where they deem it expedient and necessary. (1983 Code § 10.12.020)
   C.   It shall be the duty of the city council to have erected suitable signs
and provide striping for streets and alleys where practicable, said signs and
striping to conform to rules and regulations prescribed by the city council.
(1983 Code § 10.12.030)
   D.   The rules and regulations prescribed for the parking of motor vehicles
within the limits of the city shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and
city council by resolution. It shall be the duty of the mayor, after having the
rules and regulations governing parking approved as provided in this chapter,
to file a copy of such rules and regulations in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 450, 12-4-2012)
5-2-2: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
The city council shall prescribe the rules and regulations for the parking of
motor vehicles in the alleys of the city, together with rules and regulations
for the parking of motorcycles and bicycles on the streets and in said alleys.
(1983 Code § 10.12.040)
5-2-3: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS:
All municipal parking lots within the limits of the city shall be under the
control and supervision of the mayor and city council. (1983 Code § 10.12.050;
amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-4: RESTRICTED PARKING:
   A.   Areas Where Parking Restricted:
      1.   Vehicles On Property Under Control Of The City: It shall be unlawful
for any person to park, place, keep or leave any motor vehicle, piece of
machinery, trailer or equipment on a public street, alley, municipal parking
lot or other public property for any period of time in violation of parking
rules and regulations set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 450, 12-4-
2012)
      2.   Trailers Or Boats On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to
park, place, keep or leave any trailer, boat or nonmotorized vehicle on a
public street, alley or other public property unless attached to a motor
vehicle capable of towing said trailer, boat or nonmotorized vehicle.
      3.   Vehicles On Street Without Current License: It shall be unlawful for
any person to place, keep or leave any motor vehicle, piece of machinery,
trailer or equipment on a public street, alley or other public property that
does not display current, lawful license and tags.
      4.   Wrecked Or Partially Dismantled Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to
keep or leave any motor vehicle, piece of machinery, trailer or equipment that
is in an inoperable condition or in a wrecked or partially dismantled condition
or in a state of repair for a period of forty eight (48) hours or more on a
public street, alley or other public property.
      5.   Vehicles On Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, keep or leave any motor vehicle, piece of machinery, trailer or
equipment in a wrecked or partially dismantled condition or in a state of
disrepair for a period of more than ten (10) days on private property unless
enclosed in a building or other area screened from public view and fenced in a
manner to prevent children from entering the property. Any such fence and
screening shall be constructed in compliance with the current provisions of the
international building code. Such vehicle, machinery, trailer or equipment is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance unless properly fenced or enclosed.
      6.   Vehicles Or Equipment Causing Environmental Concerns: It shall be
unlawful for any person to place, keep or leave any motor vehicle, piece of
equipment or machinery in a fashion which permits same to leak or discharge oil
or gasoline onto the ground or pavement or which discharges freon into the air.
Similarly, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, discharge or in any
manner dispose of oil, gasoline or hazardous chemical waste on any public
street, alley, other public property and private property not zoned for such
use.
      7.   Unauthorized Vehicles In Designated Disabled Spaces: It shall be
unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in a designated disabled parking space
without bearing license plates, signs or shields identifying the owner of such
vehicle as having a disability. The city council shall approve the location of
such spaces by resolution. This provision shall be in compliance with Idaho
Code 49-213.
      8.   Snow Emergency Routes: Whenever the mayor finds, on the basis of
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it
necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city
streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, he
shall put into effect a parking prohibition on primary snow emergency routes as
necessary. "Primary snow emergency routes" are defined as those streets
generally traversing the entire city or a major part thereof that are
considered essential to the rapid movement of emergency vehicles and normally
carry the heaviest traffic volumes.
      9.   Construction Or Street Sweeping: Whenever the mayor finds it
necessary that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for the
purposes of street or utility construction or repair or for street sweeping or
cleaning, he shall put into effect, with twelve (12) hours prior posted notice,
a parking prohibition on the affected streets.
   B.   Signs For Restricted Parking: The mayor and city council have authority
to designate city staff to erect signage designating disabled parking spaces
and any other restricted or limited parking as is deemed necessary. Application
of this provision shall be in compliance with Idaho Code. (Ord. 374, 4-12-2001;
amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-5: PROHIBITED PARKING:
Parking of motor vehicles is hereby prohibited in the following places and
under the following circumstances:
   A.   No vehicles shall be parked within twelve feet (12') of street
intersections. (1983 Code § 10.12.090; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY; IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction as
provided in subsection
1-3-1B of this code.
   B.   In addition to or in lieu of any infraction penalty, any law
enforcement officer or other person designated by the city may issue a civil
citation. The civil assessment shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) to be paid
to the city. The civil citation assessment shall be payable at city hall within
thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. If the civil penalty is paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of the issuance of the civil assessment, the
civil penalty will be reduced to ten dollars ($10.00). No partial payments will
be accepted as full payment. If, within the thirty (30) day period following
the issuance of the city civil citation the assessment has not been paid, an
infraction uniform citation or sworn complaint may be issued for the violation
of this chapter or the rules, and the violator, if found guilty, will be fined
in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the violation plus court
costs. Nothing contained herein prohibits a law enforcement officer from
issuance of a uniform infraction citation instead of a civil citation.
   C.   The sheriff's department is authorized, in its discretion, to remove
and impound at such place as may be designated by the sheriff's department any
vehicle, piece of machinery, trailer or equipment which is parked in violation
of any provision of this chapter. All costs and expenses of taking and keeping
such vehicle, including the costs and expenses of towing, keeping and storing,
shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle and shall constitute a lien upon
such vehicle. (Ord. 455, 5-6-2014)
5-2-7: VEHICLE OWNERSHIP AS EVIDENCE; EXCEPTION:
   A.   In any prosecution against the registered owner of a motor vehicle
charging a violation of any regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle under any ordinance of the city, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time
of parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or
placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the
violation occurred. For the purposes of this subsection, proof that a person is
the registered owner of a vehicle is not prima facie evidence that the
registered owner has violated any other provision of law. Proof of a written
lease or of a rental agreement for a particular vehicle described in the
complaint on the date and time of the violation, which lease or rental
agreement includes the name and address of the person to whom the vehicle is
leased or rented, shall rebut the prima facie evidence that the registered
owner was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the time and place
where the violations occurred.
   B.   In any prosecution against the lessee or renter of a motor vehicle
charging a violation of any regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle under any ordinance of the city, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any provision of the
ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was,
at the time of parking, the lessee or renter of the vehicle, shall constitute
prima facie evidence that the lessee or renter of the vehicle was the person
who parked the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the
violation occurred. For the purposes of this subsection, proof that a person is
the lessee or renter of a vehicle is not prima facie evidence that the lessee
or renter has violated any other provision of this law.
   C.   Any charge under such ordinance shall be dismissed when the person
charged has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle, has delivered
possession thereof to the purchaser, and has complied with the requirements of
Idaho Code title 49, chapter 4, prior to the date of the alleged violation and
has advised the court of the name and address of the purchaser and the date of
the sale. (Ord. 455, 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Operation On Public Streets And Highways
5-3-2: Operating Requirements
5-3-3: Violation; Penalty
5-3-1: OPERATION ON PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS:
   A.   City Streets: It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any snow
vehicle, commonly known as a snowmobile to operate the same along or upon any
city street, alley or thoroughfare except under the following conditions:
      1.   Such snowmobiles may be used on the city streets only for the
limited purpose of transporting the same from one section of town to another,
or to a field or other designated area where the same may be operated, and said
transportation must be along the shortest feasible route. Such vehicles are not
to be used for pleasure or for general operation on the city streets at any
time.
      2.   No snowmobile may be operated upon or along any city street after
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., with the exception that such operation may be
permitted after the nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. curfew for the sole and limited
purpose of transporting such vehicle directly to the home of the owner or
operator thereof, and for no other purpose. (1983 Code § 10.08.010)
   B.   State Highway 97: No snowmobiles may be operated on state highway 97
within the city limits, this being a highway as opposed to city streets of the
city. (1983 Code § 10.08.050)
5-3-2: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single File: All snowmobiles operating on the city streets must travel
single file, and there must be not less than a fifty foot (50') interval
between two (2) or more vehicles operating on said streets.
   B.   Speed Limits: The speed limit shall not exceed ten (10) miles per hour.
   C.   Obey Traffic Laws: All vehicles operating upon the city streets must
stop at all intersections and obey all applicable state, county and motor
vehicle laws. (1983 Code § 10.08.020; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Equipment: All vehicles operated on the city streets for the limited
purposes herein permitted shall have qualified and properly functioning
mufflers, and must be properly lighted. (1983 Code § 10.08.030)
   E.   Valid Driver's License: All operators of snowmobiles within the city
and under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall have in effect and in
their possession a valid state of Idaho driver's license. (1983 Code §
10.08.040)
5-3-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof may be punished as provided in the
general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 10.08.060; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Municipal Authority
6-1-2: Street Improvements
6-1-3: City Base And Grades Established
6-1-4: Use Of Public Ways
6-1-5: Obstructions
6-1-6: Trees Overhanging Public Ways
6-1-7: Encroachments
6-1-8: Excavations
6-1-9: Liability For Damages
6-1-10: Violation; Penalty
6-1-1: MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY:
All streets, alleys and public thoroughfares in the city shall be under the
immediate supervision of the mayor. He shall be in charge subject to the orders
of the city council. (1983 Code § 12.04.010)
6-1-2: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
No new permanent improvement shall be undertaken by the mayor except upon the
order and direction of the city council. (1983 Code § 12.04.020)
6-1-3: CITY BASE AND GRADES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Base: A city base is fixed and established at the south quarter corner
of section 6, township 47 north, range 3, west Boise Meridian, said point also
being the 291/2 mile corner of the new north boundary of the Coeur d'Alene
Indian reservation. All official grades and elevations fixed and established on
any of the streets and avenues and sidewalks of the city shall be with
reference to and computed from the city base as fixed and established in this
subsection. (1983 Code § 12.04.150)
   B.   Grade Lines: All grades and lines shall be established and approved by
the city council in accordance with ordinances establishing the grade lines of
the various streets and curbs. (1983 Code § 12.04.160)
6-1-4: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Heavy Equipment And Loads:
      1.   It is prohibited and made unlawful for any person to drag, push,
pull or otherwise propel any poles, logs, ties, boards or other pieces of
timber or heavy materials over any graded or otherwise improved streets within
the city. (1983 Code § 12.04.030)
      2.   It is prohibited and made unlawful for any person to drive, drag,
pull, push or otherwise propel over or upon any graded or otherwise improved
street within the city; or cause to be driven, dragged, pulled, pushed or
propelled over any improved streets of the city, any vehicle having a gross
weight being the combined weight of the vehicle plus accessories plus load of
more than three hundred (300) pounds per inch width of tire (both pneumatic and
solid) on any one wheel concentrated on the surface of the roadway, such width
being determined by the manufacturer's rated width thereof; any vehicle or
machine having lugged tires or treads, or any heavy vehicle, machine or thing
which will be destructive to, or tend to interfere with or injure, the surface,
base or any part of such street of the city. Each separate act of driving,
dragging, pulling, pushing or propelling in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate violation hereof; and any person convicted of violating
this section shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code for each violation. (1983 Code § 12.04.040; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Waiver Of Weight Limitations: Upon written request being made to the
city council at any regular meeting or special meeting called for that purpose,
any person desiring to transport loads in excess of the limitation set forth in
subsection A of this section, may make written application to the city council
for waiver of said limitations, said written application to be submitted to the
city clerk not less than twenty four (24) hours prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the city council. Said written application shall specify
the dates upon which waiver is requested, the reasons therefor, a statement of
the loads and weights thereof anticipated to be carried on such dates, the
route to be followed along the city streets and a statement of precautions
which are to be taken to protect the roads, the utility lines and the health,
welfare and safety of the residents of the city. The burden of proof as to the
exceptional need for such waiver and that such need overrides in importance the
threat to the streets, the utilities and the residents of the city shall lie
with the applicant, and the decision of the city council on such matters shall
be final. In the event that the city shall grant a waiver, such waiver shall be
limited to the dates, times and conditions set forth in such waiver, including
the condition of the posting of a bond by the applicant to ensure payment of
any and all damages accruing as a result of such waiver. The applicant's
failure to conform the activities authorized thereby to the terms and
conditions specified in the waiver shall constitute a misdemeanor, each
enumerated term or condition thereof violated constituting a separate offense;
and any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 12.04.042)
   C.   Driving Vehicles Over Curbs: It is prohibited and made unlawful for any
person to back, push or otherwise propel any auto, truck, wagon or any vehicle
of any nature whatsoever over or across any curb on any of the streets and
avenues of the city, or cause the same to be done, other than in a place
specially provided for each purpose and, if so provided, it must be done
pursuant to the rules of the city supervisor and approved by him. (1983 Code §
12.04.050)
6-1-5: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Gutters And Pipes: It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any of the
gutters on any street within the city, or to obstruct any artificial carrier or
conductor of any surface waters; or to, in any manner, obstruct any pipe,
drain, sewer or other carrier or conductor of surface waters or sewerage
whether above or underneath any street or property within the city by placing
thereon or therein any dirt, refuse, snow, ice or any other matter or thing
which shall in any manner prevent the free discharge and drainage of water
through, over or in such gutters, pipes or other carriers or drains. (1983 Code
§ 12.04.070)
   B.   Streets: It is unlawful for any person to in any manner obstruct any of
the streets or avenues within the city by placing or leaving thereon any brick,
rock or any other material which will have a tendency to obstruct or blockade
the free use of such streets or avenues; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city council or the street and alley committee of
the city from authorizing the use of such portions of any street or avenue as
may be necessary for the piling of lumber and building material to be used in
the actual construction of buildings, or in the repair or alteration of
existing buildings. (1983 Code § 12.04.080)
6-1-6: TREES OVERHANGING PUBLIC WAYS:
All shade trees, including fruit bearing trees, located within the boundaries
of a dedicated street or alley, shall have all foliage, including leaves and
branches, trimmed up to a point seven feet (7') above the level of the sidewalk
under or near said trees, and if there is no sidewalk, to a point fourteen feet
(14') above the average level of the traveled roadway opposite said trees.
(1983 Code § 10.04.020; amd. 2004 Code)
6-1-7: ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any part of the
public streets, highways, rights of ways or alleys within the city, or to in
any manner encroach thereon for the purpose of displaying, selling or
dispensing any merchandise or goods, or placing of any advertising signs, gas
pumps, structures, fences or any other encroachments, including the storage of
machinery, materials, equipment, junk or any other personally owned property.
(1983 Code § 12.04.090)
   B.   Exceptions; Permit Required: Any person desiring to use any highway,
street, or alley or any part thereof, for any private purpose, must apply in
writing; and upon city council approval, the city clerk shall issue a permit
allowing the encroachment; and provided further, that the proposed encroachment
will not operate to the detriment to the city, or the residents and citizens
and users of said streets, highways or alleys therein. (1983 Code § 12.04.100)
6-1-8: EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to break up, dig up, cut
up, excavate, fill in, do any work upon or in any way whatsoever interfere
with, any street, alley, avenue, lane, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public
improvement or pavement without having first obtained a permit therefor as
provided in this section.
   B.   Application And Fee: Application for an excavation permit shall be
filed with the city clerk and shall specify the kind and location of the
proposed work, the time when the same shall begin, and the time when the same
shall be completed, which time shall in no case exceed thirty (30) days unless
a renewal of such permit is granted by the city council. The mayor may impose
such conditions as may be necessary to ensure that the city and residents be
protected. The applicant shall pay an application fee and any other fees
associated with the excavation permit at the time of issuance of the permit.
The fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Supervision Of Work: It shall be the duty of the mayor to supervise the
filling in of any excavation above set forth and the resurfacing of such
street, alley, avenue, lane, sidewalk or crosswalk, and he shall see that such
work is done in conformity with the type of surfacing upon the balance of
street, alley, lane, avenue or crosswalk.
   D.   Liability For Damages: The person upon whose application the work is
done shall assume all liability and responsibility for the costs involved and
for any injury or damages that might result from the excavation, cutting or
other work involved. (Ord. 410, 7-11-2006)
6-1-9: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
In addition to any fine or other penalty which may be incurred as a result of
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and whether or not
criminal charges shall be brought with regard to any such violation and without
regard to the determination of guilt or innocence if any such charges are
pressed, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be civilly
liable to the city for all damages incurred as a result of such violation,
including damages to streets, sidewalks and utility lines, and any other
property of the city. (1983 Code § 12.04.175)
6-1-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the general
penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 12.04.170)
CHAPTER 2
STREET VACATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Application For Vacation
6-2-2: Objections
6-2-3: Hearing Procedures
6-2-4: Damage Assessments
6-2-5: Plat Requirements
6-2-1: APPLICATION FOR VACATION:
Any person owning any interest in real estate abutting on any street, avenue or
public way, who may desire the vacation of such street, avenue or public way,
or any part thereof, may make application therefor by causing to be filed with
the city clerk a petition therefor giving a description of the property to be
vacated; and thereupon the city council may, and if such petition is signed by
the owners of a majority of the private property abutting upon that part of
such street, avenue or public way, shall, by resolution, fix a time when said
petition shall be heard, which time shall be not more than forty (40) nor less
than ten (10) days from the date of the passage of such resolution; and upon
the passage of such resolution it shall be the duty of the petitioner to give
seven (7) days' notice of the pending of such application by written or printed
notice posted in three (3) public places in the city, one of which shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on or adjacent to the street, avenue or public
way sought to be vacated, and by causing such notice to be published once, not
less than one week prior to the hearing of said application, in the official
newspaper of the city. Such notice shall contain a statement that a petition
has been filed to vacate the street, avenue or public way, or the portion
thereof sought to be vacated, describing the property to be vacated together
with a statement of the time and place fixed for the hearing of said petition.
(1983 Code § 12.08.010; amd. 2004 Code)
6-2-2: OBJECTIONS:
Any person claiming to be injured by such vacation shall, at or before the time
fixed for such hearing, file, in writing and with the city clerk, his
objections thereto setting forth the grounds of such objections, describing the
property which he claims will be injured by such vacation, and setting forth
the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed; and
such person failing to so file such objections shall be deemed to have waived
all claims for damages for or on account of such vacation. (1983 Code §
12.08.020)
6-2-3: HEARING PROCEDURES:
At the time appointed for hearing such petition, or at the time to which such
hearing may be adjourned by the mayor and city council, the mayor and city
council shall consider the said petition, and all objections filed thereto, and
shall hear the said parties; provided it shall then appear to the satisfaction
of the mayor and city council that notice of said hearing has been given as
herein provided, and in the event that such body shall determine to grant the
prayer of said petition, the mayor and city council shall thereupon, by
ordinance, vacate such street, avenue, public way or portion thereof. (1983
Code § 12.08.030)
6-2-4: DAMAGE ASSESSMENTS:
In the event that it shall be determined to vacate such street, avenue, public
way or portion thereof, and if any claim or claims for damages by reason
thereof shall have been filed as provided in section
6-2-3 of this chapter, the mayor shall appoint five (5) disinterested persons
who shall, before the passage of such vacation ordinance, assess and determine
what, if any, damage will be caused to the property of each objector and shall
immediately file with the city clerk a report of their findings stating the
amount of each item of damage. (1983 Code § 12.08.040)
6-2-5: PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Any person seeking the vacation of any street or alley, or any portion of any
street or alley, within the city shall file with his petition and application
for vacation a plat designating and showing that portion of the street or alley
sought to be vacated. Said plat shall be duly certified to by a licensed
engineer. In the event that the said street or alley is vacated by order of the
city council, the applicant, upon the passage of an ordinance vacating any
street or alley, or any portion of any street or alley, shall file said plat
showing the streets or alleys, or portions of such streets or alleys, vacated
with the county recorder of Kootenai County; and said ordinance shall not
become effective until a certificate of the county recorder of Kootenai County,
has been filed with the city clerk showing that the plat therein mentioned has
been duly recorded in his office. (1983 Code § 12.08.050)
CHAPTER 3
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Material Specifications
6-3-2: Grades And Specifications
6-3-3: Costs Of Construction
6-3-4: Construction Procedures
6-3-5: Liens
6-3-6: Snow Removal
6-3-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
6-3-8: Violation; Penalty
6-3-1: MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Mayor's Authority: All sidewalks built or constructed within the city
limits shall be constructed of cement or material pursuant to specifications of
the mayor. (1983 Code § 12.12.010)
   B.   Plank Or Wooden Sidewalks: It is unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to construct along his property or to allow to be
constructed any plank, board or wood sidewalk within the city limits without
first having secured a permit from the mayor and city council to do so. (1983
Code § 12.12.020)
6-3-2: GRADES AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks built or ordered to be built within the city shall be built and
constructed upon the grades heretofore or hereafter established; provided,
however, that the city council may order sidewalks to conform to the surface of
the ground where the streets have not been graded, and provided further that
such order shall not establish the grade of such sidewalk nor shall the city be
liable for any damage thereto by reason of the grading of any streets where
such temporary sidewalks have been constructed in accordance with this section.
All sidewalks constructed hereafter in any residential district shall be forty
inches (40") in width and constructed integral with or abutting the curb if
then constructed or then being constructed. If the curb is not then
constructed, the sidewalk shall be laid to what will be the inside line of the
curb when constructed. (1983 Code § 12.12.110; amd. 2004 Code)
6-3-3: COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Owner Liable For Costs: All sidewalks upon any street, avenue or
highway within the city shall be constructed and maintained by the property
owner owning the land in front of which such sidewalk shall be constructed,
repaired or maintained. The property owner shall be liable for all costs, and
the costs of such construction, maintenance or repair is made a first lien upon
said lots or lands fronting or abutting any streets, avenues or highways upon
which any construction, maintenance or repair is done. (1983 Code § 12.12.030)
   B.   Construction By City: All sidewalks shall be built by the owner or
owners of the property adjacent thereto or abutting thereon, but if built by
the city, the costs of construction shall be charged to the lots or land
fronting or abutting thereon or adjacent thereto as shall the costs of repair
or maintenance thereon; provided, however, that the city council may, in cases
where they deem it proper, construct or repair any sidewalks within the city
and charge the same to the property or lots as provided in this section. (1983
Code § 12.12.040)
6-3-4: CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Order Of City: Whenever the city council or mayor shall deem it
necessary, they shall order sidewalks to be constructed, repaired, replaced or
built upon and along any street or avenue or highway and in front of any lot,
piece or parcel of land fronting or abutting upon such street, avenue or
highway. Such order shall be made by resolution and be shown upon the minutes
of the city council. If such order is to build a sidewalk of different
dimensions or of different material than the general rules of the city require,
the said resolution shall specifically state the kind and character of such
sidewalk, its dimensions and the mode of its construction. (1983 Code §
12.12.050)
   B.   Notice Required: Notice of the proposed action shall be given by the
city council at least ten (10) days prior to the time the proposed action is to
be taken. The notice must be given personally to the property owner or owners
upon whose property the proposed sidewalks are to be constructed or, if the
owner or owners live without the state or, after reasonable search, cannot be
found within the state, the notice shall be published in one issue of the
official newspaper of the city and a copy of the notice mailed to the last
known address of the property owner or owners. If an agent of the owner who
cannot be found resides upon the property or in the state, notice shall also be
sent to said agent. (1983 Code § 12.12.060)
   C.   Hearing: The property owner or owners shall be given an opportunity to
be heard in person or by attorney at the meeting at which the proposed action
is to be taken and may present evidence in opposition thereto. The judicial
rules of evidence shall not be applicable and the hearing shall be informal and
shall be conducted as provided in section
1-9-2 of this code. The city council shall determine whether it is in the best
interest of the city that such proposed action be taken. At such hearing, the
city council may revise, reform or correct the proposed resolution and approve
the same as corrected. The resolution and order shall be subject to an appeal
to the courts within twenty (20) days after final action thereon and not
thereafter. (1983 Code § 12.12.070; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Time Limits: The order of the city council shall be that the owner or
owners shall within five (5) days begin construction of the sidewalks required
and, if he fails to do so or fails to complete the sidewalks within a
reasonable time, not in excess of thirty (30) days, the mayor, without further
authority from the city council, shall proceed to construct the same and shall
keep an account of the cost and expense thereof and at the next regular or
special meeting of the city council shall submit a copy to the city council by
filing the same with the city clerk and, if the city council shall approve the
cost, the same shall be and is a first lien against such lot, piece or parcel
of land which fronts or abuts upon the sidewalk constructed and shall be
charged thereto and steps to collect the same shall be taken by the city
attorney. (1983 Code § 12.12.080)
6-3-5: LIENS:
   A.   Lien Against Adjacent Property  1 : The costs of construction, repair
or maintenance of all sidewalks constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be a
first lien upon the land fronting or abutting upon the sidewalks so
constructed, repaired or maintained and the same shall be certified to the
county. The lien may be collected by foreclosure proceedings by suit brought in
the name of the city. All monies due the city for the construction, repair or
maintenance of any sidewalk upon which the work is done by the city are due,
owing and payable within ten (10) days after the construction, repair or
maintenance of such sidewalk, and the sum shall bear interest from that date at
the prevailing statutory rate until paid. (1983 Code § 12.12.090)
   B.   Notice; Hearing; Appeal: Within five (5) days after entering such
liens, the city clerk shall mail a notice of the total amount of the lien,
together with a description of the property to the owner of the property at his
last known address or, if the owner is not known, to his agent or, if no agent
is known, to the tenant or occupant of the premises or, if there is no such
occupant, then by publication in one issue of the official newspaper of the
city. Within ten (10) days after the mailing or publication of such notice, any
party interested may file with the city clerk a written protest against such
assessment. If a protest is made, the city council shall fix a time and place
for hearing the same, give reasonable notice of such hearing to the party
protesting, and may, upon such hearing, approve the assessment, or revise,
reform or correct the assessment and approve the same as corrected. The hearing
provided shall be in accordance with the provisions of section
1-9-2 of this code, and the city council shall determine whether the assessment
upon the property is reasonable in relation to the properties in close
proximity thereto. If no protest is made, the assessment shall be deemed
automatically approved and confirming any assessment hereunder shall be subject
to an appeal to the courts within twenty (20) days from the date of the final
order and no appeal shall lie thereafter. (1983 Code § 12.12.100; amd. 2004
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 45-101 et seq.
6-3-6: SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Removal Of Snow And Ice Required: Every person who may own, lease or
occupy any building within the corporate limits of the city which abuts on any
street of the city and has a sidewalk in front of said building, shall clean
the same of any snow, slush, ice or other refuse within ten (10) hours after
any storm that may take place.
   B.   Failure To Remove Snow Or Ice: Any person who neglects to comply with
the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
6-3-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Coasting, Riding Or Sledding: It shall be unlawful for any person upon
roller skates, rollerblades, inline skates, or riding any coaster, toy vehicle
or similar device, to be upon any roadway except while crossing a street within
a crosswalk; and when crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1983 Code §
12.12.120; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Driving On Sidewalks: It is unlawful for any person to drive or cause
to be driven any wagon, automobile, truck or any other vehicle of any kind or
nature across any of the sidewalks of the city other than at a place specially
constructed for such purpose. (1983 Code § 12.12.130)
   C.   Bicycles On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to park,
ride or propel any bicycle upon the sidewalks of the city within the business
district or any other congested district of the city that may be so designated
by proclamation of the mayor. (2004 Code)
6-3-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 12.12.140)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Public Improvement Requirements
6-4-2: Water Facilities
6-4-3: Sewer Facilities
6-4-4: Underground Utilities
6-4-5: Streets And Sidewalks
6-4-6: Stormwater Facilities
6-4-7: Off Street Parking
6-4-8: Violations; Penalty
6-4-1: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Street, Water And Sewer Extensions:
      1.   Any owner seeking to develop property within the city or seeking
connection to the city water or sewer system shall be responsible for paying
for the extension of such facilities, including streets and stormwater
facilities, to the property.
      2.   All utility and street extensions shall be designed by a licensed
engineer. Plans must be approved by the city prior to construction and as built
plans shall be provided to the city. Such extensions shall be made in
accordance with all city and state standards including fire hydrants and
manholes.
      3.   The city may require that water and sewer lines be sized to provide
services beyond the needs of the property being developed. In such case, the
city shall pay the incremental costs related to increasing the size of the
line.
   B.   Approval Of Plans; Engineering Costs: Plans for all improvements must
meet all specifications of this chapter brought to and approved by the city
council before any work is done. Within thirty (30) days of completion of
construction, as built plans shall be provided to the city. The owner shall
reimburse the city for all engineering costs incurred by the city.
   C.   Inspection By City: No water line, sewer line or stormwater pipe shall
be covered until it has been inspected by the city. The developer or contractor
shall provide at least twenty four (24) hours' notice to city of need for
inspection. All public facilities shall be warranted by the developer or
contractor for a period of three (3) years after acceptance by the city. (Ord.
362, 3-7-2000)
6-4-2: WATER FACILITIES:
Water lines within the city shall comply with the following standards:
   A.   All work shall conform to the "Idaho Standards For Public Works
Construction" (ISPWC), current edition, and the city of Harrison standards and
specifications. In the case of conflict, the most stringent standard shall
apply. (Ord. 422, 12-4-2007)
   B.   Fire hydrants shall be constructed every four hundred feet (400').
   C.   All plans shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 362,
3-7-2000)
6-4-3: SEWER FACILITIES:
Sewer lines shall comply with the following standards:
   A.   All work shall conform to the "Idaho Standards For Public Works
Construction" (ISPWC), current edition, and the city of Harrison standards and
specifications. In the case of conflict, the most stringent standard shall
apply. (Ord. 422, 12-4-2007)
   B.   All plans shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 362,
3-7-2000)
6-4-4: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
   A.   Whenever in this section the words or phrases hereinafter defined are
used, they shall have the following definitions:
   COMMISSION: The public utilities commission of the state.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES: Poles, towers, supports,
wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers,
insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments
and appurtenances located above ground within the city and used or useful in
supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.
   B.   All wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, data
transmission or similar or associated service within the city installed after
the effective date of this chapter shall be installed underground.
   C.   This chapter does not apply to all poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures within the city which exist and have been installed prior
to the adoption of this chapter; the section does apply to wires and facilities
which undergo replacement or a substantial renovation.
   D.   After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person or utility to erect, construct, maintain, employ or operate poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the city unless otherwise
provided for in subsection E or F of this section.
   E.   This section does not apply to the following types of facilities:
      1.   Overhead facilities installed and maintained, without authority of
the city engineer, to provide emergency service for a period not to exceed ten
(10) days.
      2.   Cases of emergency where the city engineer grants special
permission, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect,
construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures.
      3.   Poles and lamps used exclusively for street lighting.
      4.   Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing through
the city when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires
and associated structures are not prohibited.
      5.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by
means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or extending from the
building to another building without crossing any public street.
      6.   Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communication services.
      7.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
   F.   Any person or utility may petition the city for a variance to erect,
construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
The city will utilize its variance procedures, established pursuant the local
planning act 1 , to decide such requests.
   G.   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within the city, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission;
provided, that if any provision of any franchise agreement between the city and
the supplying utility is clearly in conflict with any provision of this
section, the provision of the franchise agreement shall prevail. (Ord. 362, 3-
7-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9, chapter 10 of this code.
6-4-5: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
Rights of way and sidewalks shall be constructed to the requirements of this
section. Dedication of streets to these standards shall be a condition of
development unless waived by the city council.
   A.   Minimum Standards: All streets and sidewalks shall be to the following
minimum standards:
      1.   Streets:
         a.   Base of at least twelve inches (12") (minimum) of rock with at
least six inches (6") (pit run not smaller than 3 inch diameter) topped by at
least four inches (4") of one and one-quarter inch (11/4") crushed aggregate,
graded and finished with an additional surface of at least two inches (2") of
crushed aggregate three-quarter inch (3/4"). This surface shall be
appropriately compacted to meet current engineering standards.
         b.   The driving surface shall be paved with asphalt on the above
indicated compacted base at located in the center of road unless otherwise
located by the city engineer.
      2.   Curbs: Curbs shall be constructed on both sides of the street unless
waived by the city council.
      3.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be at least forty inches (40") in width
and shall be constructed of concrete four inches (4") in depth (6 inches at
curb cuts and driveways) with at least four inches (4") of compacted gravel as
a base. A sidewalk shall be developed on one side of the street in single-
family residential areas and on both sides in commercial, industrial and multi-
family residential areas. Expansion joints shall be located at least every
thirty feet (30'), and scribed lines every forty inches (40") or to match the
width of the sidewalk.
      4.   Alternative Materials: The city council may permit alternate
materials or, where it is in the public interest, permit installations to be
delayed until adjacent properties develop.
   B.   Residential Streets (Local Access Road):
      1.   Dedicated right of way shall be fifty feet (50') in width with a
five foot (5') utility easement on each side. Width of surfacing and usable
shoulders shall be at least forty feet (40').
      2.   The street shall be constructed to at least thirty feet (30') in
width with asphalt of at least two and one-half inches (2 1/2") thick on the
above indicated compacted base at least twenty feet (20') in width placed as
designated by the city engineer.
   C.   Minor Collector Streets:
      1.   Dedicated right of way shall be fifty feet (50') in width.
      2.   The street shall be constructed to at least forty feet (40') in
width (travel width of at least 22 feet and 9 foot wide parking lane on each
side). The travelway shall be finished with asphalt at least four inches (4")
thick.
      3.   The following streets are minor collectors: (reserved)
   D.   Major Collectors:
      1.   Dedicated right of way shall be eighty feet (80') in width with a
five foot (5') utility easement on each side.
      2.   The street shall be constructed to at least forty four feet (44') in
width (24 foot travel lanes with 10 foot parking on each side) with asphalt at
least four inches (4") thick with a paved width of at least twenty four feet
(24').
      3.   Sidewalks with a minimum width of five feet (5') shall be developed
on both sides of the street.
      4.   The following streets are hereby designated as major collectors:
(reserved). (Ord. 362, 3-7-2000)
6-4-6: STORMWATER FACILITIES:
Stormwater facilities shall be installed at the time of or prior to development
of adjacent property. Stormwater facilities must be designed by a civil
engineer. If a project will place a burden on downstream facilities, the
developer may be required to construct or improve such off site facilities. The
city may waive the requirement of an engineered design for a small project upon
a determination by the council that the complexity of the project does not
require engineered plans. For purposes of this section, small projects are less
than two (2) acres in size and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in
construction costs. All subdivisions must have engineered plans for
improvements 1 . (Ord. 362, 3-7-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
6-4-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking spaces shall be provided for every residential unit,
commercial and office facility hereafter constructed or placed on a site within
the city as provided by section
9-5-4 of this code. The city council may reduce this requirement upon a showing
by the property owner that the requirement is excessive. A variance from the
parking requirement may be granted under circumstances where the applicant
provides funds to the city to acquire an equal number of city owned parking
spaces in the vicinity of the use. (Ord. 362, 3-7-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
6-4-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
The city may enforce these regulations through civil action and/or prosecution.
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be misdemeanor punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. Each day of violation after notice shall constitute a
separate violation. (Ord. 362, 3-7-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PARKS, BEACHES AND WATERFRONT
SECTION:
6-5-1: City Parks
6-5-2: Beaches
6-5-3: Waterfront
6-5-1: CITY PARKS:
   A.   Camping In City Parks: Camping of any kind or nature in any city park
shall be and the same is hereby prohibited, said parks to be for daytime use
only. (1983 Code § 7.04.010; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Hours: The hours for use and occupancy of any city park shall be from
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the following morning;
no persons except law enforcement officers or other officers or employees of
the city shall be present in any park area during the hours set out in this
subsection. (1983 Code § 7.04.020)
   C.   Standards Of Conduct:
      1.   All persons occupying a city park shall do so in an orderly and
sanitary manner, in full compliance with all laws of the state of Idaho and
ordinances, regulations and rules of the city relating to use and enjoyment of
said park areas;
      2.   All persons using any park shall do so in a manner so as not to
interfere with its use and enjoyment by other members of the public lawfully
using the same;
      3.   All parks shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition by all
persons using the same, and all garbage and refuse shall be cleaned up and
placed in proper receptacles by all patrons of the park premises;
      4.   All persons using any park shall refrain from loud or tumultuous
conduct, or the use of profanity; and
      5.   No person or persons shall be permitted to use any park while
intoxicated. (1983 Code § 7.04.030)
   D.   Violations; Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty in
section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 7.04.040)
6-5-2: BEACHES:
   A.   Definitions:
   BEACHES: Includes the public beaches of the city and all parking and grassy
areas adjacent thereto and belonging to the city.
   WATERFRONT: Includes all public swim areas, boating areas, docking areas and
docks situated thereto, extending from the beaches to the breakwater. (1983
Code § 7.08.010)
   B.   Recreational Use: The beaches and waterfront areas adjacent to and
belonging to the city shall be used for recreational purposes only. (1983 Code
§ 7.08.020)
   C.   Uses Prohibited:
      1.   Commercial Enterprises And Manufacturing: No manufacturing or
commercial enterprise or activities of any kind for profit shall be maintained
on, in or in connection with the beaches and waterfront area; nor shall such
property in any way be used for other than strictly recreational purposes. This
restriction shall not be construed, however, as preventing the city from
charging fees, rentals or other charges for the occupancy or use of any of the
beach or waterfront areas, or for any services provided by the city in
connection therewith. (1983 Code § 7.08.030)
      2.   Exhibitions, Festivals, Shows Or Fairs: No fair, exhibition,
festival, show or other activity that attracts or is intended to attract,
divert or collect a large number of persons shall be conducted or allowed on
the beaches or waterfront areas. (1983 Code § 7.08.040)
   D.   Exceptions; Permit Required: The restrictions of subsection C
notwithstanding, if application shall be made, in writing, to the city council
requesting relief from this section, and if the city council at any regular
meeting, or special meeting called for that purpose, shall determine that the
interests of the residents of the city and the general public will be served
thereby, then the city council reserves the right to grant to individuals or
organizations a permit to carry on an activity which would otherwise be in
violation of this section. The permit shall be subject to such terms and
conditions as the city council may deem fit and proper, with permit fees
established by resolution of the city council to be paid. (1983 Code §
7.08.050; amd. 2004 Code)
6-5-3: WATERFRONT:
   A.   Camping:
      1.   There shall be a fee charged for the use of camping facilities
belonging to the city and situated on the waterfront adjacent to the Harrison
marina, the amount thereof to be fixed by resolution of the city council. Such
amount may, as need arises, be adjusted from time to time by further resolution
of the city council. (1983 Code § 7.12.010)
      2.   The fees established by the city council shall be enforced on a
year-round basis, and payment of such fee shall be the joint and several
responsibility of any person causing a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle to
be parked in a camping space, and the person exercising control over such
vehicle. (1983 Code § 7.12.030)
      3.   The city council shall appoint its designated agent who shall have
the authority to collect the established fee from each person using the said
camping area. (1983 Code § 7.12.020)
   B.   Interference With Collection Agent: No person shall harass or assault
the appointed agent of the city council while he is acting in his capacity as
designated agent, nor shall any person interfere with the designated agent so
as to hinder him from carrying out his duties. (1983 Code § 7.12.050; amd. 2004
Code)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: If any person shall hinder the appointed collection
agent or refuse to pay the fee established hereunder, when payment of the same
is requested by the designated agent of the city council, and if it is
determined that the said fee was then due and owing from the individual so
refusing, then that individual shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 7.12.040; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY CEMETERY
SECTION:
6-6-1: Sale Of Cemetery Lots
6-6-2: Interment
6-6-3: Grave Openings
6-6-4: Monuments And Ornamentation
6-6-5: Compliance By Work Force
6-6-6: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
6-6-7: Violation; Penalty
6-6-1: SALE OF CEMETERY LOTS:
All lots and parcels of ground in the Harrison cemetery which the city shall
sell will be conveyed by certificate, giving the owner the right of possession
forever, as a place of interment of the dead; subject, however, to such rules
of the Harrison cemetery as shall be in force at the time of the purchase, or
that may be adopted thereafter for the general good of the cemetery. It is not
the intention to give credit for lots or graves, but in case such leniency is
shown, the city shall retain the right of ownership of the lots, and in case
the party purchasing the same should fail to pay the full amount due thereon,
the city may, after waiting a reasonable time, at its discretion, proceed to
remove the bodies therein to some other suitable place in the cemetery, or to
the portion set apart for single graves; or it may set apart that portion of
the lot in which the remains are buried and sell the remaining portion of the
lot. (1983 Code § 2.24.070)
6-6-2: INTERMENT:
   A.   Permit Required: Whenever an interment is to be made in a family lot,
written application must be made to the mayor or city clerk by the owner of
said lot, through the undertaker, and a permit obtained therefor. (1983 Code §
2.24.080)
   B.   Application And Contents:
      1.   The application must state the following particulars:
         a.   The full name of the deceased;
         b.   Age, if known;
         c.   Date and place of demise;
         d.   Date of interment and location of grave;
         e.   Name of undertaker;
         f.   Outside size of coffin or box.
      2.   In case of the interment of a deceased owner of a lot, the
application shall be authorized by some person known to the mayor or city clerk
to be of his family or household, or by his physician. (1983 Code § 2.24.090;
amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Advance Notice Of Interment Required: The permit must be deposited with
the mayor at least four (4) hours before the time of the funeral, and notice of
the hour of the funeral must be given at the same time. (1983 Code § 2.24.100)
6-6-3: GRAVE OPENINGS:
   A.   Fees: All graves must be opened by the city, and all interments will be
subject to the charges as may be set from time to time by resolution of the
city council. (1983 Code § 2.24.130)
   B.   Removal Of Bodies: When a body is to be removed from one part of the
cemetery to another part of the cemetery or to another place of interment, a
permit must be obtained from the mayor prior to such removal. (1983 Code §
2.24.120)
   C.   Transfer From Other Burial Grounds: In all cases where bodies are
brought from other burial grounds for interment, the same proceedings must be
had before burial as provided in section
6-6-2 of this chapter. (1983 Code § 2.24.110)
6-6-4: MONUMENTS AND ORNAMENTATION:
   A.   Placement Of Monuments: No monument shall be placed on any lot without
permission of the mayor, and it shall be his duty to direct the location and
placement of the same, and no monument shall be so placed as to interfere with
any important effects upon adjoining lots. The foundation of all monuments and
headstones shall not be less than three feet (3') deep, and subject to approval
by the mayor. (1983 Code § 2.24.030)
   B.   Ornamentation:
      1.   Ornamental Objects: No lot shall contain any vase or seat, or any
rock works, or any other ornamental objects, excepting by permission of the
mayor. (1983 Code § 2.24.010)
      2.   Trees And Shrubs: No lot shall be decorated by its owner or other
parties interested therein with any tree or shrub without the permission of the
mayor. (1983 Code § 2.24.020)
      3.   Grounds: The mayor shall, under the direction of the city council,
have entire charge of the planting of trees and shrubs, in accordance with the
general plan for the ornamentation of the grounds; and if any tree or shrub
standing on any lot, whether planted by direction of the mayor or otherwise,
shall become, by means of its roots, branches or otherwise, detrimental to
adjacent lots or avenues, or for any reason its removal shall become necessary
or advisable, the mayor shall have the right, and it shall be his duty, to
remove such tree or shrub, or any part thereof. (1983 Code § 2.24.040)
      4.   Private Vaults And Tombs: Private vaults and tombs will be allowed
in lots where the ground is suitable therefor; but in every case a design of
the same must first be submitted to, and approved by, the city council. (1983
Code § 2.24.050)
6-6-5: COMPLIANCE BY WORK FORCE:
In every case where workers are employed by owners of lots to do work or make
improvements in or about said lots, such workers shall be subject to the
control and direction of the mayor; and any worker who shall neglect or refuse
to obey said direction, or who shall carelessly or wilfully do injury to
adjacent lots, or who shall neglect to remove any rubbish accumulated in his
work, will not thereafter be permitted to work in the grounds of the cemetery.
(1983 Code § 2.24.060)
6-6-6: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Motor Vehicles: Fast driving and driving off the road or avenues in and
around the cemetery are strictly prohibited. (1983 Code § 2.24.140)
   B.   Animals: No animals will be permitted to enter the cemetery grounds.
(1983 Code § 2.24.150; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Disturbing The Peace: Boisterous and profane language, and any conduct
tending to disturb the quiet and good order of the place, are forbidden. (1983
Code § 2.24.160)
   D.   Picking Flowers; Defacing Property: Visitors and all other persons who
shall enter the grounds are forbidden to pick any flowers or plants, to break
or injure any tree or shrub, or to write upon or deface any wall, monument or
gravestone. (1983 Code § 2.24.170)
   E.   Loaded Vehicles: Loaded vehicles, unless loaded with material for work
in the cemetery, will not be permitted to enter the grounds. (1983 Code §
2.24.180)
   F.   Persons Removed From Cemetery: Any person violating any of the rules or
regulations established for the cemetery, or committing any offense, shall be
removed therefrom. (1983 Code § 2.24.190; amd. 2004 Code)
6-6-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 2.24.200)
CHAPTER 7
FRANCHISES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Franchises Required
6-7-2: Conditions Of Franchise
6-7-3: Application For Franchise
6-7-4: Objections To Franchise
6-7-5: Granting Of Franchise
6-7-1: FRANCHISES REQUIRED:
Any person, company, corporation or association intending to construct or
erect, or causing to be constructed or erected within the corporate limits of
the city a telephone or telegraph line, electric, gas or other light plant, or
any system of waterworks, or any cable and/or telecommunications systems,
whereby any part or portion of any highway, bridge, street or alley in the city
limits will be used for the erection of poles, stretching of wires, laying
underground wires or laying of pipes for purposes of light plants, and laying
water pipes for a system of waterworks, must first obtain a permit or franchise
from the city council. (1983 Code § 5.20.010; amd. 2004 Code)
6-7-2: CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Term: No permit or franchise shall be granted for a longer period than
twenty (20) years
   B.   Exclusivity Prohibited: No franchise or permit shall be exclusive.
(1983 Code § 5.20.020)
6-7-3: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
   A.   Contents: The application for a franchise shall be presented to the
city council and shall state fully the person, company, corporation or
association applying for the permit or franchise, the object, purpose and
period for which the permit is requested. The privileges asked for must be
specifically stated; all highways, bridges, streets or alleys to be made use of
must be designated; and the mode of how the proposed line or system and the
extent of its plants, and how built, constructed or to be erected must be fully
described. The proposed rates and charges to patrons and consumers must be
stated; any concession in return for the permit to be made on the part of the
applicant to the city or its residents must be stated; and any other
information that will fully explain the terms, conditions and purposes under
which the permit is asked shall be embodied in such application. (1983 Code §
5.20.030; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Filing; City Council Action: After the filing of such application, the
city council shall cause an ordinance to be drawn up in conformity with the
application and also embodying therein such conditions, terms, regulations and
restrictions for the government, operation and construction of the respective
lines or systems as they may deem fit. Such ordinance shall be read three (3)
times before final action thereon is taken. (1983 Code § 5.20.040)
   C.   Notice:
      1.   After the filing of any application for a permit or franchise, the
applicant shall, at his own expense, cause to be published a notice that such
application has been made, and in such notice shall set forth the purpose, the
period for which such permit or franchise is asked, and the concessions,
conditions and terms under which such permit or franchise is asked. The
highways, bridges, streets and alleys to be used in the construction of the
lines or systems and the rates and charges proposed to be charged to patrons
and consumers shall be stated in the notice. (1983 Code § 5.20.050; amd. 2004
Code)
      2.   Such notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city
for a period of not less than four (4) consecutive weeks. (1983 Code §
5.20.060)
6-7-4: OBJECTIONS TO FRANCHISE:
Upon the notice provided for in section
6-7-3 of this chapter being published, any resident of the city may file with
the city council any protest, remonstrance or objection against the granting of
such permit or franchise, such protest, remonstrance or objection to be in
writing and signed, and if the city council finds that a majority of the
property owners and taxable inhabitants in the city have signed such protest,
remonstrance or objection, such permit or franchise shall not be granted. (1983
Code § 5.20.070)
6-7-5: GRANTING OF FRANCHISE:
Should no majority of property owners and taxable inhabitants present protests,
remonstrances or objections, at the time when the ordinance for a permit or
franchise comes up for the third reading, such ordinance shall then come up for
final action, and in order to be passed, it shall require the affirmative vote
of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full city council. (Ord. 316,
9-4-1990; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-1-1: Supervision
7-1-2: Installation And Maintenance Of Equipment
7-1-3: Separate Connections Required
7-1-4: Authority To Shut Off Water
7-1-5: Excavations For Connections
7-1-6: Tapping And Connection Permit
7-1-7: Water Meters Required
7-1-8: Water Service Reconnection Fee
7-1-9: Service Outside City
7-1-10: Supply To Fire Equipment
7-1-11: Shutoff Orders
7-1-12: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7-1-13: Violation; Penalty
7-1-1: SUPERVISION:
   A.   City Maintenance Supervisor: The city maintenance supervisor shall be
the head of the water department and subject only to the orders of the mayor
and city council. The city maintenance supervisor, together with his assistant,
shall perform the duties prescribed herein for the water department of the
city, except such duties as may be specifically assigned to the city clerk as
the clerk of the water department 1 . (1983 Code § 14.20.010)
   B.   Water Department Personnel: The water department shall consist of the
city clerk as clerk of the water department, and the city maintenance
supervisor and his assistants, who shall carry out all the provisions of this
chapter and shall be subject only in matters of discretion to the mayor and
city council. (1983 Code § 14.20.020)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-5-4 of this code.
7-1-2: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The water department will, at the expense of the city, run a service pipe not
larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") from the city water main to the lot line
of any applicant or consumer of water, provided that the distance is not
greater than seventy five feet (75'). All pipe of one inch (1") in size is to
be laid by and under the direction of the city water department, and the
expense thereof charged to the consumer or owner of the property served. The
water consumer, or the owner of the property served, shall at all times be
responsible for the condition of the lateral pipes, curb cock and box when
located on his premises, and said owner, or water consumer, shall be
responsible for all damages resulting from leaks or breaks to the service pipe
on his property. No claim shall be made against the city on account of the
breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, or for the failure in the supply of
water. The city will be responsible for repair of leaks that occur upon public
property. Where a break or leak occurs in a lateral service pipe, the property
owner or water consumer will be required to repair the pipe at his own expense
and to protect the city and the water department from any cost for such repair.
If, after being notified, the owner of the property upon which a break or leak
occurs or his agent does not make the necessary repairs to his lateral service
pipe immediately, the water department shall cause the water to be shut off
from said premises, and the same shall not be turned on until the service pipe
has been properly repaired and the owner or water consumer has paid to the city
the fees set out in chapter 5 of this title for the shutting off and turning on
of said water. Where a break or leak occurs in a lateral service pipe, the
property owner or water consumer shall be responsible for any and all damages
resulting therefrom. Where there is a leak and it is doubtful whether the water
is from a break in the city main or in a private service pipe or lateral line,
the city shall have charge of the repairs but the costs of repairs shall be
assessed to the proper private property owner or consumer in the event the leak
or break is in a service pipe or lateral line. (1983 Code § 14.20.030; amd.
Ord. 388, 6-3-2003)
7-1-3: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   The service pipes must be so arranged that the supply for each separate
house or premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock placed at a point
designated by the water department, and the owner or agent of said property
will be held responsible for all bills for water used through said service for
his use, or from the use of others to whom it may be accessible. Where water is
supplied on one service to several houses, families or persons, the city
council may require separate services or may permit the single service to be
used on condition that one designated person shall pay for all water used on
the service. (1983 Code § 14.10.080)
   B.   It is unlawful for any owner, agent or tenant to supply or permit to be
supplied any water to two (2) or more buildings through one and the same
connection, except on special contract with the water department. (1983 Code §
14.40.030)
7-1-4: AUTHORITY TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The water department reserves the right at any time to shut off, without
notice, the water from its mains for the purpose of making repairs or
extensions, or for any other purpose; and no claim shall be made against the
city by reason of the breakage of any service pipe or from any other damage
that may result from shutting off said water. (1983 Code § 14.20.040)
7-1-5: EXCAVATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Safety Precautions Required: The streets must be opened in the manner
which will occasion the least inconvenience to the public. No excavation in any
street or alley shall be left open overnight unless properly guarded with amber
lights, which must be maintained from sunset to sunrise; and every precaution
must be taken to ensure public safety. (1983 Code § 14.20.050; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Excavation Permit: Before excavation within the streets, for the
purpose of laying service pipes or repairing the same, the owners of property
to be served, or their legal agent, must first, through the plumber doing the
work or by themselves, secure a permit for such work from the office of the
water department on a form provided for that purpose. Permit fees are as set by
resolution of the city council. (1983 Code § 14.20.060; amd. 2004 Code)
7-1-6: TAPPING AND CONNECTION PERMIT:
All applications for the tapping or connection with any water mains must be
made at the office of the clerk of the water department by owners of the
property to be served, or their legal agents, and be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. Said
applicant shall fully state all purposes for which the water is required, the
size and number of taps or other outlets from which the water is to be drawn,
and the number of the lot and block to which the water is to be taken and used
and the street from which it is desired that the service pipe shall be laid.
Such application shall show upon its face that the same is made and taken and
accepted subject to any and all rules and regulations then in force, or to be
made later, for the government and control of said waterworks system. No person
other than an authorized employee of the water department shall tap or make any
perforation or opening of any kind in any water main or any service pipe from
which water may be taken. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2007)
7-1-7: WATER METERS REQUIRED:
All property owners within the corporate limits of the city, in, on or upon
whose premises water is consumed by the owner, tenants or otherwise, must have
a water meter, to be furnished by the city, installed in, at and upon the
respective premises; and all city water used in, on or upon said premises shall
pass through and be measured by said water meter. In the event that any
property owner shall refuse to allow such water meter to be installed, it shall
be the duty of the water department to forthwith discontinue the water to the
premises or property of such owner, or to refuse to deliver water to the
property or premises of the owner. All property owners connected to the city
water system shall pay a user fee in the amount set by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 410, 7-11-2006)
7-1-8: WATER SERVICE RECONNECTION FEE:
Whenever water service to a property being served by the system has been
terminated pursuant to section
7-1-11 of this chapter, a reconnection fee shall be paid to the city before
restoration of water service to the property. The amount of the reconnection
fee shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council, and shall
be subject to modification from time to time in the manner provided for the
modification of other rates established by this chapter. (Ord. 431, 3-3-2009)
7-1-9: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
It shall be discretionary with the city council as to whether water service
shall be provided outside the city limits. (1983 Code § 14.30.030)
7-1-10: SUPPLY TO FIRE EQUIPMENT:
Water will be furnished to pipes or hoses, to be used for fire purposes only,
free of charge on the condition that the fire pipes, hoses or branches be
disconnected from all other water supplies furnished by the city and that all
pipes, hoses or branches so used be sealed to be broken open only in case of
fire. (1983 Code § 14.10.010)
7-1-11: SHUTOFF ORDERS:
All orders for discontinuing water service must be made in writing to the water
department and must be done in conjunction with termination of sewer service as
described in section
7-2-6 of this title. The owner may elect to continue paying at the unoccupied
rate set by resolution and subject to modification from time to time. If the
owner elects to cease paying the monthly fee, the city council will issue an
order terminating service. The order shall advise that the property is not
served by city utilities. Said order shall be filed with the county recorder to
provide notice to any individual considering the purchase of said property. The
capitalization fee, in effect at the time of reconnection, must be paid before
service will be reinstated. (Ord. 431, 3-3-2009)
7-1-12: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Unauthorized Turn On: After the water has been turned off at the curb
cock, it shall not be turned on by any person except an employee of the water
department; and if so turned on at the curb cock by any person other than an
employee of the water department, the mayor shall have the water turned off at
the main and shall have charged against the property and the property owner a
penalty of five dollars ($5.00) which must be paid before the water shall again
be turned on, and in addition thereto, the party turning on said water in
violation of the provisions of this subsection may be punished for the
violation thereof as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 14.40.010)
   B.   Contract Required: No person shall knowingly take or use or allow to be
used water without having previously contracted for the same. (1983 Code §
14.40.020)
   C.   Water Waste: It is unlawful for any owner, agent or tenant, or other
person to maintain, suffer or permit to remain in a leaky or defective
condition any water pipe, hydrant, service or water connection of any sort
whereby city water may be wasted; or cause the same to be maintained, suffered
or permitted to remain in a leaky or defective condition for more than twenty
four (24) hours after knowledge or discovery of the same; and it is unlawful
for any person to waste or cause to be wasted in any way whatsoever any water
from the water supply works of the city. If undue waste is permitted, or water
is bypassed to other consumers, or in cases of deception, misrepresentation or
abuse of the privilege of connection with the water system, the supply of water
shall be turned off without notice, and a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) shall
be paid to the water department before the water is turned on, and in addition
thereto the offending person may be punished as provided in the general penalty
in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 14.40.040)
   D.   Unauthorized Use: It is unlawful for any person to open, close, turn or
interfere with, or to attach to or connect with, any fire hydrant, curb cock or
valves, without permission from the water department, or to disturb or damage
any pipe, machinery, tools, or other property of the water department, or to
throw any substance into the reservoir or water main, or to bathe in any
reservoir, or to deface or injure any buildings belonging to or connected with
said water system. (1983 Code § 14.40.050)
   E.   Injure Or Defraud: It is unlawful to do any of the following acts with
intent to injure or defraud:
      1.   Obstruct, alter, injure or prevent the action of any meter or other
instrument used to measure or register the quantity of water supplied to a
consumer thereof;
      2.   Make any connection by means of a pipe, or otherwise, with any main
or pipe used for delivery of water to a consumer thereof in such a manner as to
take water from said main or pipe without its passage through the meter or
other instrument provided for registering the amount or quantity consumed, or
use any water so obtained;
      3.   Make any connection or reconnection with such main or pipe, or turn
off or on, or in any manner interfere with, any valve, stopcock or other
appliance connected therewith; or
      4.   Prevent by the erection of any device or construction, or by any
other means, free access to any meter or other instrument for registering or
measuring the amount of water consumed, or interfere with, obstruct or prevent
by any means, the reading or inspection of such meter or instrument by any of
the employees of the water department. (1983 Code § 14.40.060)
   F.   Restricted Use Of Washers And Sprinklers: No person shall use or permit
to be used any washer or lawn or garden sprinkler except upon his own premises
for which he has made application and is paying rent. (1983 Code § 14.40.070;
amd. 2004 Code)
   G.   Maximum Hose Size Permitted: No hose larger than three-fourths inch (3/
4") in diameter shall be used from any service pipe without special permission
from the water department, except in case of fire protection. (1983 Code §
14.40.080)
   H.   Use Of Water During Fire: No person shall draw any water from the city
main during a fire except for the extinguishment of a fire. (1983 Code §
14.40.090)
   I.   Water Pollution: No person shall cast, throw or place in any water
reservoir, supply pipe, water main, headworks or other part of the waterworks
or supply system of the city, any dirt, refuse, filth, wood, sticks, stones or
other substances or matter, or shall in any manner pollute the water in any
service supply pipe, headworks or any other part of said waterworks system.
(1983 Code § 14.40.100)
   J.   Connection Within Floodplain: Connection to the city water system is
prohibited for any properties located within the 100-year floodplain, or within
designated wetlands, unless a 404 permit has been issued by the U.S. army corps
of engineers. (Ord. 363, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
7-1-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Each and every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 14.40.110)
CHAPTER 1A
WATER SYSTEM
ARTICLE A. WATER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Basic Rate Classes Established
7-1A-2: Computation Of Charges
7-1A-3: Rates
7-1A-4: Rate Regulations
7-1A-5: Financial Reports
7-1A-1: BASIC RATE CLASSES ESTABLISHED:
Separate basic rates and charges for furnishing water service shall be
established by the city council from time to time for each of the following
classes of users:
   A.   Occupied residential within the city.
   B.   Residential outside the city.
   C.   Commercial, multiple residential:
      1.   For any apartment building or similar commercial facility composed
of multiple dwelling units wherein persons reside on a permanent or semi-
permanent basis, the monthly base rate shall be assessed for each living unit
within said complex whether or not said units are actually occupied.
      2.   The above stated rate class shall not apply to motels, trailer
camps, or similar facilities providing accommodations to transients, which
facilities shall be classified as commercial property under subsection E of
this section.
   D.   Unoccupied residential structures.
   E.   Commercial (public retail, nonresidential).
   F.   Unoccupied commercial structures.
   G.   Industrial (any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works
identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972", office of
management and budget, as amended and supplemented under the following
divisions:
 
Division A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing;
Division B: Mining;
Division D: Manufacturing;
Division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
            services;
Division I: Services.
 
   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it
will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences. Rates to be established individually by contract to be
commensurate with other charges in the city; however, rates will comply with
the federal guidelines and/or regulations pursuant to the water pollution
control act.
   H.   The city reserves the right to determine the type of customer receiving
water service and to classify the type of customer within the foregoing
categories. The city further reserves the authority to delegate the duty to so
classify customers. In the event there arises a dispute relative to the type of
customer receiving water service and thus as to the applicable water service
rate, the city's determination as to the type of customer shall be binding upon
the customer in the absence of manifest error. A customer disputing the
classification shall have the right to appeal the determination of the city by
making a written request to the city council for a redetermination hearing and,
after a hearing on the matter, the determination of the city council shall be
likewise binding on the customer in the absence of manifest error.
   The written request for redetermination shall set forth with reasonable
clarity the reasons for the request. The redetermination hearing shall be held
at city hall at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, or at
such time and place as the city council may order; provided, however, that any
hearing held other than at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
council or at the city hall shall be held only upon at least five (5) days'
written notice to the party requesting the hearing, setting forth the time and
place of hearing. At such hearing, either party may present witnesses and other
evidence, but a failure by the City to present witnesses or other evidence
shall in no way invalidate the decision of the City Council, it being the
requesting party's burden to convince the City Council that reclassification
should be made. All charges shall begin with the date of classification by the
City, rather than the date of any final appeal determination. (Ord. 323, 2-2-
1993)
   I.   Charges for the use of water from fire hydrants within the City shall
be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for an annual hydrant use permit paid to
the City prior to use. Should it appear that said use will exceed ten thousand
(10,000) gallons, additional estimated water shall be billed to the permittee
at the City's normal monthly rate. (Ord. 390, 6-3-2003)
7-1A-2: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES:
   A.   All fees and charges are subject to modification by resolution upon
review by the City Council of the revenues and costs of the water system, which
review shall be carried out at least once during any given twelve (12) month
period of operation of the system.
   B.   Charges based on water consumption shall be computed on the monthly
average over the previous twelve (12) month period, with an adjustment at the
end of each twelve (12) month period. The adjusted average shall be the basis
for the succeeding twelve (12) month period. In the event that any unit of
occupancy does not have a twelve (12) month record of water consumption,
billing shall be estimated and agreed upon between the City and the customer,
until such a record is available, and adjustment for the previous twelve (12)
month period shall be made at that time. (Ord. 323, 2-2-1993)
7-1A-3: RATES:
   A.   General: Water rates within the City charged by the Water Department
shall, subject to the minimums established by the City Council, be as follows:
 
First 7,500 gallons used for residential users     $0.35/1,000 gallons
Over first 7,500 gallons used for commercial users 0.60/1,000 gallons
 
   (1983 Code § 14.10.120)
   B.   Unmetered Premises: Rates for unmetered premises will be determined by
an agreement between the City Council and the owner or occupant of such
premises, structure or establishment as to the estimated amount of use. (1983
Code § 14.10.130)
7-1A-4: RATE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum Basic Rates Within City: The basic minimum rate for water
furnished by the City to each classification of water user within the City,
created by section
7-1A-1 of this article, and the quantity of water to which the minimum basic
rate applies, shall be set from time to time by resolution adopted by the City
Council.
   B.   Excess Usage: In addition to the minimum basic rates provided for in
this article, the City Council shall, from time to time, by resolution adopted
by it, establish rates for excess water usage for each class of property
created by section
7-1A-1 of this article. (Ord. 323, 2-2-1993)
   C.   Time Of Charge: Water rentals at the established rate will be charged
against the property from the date on which the water is turned on until the
date on which the water meter is removed. (1983 Code § 14.10.050)
   D.   Water Use For Building Purposes: Contractors, builders or others
desiring water for building purposes must make application to the Clerk of the
Water Department prior to using same, and the amount to be paid shall be based
upon the rates fixed therefor by the City Council. (1983 Code § 14.10.070)
   E.   Rates Outside City: The basic minimum rate for water furnished by the
City to water consumers outside the City shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. (1983 Code § 14.10.100)
7-1A-5: FINANCIAL REPORTS:
The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Water Department and shall, before the
first meeting of the City Council in each month, render to the Mayor a
statement covering the previous month which shall contain the names of all
water users and consumers, the amount of water rent charged to each consumer
together with the amount paid or unpaid by each consumer. The statement shall,
after its inspection by the Mayor, be filed as a public record in the Office of
the City Clerk. (Ord. 2019-477, 6-4-2019)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Use Of Public Sewers
7-2-3: Repairs By Owner
7-2-4: Side Sewer Permits And Fees
7-2-5: Installation Regulations
7-2-6: Capping
7-2-7: Inspections
7-2-8: Contractors To Be Registered
7-2-9: Work In Public Rights Of Way
7-2-10: Construction Standards
7-2-11: Grafts To Public Sewers
7-2-12: Discharges To Sewers
7-2-13: Water And Sewage Sampling And Analyses
7-2-14: Special Regulations
7-2-15: Industrial Cost Recovery
7-2-16: Powers And Authority Of City
7-2-17: Violations; Penalty
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the naming of terms used
in this chapter shall be as set forth in this section. Terms not specifically
defined herein shall be as defined in the publication "Glossary Water And
Wastewater Control Engineer", 1969, published by the American Public Health
Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works
Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation.
ASTM: Represents the American Society for Testing Materials.
AGENCY: Any city, town, county or state.
BOD OR BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
CAPPING PERMIT: A permit required for the disconnection of sewer service.
CITY: The city of Harrison, a municipal corporation of Kootenai County, state
of Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The Harrison city council, the governing body of the city.
CITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM: The system of conduits, pumps, treatment plants and
structures used for the purpose of conveying from their source, treating in any
manner, and conveying to final points of disposal all wastes of any nature
permitted by this chapter to enter said system.
CLUSTER LIVING UNITS: Living units, such as trailers, cabins or houses which
have utilities operated and maintained by an association or by a common owner.
COMMERCIAL SERVICE: All sanitary sewerage system service other than domestic
service.
COUNTY: Kootenai County, Idaho.
COVER: The depth of material lying between the top of the sewer or drain and
the finished grade immediately above it.
DOMESTIC SERVICE: Any sanitary sewer system serving a living unit.
DOWNSPOUT: A pipe which conducts water from a roof of a building or structure.
GARBAGE: Putrescible waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INSIDE CONNECTION: The side of the sewer constructed on private property from
the plumbing outlet to the individual pump unit.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: A multiple-family dwelling; namely, a building designed and/
or used to house two (2) or more families living independently of each other
and including all necessary household functions of each such family, such as
motels and apartments.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, bay or other
body of surface or ground water.
OTHER STRUCTURE: Any building other than a single-family or multiple dwelling.
OUTSIDE CONNECTION: Any sewer constructed in a public right of way and where
the public agency who has jurisdiction or such right of way requires a permit
fee or any other charge.
PERSON: Any individual, company, partnership, corporation, association, society
or group, and the singular term shall include the plural.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PLUMBING OUTLET: In plumbing, the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system that received the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the side sewer (house
connection). The latter begins thirty inches (30") outside the inner face of
the building wall.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage which has been shredded to such degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2")
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: Any sanitary sewers, including, but not limited to, trunks,
laterals, stubs and force mains and being constructed by the city or any person
within the public right of way or perpetual easement obtained by the city.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Wastewater derived from domestic, commercial and industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sanitary sewage.
SEWAGE: A comprehensive term including industrial waste, storm drainage and
wastewater.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIDE SEWER: A sanitary sewer pipe leading from a plumbing outlet, drain, or
other facility to the stub sewer of the public sewer system.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure designed and/or used to house a single
family.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Those specifications contained in a bound volume
entitled "Standard Specifications And Standard Details", published by URS/Hill,
Ingman, Chase, Consulting Engineers of Seattle, Washington, consisting of
printed material and standard details, latest edition with revisions.
STORM DRAIN: A public or private drain which carries storm and surface waters
or drainage effluent from storm plumbing outlets and other unpolluted water.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
or attachment to something having location on the ground, and shall in
addition, include, but not be limited to, trailers, mobile homes and house
trailers, but shall not include fences and walls.
STUB SEWER: A sewer constructed from the lateral or truck sewer to the property
line or edge of perpetual easement of the property being served.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are largely
removable by laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water in its natural state, or water which after use for any
purpose, is not substantially changed as to chemical or biochemical qualities.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standing of source, it may
be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residence and
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and stormwater that may be present. (1983 Code §
13.01.010)
7-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Use Required:
      1.   Time To Connect:
         a.   The owner or owners of all houses, buildings or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within
the city, shall be and they are hereby required to install all suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer, provided said public sanitary sewer is located where it is
possible or practicable for such owner or owners to make such connection,
practicality thereof to be determined by the city council. Unless otherwise
determined upon the written application of the owner or owners, any facilities
located within three hundred feet (300') of the sewage line shall be deemed to
be located where it is possible and practicable to make the said connection.
         b.   If a public sewer is not available for connection, the owner or
owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city, shall be and
they are hereby required to install a septic tank and drainfield system for the
purpose of sewage treatment and disposal. The design and construction of said
facilities shall be in conformance with the rules and regulations of the
Panhandle health district or its equivalent, including all requirements as to
fees, permits and inspections. (1983 Code § 13.04.010)
      2.   Connection Within Floodplain: Connection to the city sewer system
for property located within the 100-year floodplain or any connection to
property within a designated wetland is hereby prohibited unless a 404 permit
has been issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. (Ord. 363, 2-1-2000)
   B.   Connection And Charges: The owner shall connect all applicable plumbing
outlets to the public sewer at his expense at the point designated by the city.
In the event it shall be necessary for the city to serve notice upon the owner
to make said connection, the owner shall, within a period of thirty (30) days
after the date of mailing or personal service of notice to the property owner
directing such connection, make application to the city for a permit in the
manner hereinafter specified.
   Such owner or owners, at the time of application for a side sewer permit and
prior to making said sewer connection with a public sewer as herein prescribed,
shall pay the appropriate and proper fee therefor, which fee shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the city council. Final connection to the public
sewer system shall be made within the period specified in the connection
permit. (1983 Code § 13.04.020)
   C.   Connection Within City Limits: All plumbing outlets from any building
or structure hereafter constructed or made available for human occupation and/
or use for any purpose shall, when required by this section, be connected to a
public sewer of the city before the completion of the construction of such
building or structure or before any occupancy or use thereof is allowed. In the
event that a public sewer capable of serving that building or structure has not
been completed by the city prior to the construction or occupancy of such
building or structure, said building or structure shall be connected to the
public sewer within ninety (90) days after written notification of public sewer
availability. In any event, written application for a permit to connect, as
hereinafter required, shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the
anticipated date of connection, or at least thirty (30) days prior to such
other date as may be provided for by these rules and regulations, whichever is
earlier. (1983 Code § 13.04.030)
   D.   Connection Outside City Limits: All connections to the city's public
sewer, whether within the city's boundaries or without, shall be subject to the
rules and requirements herein and such as may be established with regard
thereto, with the exception that connections made outside the city limits shall
be made on a voluntary basis. (1983 Code § 13.04.040)
   E.   Notification Of Connection And Charges: The city shall mail to the
owner a notice that sewer service is available and all applicable service
charges shall begin the first day of the month that begins thirty (30) days
after the mailing of such notice. (1983 Code § 13.04.060)
7-2-3: REPAIRS BY OWNER:
   A.   Notice To Repair:
      1.   Any needed repair to that portion of the side sewer lying between
the pump facility and the structure or connection to a public sewer shall be
made within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing or personal service of a
notice to the owner of the property served notifying such owner to make such
repair. In the event of an emergency, the city may establish a shorter period
of time for the repair to be made or, if the owner cannot be located or does
not promptly make such repairs, the city may make the repairs as provided for
in subsection B of this section. (1983 Code § 13.04.050)
      2.   A repair permit shall be obtained from the city office for the
repair of any minor portion of an existing side sewer on an appropriate form
provided by the city. If the repair is not minor, the city may require the
replacement of the existing side sewer. A repair is not minor if the integrity
of the side sewer is impaired. (1983 Code § 13.12.060)
   B.   Failure To Repair: After the giving of notice as required herein, the
city attorney may be authorized by the city council to bring suit against the
owner or other responsible person, to compel said owner or responsible person
to make the connection provided in this chapter, to authorize the city to make
the connection, or for such other relief as may be appropriate. The suit may
obligate the owner to pay the city's costs, disbursements and reasonable
attorney fees. After the giving of notice as required herein, the city attorney
may be authorized by the city council to bring suit against the owner, or other
responsible person, to make the needed repair to that portion of the side sewer
lying between the pump facility and the structure, if roots or any other cause
has created a blockage, as provided in subsection A of this section, to
authorize the city to make the repair at the expense of the owner or other
responsible person or for such other relief as may be appropriate. The suit may
obligate the owner or other responsible person to pay the city's costs,
disbursements and reasonable attorney fees. (1983 Code § 13.08.010)
7-2-4: SIDE SEWER PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Application And Issuance:
      1.   Prior to the construction of any new house, building or structure or
the connection of any existing house, building or structure to the public sewer
or the making of any repairs, alterations or additions to any side sewer or
line connected thereto, an application for a side sewer on an appropriate form
provided by the city shall be filed by the owner or his agent at the city
office. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
city. Upon approval of the application, the city shall issue a side sewer
permit to the applicant, which permit shall be authorization to proceed to
connect and/or construct in accordance with the permit. If the applicant
proceeds in any manner other than as authorized, the city may require the
applicant to redo any work that is not in accordance with the permit.
      2.   Any permit to connect any existing house, building or structure
shall be valid for ninety (90) days, unless extended or renewed by the city
upon good cause being shown upon application therefor, prior to the original
expiration date. A renewal permit shall be valid for not more than thirty (30)
days.
      3.   Any permit to connect any new house, building or structure to the
public sewer shall be valid for the duration of the associated building permit,
unless extended or renewed by the city upon good cause being shown upon
application therefor, prior to the original expiration date. A renewal permit
shall be valid for not more than ninety (90) days.
      4.   All permit applications shall be submitted to the city at least
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of any construction, and shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount set by resolution of the city
council.
   B.   Exhibition Of Permit: Any permit required in accordance with this code
shall at all times during the performance of the work, and until completion
thereof and approval by the city, be posted in some conspicuous place at or
near the work and must be readily and safely accessible to the city's
representative. (Ord. 419, 6-5-2007)
7-2-5: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Installation: A property owner may install the side sewer on his own
property provided he complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter. A
side sewer contractor, registered in accordance with section
7-2-8 of this chapter, shall be required for any work on public rights of way
and/or any connection to the main line sewer. Should the owner or occupant
choose to employ a bonded side sewer contractor to do the work on his property,
such contractor shall obtain the permit in his own name. (1983 Code §
13.12.030)
   B.   Community Side Sewer: Whenever a side sewer is to be located on
property other than the property being served, the owner or owners of the side
sewer shall secure a written easement on an appropriate form provided by the
city covering and granting the right to occupy such property and such purpose
and for the city to enter such easement for purpose of maintaining the side
sewer. The written easement shall be recorded by the owner of the residence in
the office of the county auditor and a copy of same be furnished to the city
prior to issuance of a permit. (1983 Code § 13.12.040)
   C.   Side Sewer: The owner(s) of property being served by a side sewer shall
grant an easement to the city to enter upon the property being served for
maintaining the side sewer and the individual effluent pump unit. This
subsection shall be subject to any and all applicable laws, whether of the
state of Idaho or the United States. (1983 Code § 13.12.050)
   D.   Nonconforming Installations: Nonconforming installations shall not be
permitted without the express approval of the city, and all releases required
by the city shall be obtained in writing by the person requesting such
installation. (1983 Code § 13.12.090)
7-2-6: CAPPING:
When any property owner desires to have sewer service terminated as to any
property belonging to said owner because the building or structure thereon is
either removed, destroyed or condemned, whether by public health authorities or
by a public entity having the power of condemnation, the side sewer shall be
capped. All orders for discontinuation of sewer service must be done in writing
by the owner and must be in conjunction with termination of water service as
described in section
7-1-11 of this title. Owner may elect to continue paying at the unoccupied rate
set from time to time by resolution and subject to modification from time to
time. If owner elects to cease paying the monthly fee city council will issue
an order terminating services. The order shall advise that the property is not
presently served by city utilities. Said order shall be filed with the county
recorder to provide notice to any individual considering the purchase of said
property. The capitalization fee, in effect at the time of reconnection, must
be paid before service will be reinstated. (Ord. 431, 3-3-2009)
7-2-7: INSPECTIONS:
No person shall cover or backfill any side sewer, public sewer, grease or sand
trap or screen without having called for an inspection, and permission and
approval therefor having been received from the city; nor shall any garbage
grinder larger than three-fourths (3/4) horsepower be placed in operation prior
to having called for an inspection and permission and approval therefor having
been received from the city. The city shall be given twenty four (24) hours'
notice when such construction is ready for inspection. If any person covers or
backfills any of the above without having obtained approval, the city may
require the person to uncover the work so that a proper inspection and approval
can be made. The city shall have access at reasonable times to all single-
family, multiple dwellings and other structures for the purpose of examining
any and all plumbing outlets and/or side sewers for the purpose of ascertaining
whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
   A.   Materials And Workmanship: The city shall inspect and make such tests
deemed necessary to ensure that the new construction meets all requirements of
this chapter in respect to materials and workmanship.
   B.   Testing: The city shall require all sewer construction to be tested by
a water exfilteration test in accordance with these regulations. (1983 Code §
13.12.080)
7-2-8: CONTRACTORS TO BE REGISTERED:
Any side sewer contractor performing any work within and with the approval of
the city, must be licensed with the state of Idaho pursuant to the public works
contractors license act 1 , and must provide the city with proof of his
registration. In addition, any contractor wishing to be approved by the city
shall submit an application on a form provided by the city requesting such
approval. (1983 Code § 13.16.010)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 54-1901 et seq.
7-2-9: WORK IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Construction: No person shall install stub sewers in any public or
private thoroughfare or right of way unless he is registered with the city
pursuant to section
7-2-8 of this chapter, and has complied with all of the requirements of this
chapter. Any work on rights of way shall be in conformity with the requirements
of the agency having jurisdiction over such rights of way. It will be the
contractor's responsibility to notify the appropriate authorities before
beginning work on the right of way and to ascertain that the schedule of
operation proposed is satisfactory to the agency; provided, however, that all
work must be completed with dispatch and in a reasonable time. If a person has
received notice from the appropriate agency or the city that certain work must
be done and that person fails to do said work, the city may complete the work
and charge the cost thereof to the person responsible. (1983 Code § 13.20.010)
   B.   Protection: Any excavation made by any sewer contractor with the proper
authority, in a right of way immediately adjacent thereto, shall be protected
and guarded by fencing or covering with proper lights. The protection of the
public from the danger of such excavation shall be the responsibility of the
sewer contractor; and the contractor shall be liable for any damage caused by
his failure to properly protect and guard such excavation as herein required.
If the contractor fails to properly protect and guard such excavation as herein
required, the city may properly protect and guard such excavation and charge
the cost thereof to the sewer contractor who shall, upon receiving written
notice of the amount of such charge, immediately pay the same to the city.
(1983 Code § 13.20.020)
   C.   Maintenance:
      1.   Whenever construction work under this chapter is undertaken on
easements or rights of way over private property or public rights of way or
franchise, all work shall be confined to the limits of such easements, rights
of way or franchise and accomplished to cause the least amount of disturbance
and a minimum amount of damage.
      2.   The contractor shall make his own arrangements with the person or
property owner for whom he is working as to how the work is to be conducted and
scheduled. The contractor shall also reach an understanding with the property
owner as to what condition the owner's property is to be left in upon
completion of construction. The aforesaid arrangements shall be completed prior
to the commencement of work.
      3.   The contractor shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or
shrubs which exist on private or public property or in parking strips without
first having notified the property owner or authorities maintaining same. If
necessary to remove trees, shrubs, etc., the contractor shall restore the same
to an equal or better condition satisfactory to the property owner and the
city. (1983 Code § 13.20.030)
7-2-10: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Plumbing Contractors: No plumbing contractor shall make connections of
side sewers to public sewers of the city without first being registered with
the state of Idaho pursuant to Idaho Code 54-2601 et seq.
   B.   Standards For Low Pressure Lines: The following standards are only for
low pressure lines and not intended for high pressure mains. High pressure
mains shall meet ASTM specifications or equivalent:
      1.   Compliance Required: Connection shall be made as directed by the
city and will be made at the point designated by the city. All plumbing outlets
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
      2.   Grade And Depth: All side sewers shall be laid on not less than two
percent (2%) (2'/100') grade nor more than two hundred percent (200%) (2'
vertical; 1' horizontal) grade. Side sewers shall not be laid less than thirty
inches (30") from any foundation wall of any building and, if there is no
foundation wall, not less than thirty inches (30") from the outer lines of any
footings, pilings or building supports. Minimum cover shall be not less than
forty eight inches (48") at the curb line, the property line or private
property. Any side sewer laid generally parallel to the curb line shall have
not less than forty eight inches (48") of cover, and all cover measurements
shall be based on the established grade or on existing improvements.
      3.   Alignment: The side sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in
straight alignment so far as is possible. Changes in direction shall be made
only with curved pipe with no greater than forty five degree (45°) bends. The
connection to the building drain and combination bends of ninety degrees (90°)
shall include a cleanout. All pipe shall be laid on a firm earth bedding
containing no material larger than one inch (1"). If the trench bottom contains
mud or water, the pipe shall be laid on a four inch (4") granular base of
three-fourths inch (3/4") minus rock, pea gravel, sand or combination thereof.
Backfill around the pipe and to a point four inches (4") above shall be
selected trenchside material hand placed and hand tamped, with no material
larger than one inch (1").
      4.   Design Standards: Unless otherwise called for, side sewer pipe shall
be plastic and meet the following specifications:
 
*Plastic ASTM        D-2241, D-1785
         (Class 125)
 
   *Bedding, laying and joining to be done in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
      5.   Sewer Pipe Size: A one and one-half inch (11/2") side sewer shall be
required for all service connections.
      6.   Cleanouts: A cleanout is required whenever more than a one-eighth
(1/8) (45°) bend is used. Also, immediately outside the house or structure
where the city deems necessary.
      7.   Water Line Location: No water line shall be laid in any form or
manner in the same ditch line as the sewer line. The side sewer must be
installed so as not to interfere or be constructed within three feet (3') of
any water line used for human consumption.
   C.   Septic Tanks:
      1.   Septic tanks used in the city for new construction or replacements
after the effective date hereof shall meet the following minimum sizes:
 
1 - 4 bedroom home      1,000 gallons
Each additional bedroom 250 gallons of capacity shall be added to the tank
 
      2.   Septic tanks shall be constructed by a recognized tank precaster, of
concrete or other corrosion resistant material to then current design
standards, unless otherwise approved by the city.
   D.   Trailer And Mobile Living Unit Connections: Sewer connections for
trailers and other mobile living units shall be of a type approved by the city,
but in all cases shall be above grade and shall have the ability to be made
airtight and watertight when not in use. (Ord. 371, 6-5-2001)
7-2-11: GRAFTS TO PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Wye Or Tee Not Found: If a wye or tee is not found at the measurement
given by the city, the contractor shall prospect five feet (5') in all
directions from the measurement given, and if not found, then notify the city.
(1983 Code § 13.28.010)
   B.   Saddles: Unless otherwise specified by the city, prefabricated saddles
will be used for any graft to the public sewer. No graft will take place unless
the city representative is present. (1983 Code § 13.28.020)
7-2-12: DISCHARGES TO SEWERS:
   A.   Storm Or Other Waters: No person shall discharge, permit or cause to be
discharged any storm drainage water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage or cooling water to or in any sanitary sewer. (1983 Code §
13.32.010)
   B.   Other Substances: Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any of the following described
water or wastes to any sanitary sewer:
      1.   High Temperature Wastes: Any liquid or vapor having a temperature
higher than sixty five degrees Celsius (65°C).
      2.   Flammable Or Explosive Wastes: Any gasoline, oils, paint, benzine,
naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      3.   Obstructive Wastes: Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstructions to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the city sewerage
system.
      4.   Toxic Or Poisonous Substance: Any waters or wastes containing a
toxic and/or poisonous substance or any combination thereof in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitutes
a hazard to humans or animals, or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of
the city sewerage system.
      5.   pH Limitations: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
      6.   Suspended Solids: Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids
of such character and quantity that unusual attention, or expense, is required
to handle such material at the sewage treatment plant, or is in excess of three
hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter.
      7.   Noxious Substance: Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance
capable of creating a public nuisance, including the contents of septic tanks
and cesspools, without written consent of the city.
      8.   Garbage: Any garbage that is not properly shredded garbage.
      9.   Paper And Plastic Products: Any paper and plastic products such as
cups, dishes, napkins and milk containers.
      10.   Greases: Any greases (animal or vegetable), oils or matter
containing animal or vegetable grease or oil of any nature in excess of three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter.
      11.   BOD: Any matter containing a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand
in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter.
      12.   Miscellaneous: Any radioactive substances, dye wastes and tanning
solutions in quantities which may cause excessive coloration, and heavy metals
in concentration in excess of those normally encountered in the receiving
waters and ground water supplies. (1983 Code § 13.32.020)
   C.   Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be provided, when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing harmful ingredients, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters.
   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. Detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted to
the city council for its approval at the time of making of written application
for a permit to connect, or as soon thereafter as it may be determined that an
interceptor shall be required. (1983 Code § 13.32.030)
   D.   Garbage Grinders: Whenever any garbage grinder having a power rating in
excess of three- quarter (3/4) horsepower shall be intended to be installed in
any capacity covered by these rules and regulations, plans and specifications
therefor shall be submitted to the city council for approval prior to the
beginning of installation thereof, and no garbage grinder covered by this
section shall be installed until written approval of the city council shall
have been obtained. (1983 Code § 13.32.040)
   E.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge, permit or cause to be
discharged to any sanitary sewer any substance capable of causing:
      1.   Flow obstructions in any sewer;
      2.   Interference with treatment processes;
      3.   Damage to collection or treatment facilities; or
      4.   Excessive loading of treatment processes. (1983 Code § 13.32.050)
7-2-13: WATER AND SEWAGE SAMPLING AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made above shall be determined in accordance with
standard methods for the examination of water and sewage, and shall be
determined at the control cleanout. In the event that no special cleanout has
been required, the control cleanout shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream cleanout in the public sewer to the point at which the side or stub
sewer is connected. (1983 Code § 13.36.010)
7-2-14: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Disturbance To Sewer: No person other than representatives of the city
shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written side
sewer permit from the city. (1983 Code § 13.40.010)
   B.   Prohibited Connections: No person shall connect any type of drain,
downspout, etc., other than sanitary plumbing fixtures, to a side sewer. (1983
Code § 13.40.020)
   C.   Excavations: No person shall leave unguarded any excavation made in
connection with the construction or repair of any side sewer or private drain
within four feet (4') of any public place. (1983 Code § 13.40.030)
   D.   Structures, Appurtenances And Equipment: No person shall break, damage,
destroy, deface, alter or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the city sewer system. (1983 Code § 13.40.040)
   E.   Unauthorized Construction: No person shall commence any sewer
construction without the issuance of a permit or otherwise meeting the
provisions of this chapter. (1983 Code § 13.40.050)
   F.   Septic Tank Pump Outs: To ensure the proper and efficient operation of
the city's sewer system, it is the policy of the city that all septic tanks
connected to side sewers served by the city's sewer system shall be pumped out
on a regular basis, as necessary by city direction. To promote this objective,
the city shall pay for the pumping of each septic tank serving a single-family
residence only as needed and no more than once every six (6) years, and each
septic tank serving commercial buildings and multiple living units, only as
needed and no more than once every three (3) years. Any septic tanks which must
be pumped out on a more frequent interval shall be done so at the expense of
the respective property owner.
   G.   Grease Traps: Any commercial establishment which fails to install and/
or maintain a grease trap when required to do so by panhandle health department
requirements, shall be responsible for the damage and cost to repair or replace
the sewer lines and pumps, if any, caused by grease discharged into the system.
(Ord. 464, 9-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-479, 12-3-2019)
7-2-15: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
Any industrial users for sewer facility constructed with environmental
protection agency grant funds awarded after March 1, 1973, shall repay that
portion of the grant amount allocated to the treatment of its wastes. The
method of repayment and procedures for handling the repayment shall be in
accordance with the federal guidelines and/or regulations pursuant to the water
pollution control act. (1983 Code § 13.48.010)
7-2-16: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CITY:
The city shall have the right to refuse to issue a permit to any person, or
registered side sewer contractor, where reasonable doubt exists that said
person, or registered side sewer contractor, may refuse to, or be unable to,
comply with the provisions of this chapter. If, in the judgment of the city,
the reputation or past performance of any person or registered side sewer
contractor indicates a lack of ability to install a side sewer, stub sewer or
any other sewer, public or private, in accordance with the accepted standards
of the trade and the provisions of this chapter, a permit shall be denied that
person or registered side sewer contractor. (1983 Code § 13.44.010)
7-2-17: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions or fails to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code, and in addition shall be liable to the city for the damage
and costs to repair or replace the sewer lines and pumps, if any, caused by
such violation. (1983 Code § 13.52.010; amd. Ord. 2019-479, 12-3-2019)
CHAPTER 2A
SEWER SYSTEM
ARTICLE A. SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
7-2A-1: Definition
7-2A-2: Basic Rate Classes Established
7-2A-3: Computation Of Charges
7-2A-4: Sewer Service Reconnection Fee
7-2A-5: Additional Fees
7-2A-1: DEFINITION:
LIVING UNIT: Any improved real property or portion thereof which is used or
occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used as the home, residence
or sleeping place of one or more human beings, but not more than one family.
Without intending to limit this definition in any way, the term "living unit"
is intended to include each and every trailer pad with sewer facilities,
apartment unit in an apartment complex, and each cottage or portion thereof
used or intended to be used by one family, whether occupied or not. (1983 Code
§ 13.10.040)
7-2A-2: BASIC RATE CLASSES ESTABLISHED:
Separate basic rates and charges for furnishing sewage disposal service shall
be established by the city council from time to time for each of the following
classes of users:
   A.   Occupied residential within the city.
   B.   Residential outside the city.
   C.   Commercial, multiple residential:
      1.   For any apartment building or similar commercial facility composed
of multiple dwelling units wherein persons reside on a permanent or
semipermanent basis, the monthly base rate shall be assessed for each living
unit within said complex whether or not said units are actually occupied.
      2.   The above stated rate class shall not apply to motels, trailer camps
or similar facilities providing accommodations to transients, which facilities
shall be classified as commercial property under subsection E of this section.
   D.   Unoccupied residential structures.
   E.   Commercial (public retail, nonresidential).
   F.   Unoccupied commercial structures.
   G.   Industrial (any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works
identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972", office of
management and budget, as amended, and supplemented under the following
divisions:
 
Division A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing;
Division B: Mining;
Division D: Manufacturing;
Division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
            services;
Division I: Services.
 
   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it
will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences). Rates to be established individually by contract to be
commensurate with other charges in the city; however, rates will comply with
the federal guidelines and/or regulations pursuant to the water pollution
control act.
   H.   The city reserves the right to determine the type of customer receiving
sanitary service and to classify the type of customer within the foregoing
categories. The city further reserves the authority to delegate the duty to so
classify customers. In the event there arises a dispute relative to the type of
customer receiving sewer service and thus as to the applicable sewer service
rate, the city's determination as to the type of customer shall be binding upon
the customer in the absence of manifest error. A customer disputing the
classification shall have the right to appeal the determination of the city by
making a written request to the city council for a redetermination hearing and,
after a hearing on the matter, the determination of the city council shall be
likewise binding on the customer in the absence of manifest error.
   The written request for redetermination shall set forth with reasonable
clarity the reasons for the request. The redetermination hearing shall be held
at city hall at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, or at
such time and place as the city council may order; provided, however, that any
hearing held other than at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
council or at the city hall shall be held only upon at least five (5) days'
written notice to the party requesting the hearing, setting forth the time and
place of hearing. At such hearing, either party may present witnesses and other
evidence, but a failure by the city to present witnesses or other evidence
shall in no way invalidate the decision of the city council, it being the
requesting party's burden to convince the city council that reclassification
should be made. All charges shall begin with the date of classification by the
city, rather than the date of any final appeal determination. (Ord. 323, 2-2-
1993)
7-2A-3: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES:
   A.   All fees and charges are subject to modification by resolution upon
review by the city council of the revenues and costs of the sewerage system,
which review shall be carried out at least once during any given twelve (12)
month period of operation of the system.
   B.   Charges based on water consumption shall be computed on the monthly
average over the previous twelve (12) month period, with an adjustment at the
end of each twelve (12) month period. The adjusted average shall be the basis
for the succeeding twelve (12) month period. In the event that any unit of
occupancy does not have a twelve (12) month record of water consumption,
billing shall be estimated and agreed upon between the city and the customer,
until such a record is available, and adjustment for the previous twelve (12)
month period shall be made at that time. (Ord. 323, 2-2-1993)
7-2A-4: SEWER SERVICE RECONNECTION FEE:
Once sewer service to a property has been terminated, as provided in section
7-2-6 of this chapter, a reconnection fee shall be paid to the city before
restoration of sewer service to the property. The amount of the reconnection
fee shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall be subject
to modification from time to time in the manner provided for the modification
of other rates established by this chapter. (Ord. 431, 3-3-2009)
7-2A-5: ADDITIONAL FEES:
In the event it is necessary for additional agency inspections on right of way
outside permits, the additional amount of the inspection fee will be the
responsibility of the property owner. (1983 Code § 13.10.100)
CHAPTER 3
WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Title And Applicability
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Purposes And Findings
7-3-4: Basis For Fees
7-3-5: Imposition Of Connection Fees
7-3-6: Fees
7-3-7: Use Of Fees
7-3-8: Exemptions And Credits
7-3-9: Review Of Fees
7-3-10: Extension Of Public Facilities
7-3-11: Penalties
7-3-1: TITLE AND APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WATER AND SEWER FACILITIES
CONNECTION FEES and shall apply in incorporated areas of the city. (Ord. 378,
8-6-2002)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CAPITAL EQUIPMENT: Equipment with an expected use life of three (3) years or
more.
CITY: The city of Harrison.
CONNECTION TO THE WATER AND/OR SEWER SYSTEM: The physical connection of a
building, structure or land use to the city's water and/or sewer lines, no
matter if such connection is made through or by intermediate lines.
DEVELOPMENT ORDER: A regulatory approval by the city.
ERU (EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT): A fee based on the comparable number of
residential units used based on demand on the system. An ERU for water service
is equal to average water use of one hundred seventy five (175) gallons per
day.
ENGINEER: The city engineer.
FEE PAYER: A person applying for connection to the city's water and/or sewer
system. Water and sewer facilities are city owned facilities. (Ord. 378, 8-6-
2002)
7-3-3: PURPOSES AND FINDINGS:
The city council determines and declares that:
   A.   This chapter is intended to assist in the improvement and increased
capacity of the city water and sewer systems.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to assure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide
water and sewer facilities in the city.
   C.   This chapter is also intended to permit the city to recover its
installation costs. (Ord. 378, 8-6-2002)
7-3-4: BASIS FOR FEES:
   A.   The city must expand its water and sewer facilities if new development
is to be accommodated without decreasing current standards of public health.
   B.   The imposition of connection fees is one of the preferred methods of
ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of water and
sewer facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done
in order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   C.   Connecting to the city water and/or sewer system will create a need for
the construction, equipping or expansion of water and sewer facilities.
   D.   The fees established by this chapter do not exceed the costs of
providing additional water and sewer facilities necessitated by the connection
to the city's water and sewer systems.
   E.   The sewer connection fee analysis and water connection fee analysis
prepared by JUB Engineers, dated May 21, 2002, set forth a reasonable
methodology for the determination of the need of and costs related to
participation in the water and sewer facilities of the city. (Ord. 378, 8-6-
2002)
7-3-5: IMPOSITION OF CONNECTION FEES:
Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks to connect to:
   A.   The city water system is hereby required to pay a water facilities
connection fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter.
   B.   The city sewer system is hereby required to pay a sewer facilities
connection fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter.
   C.   The water or sewer systems of the city shall also pay an installation
fee reimbursing the city's costs in physically connecting the user to the water
and/or sewer system. (Ord. 378, 8-6-2002)
7-3-6: FEES:
   A.   Installation Fees: Any person requesting connection to the city water
or sewer system shall pay installation fees based on the city's cost of
connecting the applicant to the system. The fees shall be set by resolution of
the city council.
   B.   Change Of Use; Redevelopment; Expansion; Modification: In the case of
change of use, redevelopment or expansion or modification of an existing use
which requires a new, replacement or additional connection to the city's water
and/or sewer system, the connection fee shall be based upon the net increase in
the size of the meter for the new connection over the size of the meter for the
previous connection.
   C.   Independent Fee Calculation: If a fee payer opts not to have the
connection fee determined according to subsection A of this section, then the
fee payer shall prepare and submit to the city council an independent fee
calculation study for the land development activity for which a connection to
the city's water and/or sewer system is sought. The independent fee calculation
study shall follow the prescribed guidelines adopted by motion of the city
council. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the
independent fee calculation was made. The city shall consider the documentation
submitted by the fee payer, but is not required to accept such documentation as
he shall reasonably deem to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the
alternative, require the fee payer to submit additional or different
documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee calculation
study is not presented, the fee payer shall pay water and per facilities fees
based upon the fee schedule adopted by resolution. If an acceptable independent
fee calculation study is presented, the city council may adjust the fee to that
appropriate to the particular fee payer. If the calculation proves to be more
than twenty percent (20%) inaccurate, the city may recalculate the fee later
and require an additional payment or credit.
   D.   Additional Services: Any installation requiring materials or labor in
excess of the basic installation or requiring repair of a curb, sidewalk or
roadway shall pay for additional services according to a fee schedule adopted
by resolution or by actual costs.
   E.   Payment Of Fees:
      1.   Where no building permit is required, basic installation fees shall
be paid at the time of building permit application or at least five (5) days
prior to installation.
      2.   Where a building permit is required, the fee payer shall pay the
fees required by this chapter to the city clerk or his designee prior to
obtaining a building permit and at least five (5) days prior to connection to
the city's water and/or sewer systems.
      3.   Any additional fees shall be billed after installation, paid within
thirty (30) days of billing. Services may be terminated for nonpayment.
      4.   All funds collected shall be properly identified by and promptly
transferred for deposit to the water/sewer capital improvement fund. (Ord. 410,
7-11-2006)
7-3-7: USE OF FEES:
   A.   Funds collected from water and sewer facility connection fees shall be
used solely for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping and/or making
capital improvements or major maintenance to water and sewer facilities under
the jurisdiction of the city, and shall not be used for daily maintenance or
operations.
   B.   Funds from the water and sewer facilities dedicated fund may only be
used for water facilities and sewer facilities capital improvement purposes.
Funds shall be deemed expended in the order in which they are collected.
   C.   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advanced provision of capital facilities for which water and sewer facilities
connection fees may be expended, connection fees may be used to pay debt
service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the
facilities provided are of the type described in subsection A of this section.
   D.   At least once each fiscal period, the city maintenance supervisor shall
present to the city council a proposed capital improvement program for water
and sewer facilities, assigning funds from the water and sewer facilities
capital improvement fund to specific water and sewer facilities improvement
projects and related expenses. Monies not assigned in any fiscal period shall
be retained in the water/sewer capital improvement fund until the next fiscal
period, except as provided by the refund provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Funds may be used to rebate developer costs for providing water and/or
sewer capital facilities in excess of the capacity required to the individual
developer making the provision. Any rebates must be pursuant to a refunding
agreement entered into between the developer and city after the effective date
of this chapter. (Ord. 378, 8-6-2002)
7-3-8: EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS:
   A.   The following shall be exempted from payment of the connection fees:
      1.   Alteration or expansion of an existing building where no additional
or larger water and/or sewer connections are requested and where the use is not
changed.
      2.   The replacement of a wing or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger water and/or
sewer connections are requested and where the use is not changed.
      3.   The installation of a replacement manufactured home on a lot or
other such site when a water and/or sewer capital facilities connection fee for
such manufactured home site has previously been paid pursuant to this chapter,
or where a manufactured home legally existed on such site on or prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
      4.   Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of
application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed
waived.
   B.   No exemption will exist where water and/or sewer services have been
disconnected either physically for six (6) months or more or after notice, as
indicated on the city's records. (Ord. 378, 8-6-2002)
7-3-9: REVIEW OF FEES:
The fees contained in sections
7-3-6 and
7-3-7 of this chapter should be reviewed by the city council at least once each
fiscal year. After careful review, amended fees may be adopted by a duly
adopted resolution. (Ord. 378, 8-6-2002)
7-3-10: EXTENSION OF PUBLIC FACILITIES:
Any person seeking to connect property to city utilities shall pay all costs of
extending lines to his property according to
title 6, chapter 4 of this code unless otherwise agreed by the city council.
(Ord. 378, 8-6-2002)
7-3-11: PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction the violator shall be punished; however, in addition to or in lieu
of any criminal prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue in civil
court to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If convicted, a person shall
be punished as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. 378, 8-6-2002; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC LIGHTING, WATER AND SEWER IMPROVEMENT FEES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Public Lighting Systems
7-4-3: Water And Sewer Capital Improvement Fees
7-4-4: Billings
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
IMPROVED PROPERTY: Includes real estate which:
   A. Has city water service; or
   B. Is paved; or
   C. Is landscaped; or
   D. Has erected thereon any construction for which a building permit would be
required.
PUBLIC LIGHTING: Refers to all lighting of exterior public areas, which may
include lighting of public streets, sidewalks, walkways, bike paths, adjacent
private property and other areas not specifically included herein, which is
paid for and/or maintained by the city for the benefit of the general public.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Includes property having occupancy or living
accommodations on a permanent or semipermanent basis. (Ord. 359, 10-20-1999)
7-4-2: PUBLIC LIGHTING SYSTEMS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the provisions of this chapter are to cover
expenses associated with public lighting within the city which shall be
financed by charges assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real
property.
   B.   Fees Imposed:
      1.   The owners and/or occupants of all improved real property within the
city are hereby made subject to service charges for public lighting.
      2.   The initial street lighting charge shall be seventy five cents
($0.75) per month per parcel of property. The owners and/or occupants of
improved real property shall be jointly and severally liable for such charges;
the charges shall become a lien upon and against the property against which the
charge is levied to the extent permitted by the laws of the state of Idaho and
the ordinances of the city and may be collected in any manner permitted or
hereafter permitted by such laws and ordinances.
      3.   Public lighting charges shall be fixed and determined in amounts
sufficient to pay all, or a portion of, the costs incurred under lease
agreements with companies, electrical energy costs, billing expense,
replacement expenses and costs of labor and materials necessary to maintain the
public lighting system within the city.
      4.   The public lighting costs may be distributed on the basis of the
relative proportionate benefit received by the various occupancies within
different lighting intensity zones existing in the city as determined by the
city council or in such other manner as is determined to be fair and reasonable
by the city council. Such charges may be changed or amended by the council from
time to time, as determined necessary to finance these street lighting costs.
Any changes or amendments to such service charges may be made and fixed by the
city council by resolution.
      5.   The charges assessed shall be included in the general utility
billing as a separate item and as hereinafter set forth; provided, however,
that the costs of lighting to illuminate parks and play fields shall be paid
from the city general fund. Improved city property shall be subject to said
fees, to be paid from the appropriate department budget.
   C.   Accounting: All funds received for public lighting shall be accounted
for separately and shall be used only for payment of expenses related to
providing lighting services.
   D.   Appeals: Any person billed for public lighting services who believes
that such billing is in excess of the relative proportionate benefits received
from lighting shall have the right to file a written appeal to the city
council. Such appeal shall set forth all reasons as to why such charges are
excessive. Appeals shall be reviewed by the city clerk and action consistent
with current fee resolutions may be taken by city staff. The city council shall
have the right to modify such charges upon a demonstration that charges made
are clearly in excess of relative proportionate benefits received from lighting
services. (Ord. 359, 10-20-1999)
7-4-3: WATER AND SEWER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FEES:
   A.   A fee to be set by resolution.
   B.   The fees collected in this manner shall be deposited in a dedicated
fund. Funds may be withdrawn from this dedicated fund only for the purpose of
funding capital improvements to the city water and sewer systems. (Ord. 420, 9-
11-2007)
7-4-4: BILLINGS:
   A.   All billings for public lighting charges shall be made by, and all
payments shall be paid to, the city. Billings shall be in the name of the owner
of the premises against which the charge is made, as determined by the city.
   B.   Billings for charges levied and assessed under the provisions of this
chapter may be made monthly and shall be fixed at such intervals as will
correspond to billings of the same improved real property for water, garbage
and sewer services. Such billings may be billed on the same statement;
provided, however, that the billings for each service shall be segregated. Such
charges shall be due at the same time as charges for water, garbage, and sewer
services. (Ord. 359, 10-20-1999)
CHAPTER 5
DELINQUENT UTILITY COLLECTIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Collection of Water And Utility Charges
7-5-2: Delinquent Account Procedures
7-5-3: City Liability
7-5-1: COLLECTION OF WATER AND UTILITY CHARGES:
   A.   All water and other utility charges for water consumed and other
services shall be due and payable to the city upon receipt of billing. Billing
shall be done between the twenty first day and the end of each month. Such
bills shall be delinquent if not paid prior to the tenth day of the following
month. Any owner or tenant may, within ten (10) days of the date of billing,
contact the city clerk in writing, and request that such person be placed on
the agenda of the next regular city council meeting to give any reasons as to
why the bill is improper or should not be charged. After hearing such person
regarding the bill, the city council may allow such person additional time to
make payment or take action deemed appropriate by the city council or take such
other action as is appropriate under the circumstances.
   B.   All security deposits, reconnect fees, late fees and collection
policies may be amended by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 388, 6-3-2003)
7-5-2: DELINQUENT ACCOUNT PROCEDURES:
   A.   In the event payment on water and other utility charges is not timely
made, the following procedures shall be conducted:
      1.   On the first business day following the last day for timely payment,
the city treasurer shall add a late charge of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50),
which each owner shall pay in addition to the amount of water charges.
      2.   After the twenty fifth day of the month following billing, the city
clerk shall add an additional five dollar ($5.00) late fee and a one percent
(1%) charge to the delinquent bill and cause a notice of delinquency to be
mailed to each property owner whose utility charges and late charges remain
unpaid. The notice of delinquency shall include the name of owner, a statement
that the water charges have not been paid, the amount of the payment due,
including the late charge, and the date water services will be shut off due to
the delinquency. This notice shall be mailed with the current billing or
delivered to tenants living on the premises.
      3.   After the tenth day of the month following mailing or delivery of
the notice of delinquency, the city clerk shall cause to be delivered to the
premises a second delinquency notice setting forth the date that water service
will be discontinued. This notice may be part of a shutoff notice. The second
notice of delinquency shall include the following:
         a.   The name of the owner;
         b.   A statement that the water charges have not been paid;
         c.   The amount of all water charges due including late charges;
         d.   A statement that unless the full amount due is paid, the water
service will be discontinued and the water will be shut off.
         e.   A statement that if the water is shut off it will not be turned
on until the past due water charges, including the late charges, plus a charge
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for reinstatement of water service plus
an additional deposit of seventy five dollars ($75.00) as security for the
payment of future water charges, have been paid.
      4.   After five (5) days following delivery of the second notice of
delinquency/shutoff, the city clerk shall prepare a list of all owners who have
been mailed a second notice of delinquency and who have failed to pay the
utility charges and all other charges referenced in such second notice of
delinquency. The city clerk shall deliver said list to the maintenance
department who shall cause the water service of each owner to be discontinued
by shutting off water to the premises.
   B.   Services will not be reconnected until all fees and required deposits
have been paid. The property shall continue to be billed at the regular rate
after services have been shut off.
   C.   If utility services continue unpaid for a period of five (5) months,
the owner shall be given notice that services to the premises will be
terminated after thirty (30) days and that should services be terminated to the
premises, it will be necessary to reconnect services and pay all connection,
hookup and capitalization fees, as if the premises were not connected to
services. The owner of the premises will be advised of the current rates of
those fees.
   D.   Thirty (30) days after the notice of termination has been mailed, the
city council may issue an order terminating services. The order shall advise
that the property is not presently served by city utilities. Said order shall
be filed with the county recorder to provide notice to any individual
considering the purchase of said property. (Ord. 388, 6-3-2003)
7-5-3: CITY LIABILITY:
The city shall not be held liable under any circumstances for any damages
resulting from a deficiency or failure of water, whether by shutting off the
water to make repairs or connections, or by shutting off the water due to the
nonpayment of water charges, or for any other cause whatsoever. (Ord. 388, 6-3-
2003)
CHAPTER 6
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-6-1: Purpose
7-6-2: Applicability
7-6-3: Enforcement
7-6-4: Definitions
7-6-5: Cross Connections Prohibited
7-6-6: Installation Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies
7-6-7: Plan Review
7-6-8: Types Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies Required
7-6-9: Location
7-6-10: Installation, Approval And Acceptable Types
7-6-11: Inspections And Testing
7-6-12: Service Fee Schedule
7-6-13: Violations; Penalties
7-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter, in conjunction with rules of the Idaho department
of environmental quality, IDAPA 58.01.20, rules for administration of drinking
water loan program, and section 1003 of the uniform plumbing code, is to
protect the public health by the control and prevention of actual and potential
cross connections by requiring the proper installation and safeguarding of
service lines leading to premises where cross connections exist or are likely
to occur, by periodic inspection and by regulating plumbing within premises or
to the public water system itself. An additional purpose is to provide for the
maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control, which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all
potable water delivered by the water systems of the city. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies throughout the city and outside the city limits to every
user and to every premises, whether residential or commercial, and the owners
and occupants thereof served by the water system of the city. It applies to all
systems installed prior to or after its enactment, both inside and outside the
city limits. Every owner and occupant of any premises covered by this chapter
is responsible for compliance with its terms and shall be strictly liable for
all damages incurred as a result of failure to comply with the express terms
and provisions contained herein. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The mayor and city council, by and through the department of public works, will
administer the provisions of this chapter. Any deviation, modification or
change from approved standards must be approved in advance by the mayor and
city council. Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as set forth in
section
7-6-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
AIR GAP (AG) SEPARATION: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle, and must be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel. In no case may the
gap be less than one inch (1").
APPROVED ASSEMBLY: Any backflow prevention assembly which has satisfactorily
completed laboratory and field tests by an independent laboratory recognized by
the Idaho department of health and welfare and/or the Idaho department of
environmental quality, and which is selected by the owner, user or occupant
from the state approved list.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water source or system other than the city water system
that may be available in the building or on the premises.
BACKFLOW: The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign
liquids, gases or substances into the distribution of the public water system.
Back Pressure: Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means
that could create pressure within the system greater than the potable water
supply system.
Back Siphonage: A form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure
within the water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly to counteract back pressures or
prevent back siphonage.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water system is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nonpotable water system,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other
device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other
waste liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of
which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross connections.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA): An assembly composed of two (2) single,
independently acting check valves, including resilient seated tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and equipped with properly
located resilient seated test cocks for testing the water tightness of each
check valve.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER BACK SIPHONAGE PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (PVBA): An assembly
containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an
independently operating internally loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with properly
located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated
shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed
to protect against a back siphonage condition only.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (RPBA): An assembly
incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically operated
differential relief valve located between the two (2) checks. Two (2) resilient
seated shutoff valves, one located at each end of the assembly and equipped
with properly located resilient seated test cocks for testing. The assembly
must operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check
valves, less than the pressure on the public water system side of the assembly.
At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves must be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve must operate to maintain the reduced pressure by
discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure drops below two (2)
pounds per square inch, the relief valve must be open to the atmosphere thereby
providing an atmospheric zone between the two (2) check valves. (Ord. 452, 1-7-
2014)
7-6-5: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   All cross connections, whether or not they are controlled by automatic
devices such as check valves or by hand operated mechanisms such as gate valves
or stopcocks, are prohibited.
   B.   Any reinjection of water by individual, residential, commercial or
industrial use of the public water system is specifically prohibited. Water to
water and water to air heat exchangers are considered a cross connection
because of health risks. Any modifications allowing reinjection are prohibited.
   C.   Failure on the part of persons, firms or corporations to discontinue
the use of all cross connections and to physically separate cross connections
is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water services
to the premises. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-6: INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with this
chapter, at the service connection or within any premises where, in the
judgment of the city by and through the public works department, the nature and
extent of the activity on the premises, or the material used in connection with
the activities, or the materials stored on the premises would present an
immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross connection occur, even
though such cross connection does not exist at the time the backflow prevention
device is required to be installed, including, but not limited to, the
following:
   A.   Premises having auxiliary water supply.
   B.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable, or
intricate plumbing arrangements that make it impractical to ascertain whether
or not cross connections exist.
   C.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficient short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist.
   D.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   E.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water system, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This includes the handling of process waters
and cooling waters.
   F.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
such that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard may result.
   G.   The following types of facilities require mandatory service protection,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics;
      2.   Laboratories;
      3.   Piers and docks;
      4.   Sewage treatment plants;
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants;
      6.   Chemical plants using a water process;
      7.   Metal plating industries;
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      10.   Car washes;
      11.   Hot water and steam boilers for individual, commercial and
industrial uses;
      12.   Others specified by the public works director. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-7: PLAN REVIEW:
All backflow prevention assemblies installed in new construction of buildings
which are required to be installed shall be shown and specified on all required
building and engineering plans in accordance with industry standards. Approval
by the state plumbing inspector and the city, by and through the public works
department, of the intended assembly installation is required prior to water
service being provided by the city to the applicant. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-8: TYPES OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES REQUIRED:
The type of prevention device required depends on the degree of hazard that
exists:
   A.   An air gap separation or reduced principle backflow prevention assembly
shall be installed where the water supply may be contaminated by sewage,
industrial waste of a toxic nature or other contaminant which could cause a
health or system hazard.
   B.   In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous
to health, an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly, or a double check valve assembly, shall be installed.
   C.   Lawn sprinkler systems which are supplied by city water only shall be
required to have either a double check valve backflow prevention assembly or a
pressure vacuum breaker assembly or atmospheric vacuum breaker assembly
depending on the design of the sprinkler system and potential risk to the
potable water supply. The design of backflow prevention assemblies larger than
one inch (1") will be submitted and approval made by the public works director.
All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type approved by the state
department of environmental quality. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-9: LOCATION:
Backflow prevention assemblies required by this chapter must be installed at
the meter on metered accounts or at the property line of the premises when
meters are not used or at a location designated by the public works department
so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, where no part of
the device will be submerged or hidden from proper inspection. (Ord. 452, 1-7-
2014)
7-6-10: INSTALLATION, APPROVAL AND ACCEPTABLE TYPES:
Any backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter shall be a model
approved by the public works director. A double check valve assembly or a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly will be approved if it
has successfully passed performance tests of the University Of Southern
California Foundation For Cross Connection Control And Hydraulic Research, or
other testing laboratories satisfactory to the state and the city public works
department. Backflow prevention assemblies which are already in service as of
the effective date of this chapter but are not listed shall be permitted to
remain in service provided they:
   A.   Were listed on the current approved cross connection control assembly
list at the time they were installed;
   B.   Are properly maintained;
   C.   Are commensurate with the degree of hazard; and
   D.   Are tested and successfully pass the test annually.
When these assemblies are moved or require more than minimum maintenance, they
shall be replaced by an assembly that is on the current list of approved
assemblies. To maintain their approval status, all assemblies must be delivered
to the job site and be installed with the shutoff valves #1 and #2 and test
cocks which are supplied by the device manufacturer. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-11: INSPECTIONS AND TESTING:
   A.   Inspections: The reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and the
double check valve assembly must be inspected annually or more often when
successive inspections indicate failure.
   B.   Testing And Maintenance:
      1.   Each backflow prevention assembly shall be inspected and tested to
ensure that it functions properly:
         a.   Upon installation.
         b.   After repairs.
         c.   After being relocated, moved or reinstalled.
         d.   Annually.
      2.   The assembly owner shall be notified one month prior to the date for
annual testing. It is then the assembly owner's responsibility to acquire the
services of a certified tester to test the assembly and provide the public
works director a copy of the test results. If the test indicates the assembly
must be repaired, the owner shall be responsible for making repairs and a
record of the repair work and a report of satisfactory final test must be sent
to the public works director. The annual testing of backflow prevention
assemblies must be done prior to any repair work or flushing of the relief
valve, to properly reestablish its operating status. Failure to test and
maintain backflow prevention assemblies is grounds for the city to discontinue
water service. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-12: SERVICE FEE SCHEDULE:
The city retains the authority to adopt a fee schedule for services provided by
the city under this chapter by resolution adopted at a regular meeting of the
city council. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
7-6-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
The failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, test
or inspection of backflow prevention assemblies required by this chapter is
grounds for termination of water services to the premises. Reconnection of a
service which has been disconnected from the city water system for
noncompliance with this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Each day of a violation
shall be considered a separate offense, and each offense may be punishable as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. This chapter may also be enforced by appropriate civil
action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 452, 1-7-2014)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Building Official
8-1-2: Building Codes Adopted
8-1-2-1: Building Code Amendments
8-1-3: Building Permits
8-1-4: Building Permit Fees
8-1-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
8-1-6: Additional Regulations
8-1-7: Appeals
8-1-8: Violation; Penalty
8-1-9: Structure Moving Requirements
8-1-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Appointment; Salary: The city council shall designate a building
official for the city. The building official shall have the authority to issue
building permits, render interpretations of the adopted building codes and
enforce the building codes consistent with those interpretations and the
provisions of this chapter. Any references in the adopted standardized codes to
council or governing body shall be deemed to refer to the city council of the
city of Harrison.
   B.   Authority To Contract: In addition to the authority of the city council
to designate a building official, the city may elect to have the uniform
plumbing code, national electric code, international mechanical and fuel gas
codes including chapters 13 through 25 of the international residential code be
enforced by the Idaho division of building safety. (Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The building official shall have authority to ensure
compliance with this title and all existing ordinances pertaining to building
codes within the city; to issue permits for and cause inspection of said
structures in accordance with the ordinances; to collect permit fees according
to the adopted schedule of the city and to account for and pay to the city
clerk all such fees; such payment and accounting to be made at least once each
month. The building official has the power to issue stop work orders for
noncompliance with this title or with the building codes adopted in this
chapter. (1983 Code § 15.08.020; amd. Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
8-1-2: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Codes Adopted:
      1.   Codes Adopted Enumerated: The latest editions of the following
nationally recognized codes, adopted by the state of Idaho, together with any
amendments, exclusions, or revisions to the nationally recognized codes made by
the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board through the negotiated
rulemaking process, are adopted as the official building codes of the city,
except as provided in section
8-1-2-1 of this chapter:
         International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition, with amendments,
collectively named the Existing Building Code 2018 of Idaho, as adopted and
amended by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process.
         International Building Code, 2018 edition, with Idaho amendments.
collectively named the Building Code 2018 of Idaho, as adopted and amended by
the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process.
         International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, with amendments,
collectively named the Idaho Energy Conservation Code (2020 edition), as
adopted and amended by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated
rulemaking process.
         International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, as adopted and amended by
the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process.
         International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, as adopted and amended by
the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process.
         International Residential Code, 2018 edition (parts I, II, III, and
IX), with Idaho amendments, collectively named the Idaho Residential Code (2020
edition), as adopted and amended by the Idaho Building Code Board through the
negotiated rulemaking process.
         National Electrical Code, 2017 edition, as prepared by the
International Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the State of Idaho or
by the Idaho Building Code Board, made through the negotiated rulemaking
process.
         Uniform Code of Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition.
         Uniform Plumbing Code, 2017 edition, as prepared by the International
Code Council, and as adopted and amended by the State of Idaho or by the Idaho
Building Code Board, made through the negotiated rulemaking process.
      2.   Successive Versions Effective: The adopted versions of the foregoing
codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they
are adopted or approved by the Idaho building code board effective January 1 of
the year following the adoption by the Idaho building code board. (Ord. 453, 2-
4-2014)
   B.   Exemption Of Agricultural Buildings: A building that meets the
definition of "agricultural building" contained herein shall be exempt from the
requirements of the building codes adopted herein, provided that the building
is used solely as an agricultural building and the property on which the
building is sited has been determined by the Kootenai County assessor to be
land actively devoted to agriculture.
      1.   Definitions:
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING: A structure that is designed and constructed for one
or more of the following purposes:
         a. Livestock shelters or buildings including shade structures and
milking barns;
         b. Poultry buildings or shelters;
         c. Barns;
         d. Storage of equipment and machinery used exclusively in agriculture;
         e. Horticultural structures, including detached production greenhouses
and crop protection shelters;
         f. Sheds;
         g. Grain silos; or
         h. Stables.
   EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY USED EXCLUSIVELY IN AGRICULTURE: Farm implements and
other equipment and machinery that are used exclusively on land actively
devoted to agriculture and are not used on public highways except as necessary
for access to land actively devoted to agriculture.
   LAND ACTIVELY DEVOTED TO AGRICULTURE: Real property meeting the eligibility
criteria for appraisal, assessment and taxation as agricultural property as set
forth in Idaho Code 63-604.
   The above definitions shall supersede any definitions of these terms that
are contained in the international building code.
      2.   Requirements Applicable To Agricultural Buildings: Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply to
agricultural buildings:
         a.   An agricultural building shall not be:
            (1)    Used as a place of human habitation; or
            (2)   Used as a place of employment where agricultural products are
processed, treated or packaged; or
            (3)   Open to use by the public.
      3.   Placement Standards: All agricultural buildings shall conform to the
minimum placement standards established pursuant to the Harrison zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Site Permit: The owner of an agricultural building shall obtain a
site permit for the building from the Harrison building department. (Ord. 427,
6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 453, 2-4-2014; Ord. 2023-488, 10-26-2023)
8-1-2-1: BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following terms, conditions, and provisions shall be incorporated into the
codes identified in this section and shall be enforced as part of said codes:
   A.   Amendments To The International Building Code:
      1.   The minimum roof design load shall be fifty (50) pounds per square
foot for roofs with a 3:12 pitch ratio or higher and shall be sixty (60) pounds
per square foot for roofs with a pitch ratio lower than 3:12.
      2.   The minimum depth for frost protection purposes from ground surface
to the bottom of a footing shall be twenty four inches (24"). (Ord. 453, 2-4-
2014; amd. Ord. 2023-488, 10-26-2023)
8-1-3: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall erect, construct or enlarge any
structure; alter any existing structure, including alteration requiring
electrical and/or plumbing changes; make any excavation and/or fill for
structural purposes; or alter or convert use of any structure within the city
without first obtaining a building permit pursuant to this section from the
building official for each separate structure.
   B.   Permit Issuance: No building permit will be issued until the applicant
has:
      1.   Received final approval on a variance, special use permit, temporary
hardship, final subdivision plat, planned unit development or zone change if
one is required.
      2.   Received an access approach, or encroachment approval from the
appropriate highway jurisdiction.
      3.   For pole barns, log homes, steel structures or other alternate
building systems not tested and approved by the National Evaluation Service,
Inc., or the International Conference Of Building Officials Evaluation Service,
Inc., or the International Code Council Evaluation Service, Inc., had plans
approved and stamped by a design professional licensed in the state of Idaho.
      4.   An elevation certificate stamped by an Idaho licensed engineer,
architect or surveyor when the parcel is located in a special flood hazard
area, and complies with the methods and provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
      5.   Paid the applicable building permit fees and sewer and water hookup
fees.
      6.   Survey completed and filed by a licensed surveyor with property pins
visibly positioned.
      7.   Submitted a site plan showing location of proposed structures,
location of water and sewer hookups and any other relevant matters. Approval by
the city maintenance department is required before a permit will be issued.
   C.   Compliance With Streets, Water And Sewer Regulations: No building
permit will be issued until such time as applicant has complied with all
municipal requirements for extension of streets, water and sewer. (Ord. 427, 6-
2-2009)
8-1-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
The fee schedule for building permits shall be as required by table 1-A of the
1997 uniform building code. Building valuation obtained from the "Building
Valuation Data" published by the International Conference Of Building Officials
(ICBO) Building Standards Magazine each year shall be used to determine
valuation of construction. Such valuation shall become effective on January 1
of the calendar year following the ICBO publication. Discontinuance of said
publication will result in the use of the last valuation data and computations
of local and national construction statistics to determine fair market value of
fees to be charged. (Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
8-1-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
Upon satisfaction of the building official that all codes and requirements have
been complied with, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, pursuant to the
provisions of subsection
9-13-2C of this code. (Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
8-1-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Roof Drains: It is unlawful for any roof drains within the city to be
allowed to run into the sanitary sewer system of the city, as outlined in
section
7-2-12 of this code. (1983 Code § 15.12.070)
   B.   Driveways:
      1.   Permit Required: Any person hereafter constructing a driveway, shall
first obtain permission therefor from the city, unless such person has a
building permit for other construction on the lot where such driveway or
driveways are contemplated, and which driveway or driveways are included in the
building permit. (1983 Code § 15.28.030; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Construction Requirements:
         a.   Limited Number And Width Permitted: From and after January 1,
1984, each lot within the city shall be limited to either one driveway not more
than twenty feet (20') in width, or two (2) driveways of not more than ten feet
(10') in width each. (1983 Code § 15.28.010)
         b.   Standards: All driveways hereafter constructed pursuant to the
authority of this subsection shall be of standard and satisfactory
construction, shall include adequate culverts, which shall be not less than ten
inches (10") in diameter. (1983 Code § 15.28.020)
      3.   Obstructions Prohibited: The maintenance of any driveway, approach
or other condition or structure, whether now in existence or to be placed or
hereafter constructed which impedes or obstructs normal and proper drainage of
city streets is prohibited. (1983 Code § 15.28.040)
      4.   Violation; Penalty: Any driveway or driveways placed or constructed
in violation of the terms and standards provided by this subsection, or any
that are maintained in violation hereof, whether the same now exist or are
hereafter constructed, shall be subject to removal and abatement at the expense
of the owner or owners of the lot where such driveway or driveways are located.
Further, any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 15.28.050)
   C.   Construction Materials: No parking, loading or storage of demolition
debris, spoil or construction materials shall be permitted within any right of
way on any public property or within ten feet (10') of any right of way
adjacent to public or private property unless specifically approved by the
city. Building contractors shall cause all dirt, mud, gravel and other debris
from the property where building activities are taking place to be regularly
cleaned from all sidewalks and streets adjoining and in the area of the
property. (2004 Code)
8-1-7: APPEALS:
Any affected persons may appeal an interpretation of the building official to
the city council, such appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the city
clerk within ten (10) days after the building official's actions. The appeal
will be scheduled before the city council at the next available city council
meeting. (Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
8-1-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, or who, having obtained a permit hereunder, shall
wilfully fail to comply with the conditions herein set forth, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. Each successive day that a violation continues constitutes
a new violation.
   B.   In addition to criminal sanctions, the city may pursue any civil
remedies that may be available to seek compliance.
   C.   An investigation fee equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the actual
permit fee will be assessed by persons who violate this chapter. This fee will
also apply to manufactured home setting permits. (Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
8-1-9: STRUCTURE MOVING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any person desiring to move an existing structure, excluding a
manufactured home, to a location within the city limits of Harrison, from
either outside of the city limits or from another location within the city
limits, shall obtain the following inspections and permits prior to bringing
the structure into the city limits:
      1.   Premove Inspection: The person or firm who will be the owner of the
structure when it is placed on its destination site shall be the owner for the
purpose of this section. The owner shall arrange for a code compliance
inspection with the jurisdiction having code enforcement responsibilities at
the premove location of the structure, prior to initiating the move. The
results of said inspection shall be supplied by the owner to the Harrison
building official. Upon receipt of the inspection report, the Harrison building
official shall inform the person or the firm requesting the premove inspection
what corrections will be necessary before occupancy of the relocated structure
will be allowed. Said requirements may be reference to by an itemized list or
by reference to the inspection report submitted by the premove jurisdiction.
      2.   Moving Permit: Permission to move the structure in question into or
within the city of Harrison may be granted by the building official if the
following conditions have been met satisfactorily:
         a.   An acknowledgment has been received from the owner that code
compliance requirements will be met prior to occupancy of the relocated
structure.
         b.   Copies of permits to use public rights of way for movement of the
structures have been obtained from all public agencies having responsibility
for the rights of way to be used in the move. Any bonds or surety requirements
associated with the use of the public rights of way for movement of the
structure shall be obtained and submitted to the transportation agency(ies)
responsible for regulation of pertinent rights of way prior to issuance of the
permits required herein. Harrison shall not be responsible for security of the
move in any manner.
         c.   A building permit for all improvements to be installed upon the
destination site shall be obtained prior to bringing the structure into the
city limits. Adequate plans and accessory permits from special purpose
districts serving the destination site shall be provided as same would be
required for completely new construction on the destination site.
         d.   Nothing in the process of permit review for structures to be
moved shall excuse the owner from his responsibility to repair any damage
caused by movement of structure prior to occupancy.
         e.   Notification of moving date and route shall be made to the fire
protection district(s) and all other emergency services dispatch centers before
and during the move. (Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
CHAPTER 2
TEMPORARY RESIDENCES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Permit Required
8-2-3: Violation; Penalty
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: Includes tents, camper trailers, vans, pickup trucks with
or without covering canopies or campers, class A and C motor homes, and all
similar facilities, exclusive of mobile homes as defined in section
9-1-4 of this code. (Ord. 415, 10-3-2006)
8-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Restrictions:
      1.   Time Limit: A person may reside in a temporary residence within the
city for a period not in excess of ten (10) days, if written notice of such
stay shall be provided to the city clerk within seventy two (72) hours of
commencing such stay.
      2.   Location: This section shall apply to all sections of the city
except the city campground and boat docks, the temporary residences therein
being governed by the ordinances, rules and regulations governing such
facilities 1 .
      3.   Waiver: A waiver to extend the time limit may be granted by the city
council if written application is made to the city clerk within the time limit
specified herein.
   B.   Contents Of Notice Of Application: Written notice, as required in
subsection A of this section, shall set forth the location where the temporary
residence will be situated; the type of residence; and the inclusive dates of
occupancy. Applications for waiver to extend the time limit shall also include
a statement of the circumstances necessitating the request. (Ord. 415, 10-3-
2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 5 of this code.
8-2-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (1983 Code § 15.24.040)
CHAPTER 3
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
8-3-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: General Provisions
8-3-4: Administration
8-3-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
8-3-6: Variance And Appeal Procedures
8-3-7: Penalties For Violation
8-3-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho in Idaho
Code 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a
floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies floodplains
and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains that are
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.
   B.   Findings Of Fact: The flood hazard areas of Harrison are subject to
periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
      1.   These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
      2.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adoption and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
      3.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
      4.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
      5.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters.
   D.   Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are to:
      1.   Protect human life, health and property;
      2.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
      3.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      4.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      6.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions. (Ord. 435, 5-3-2010, eff.
5-3-2010)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure. An insurable building should not be classified as an accessory or
appurtenant structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet (3'),
and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, V. Also known as the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded each year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood
in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on
the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of
the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline
utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material
facilities.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
has been the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical
datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring
heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and permanent
storage of equipment or materials.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk
and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before May 3, 2010.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 3, 2010.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by
floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration or U.S. department of housing and urban
development, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as zone A. The FHBM usually is the initial flood hazard map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard
and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance
administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway
boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
   B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the
elevation of the one percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood), plus any
increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus one foot (1') of
freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN: The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is
surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood
fringe 1 .
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge
and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic
effects of urbanization in a watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY: A facility that cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The
term does not include long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for HAG related to
building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
         A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register.
         B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the
interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district.
         C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior, or
         D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
          1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
          2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without
approved programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following
categories:
         A. Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. An LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
         B. Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data
showing that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones,
flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric
features. One common type of LOMR, an LOMR-F, is a determination that a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is excluded from the special flood hazard area.
         C. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
national flood insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for LAG related
to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking and eating,
or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could
be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl space. An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
structure's lowest floor. The lowest floor is a determinant for the flood
insurance premium for a building, home or business.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after May 3, 2010, and includes subsequent improvements to the structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed on or after May 3, 2010.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A. Built on a single chassis,
   B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection,
   C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck,
and
   D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
market value of the structure should be: a) the appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or b) in the
case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless
of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not include
either:
   A. A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B. Alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this
chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 435, 5-
3-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 46-1021.
8-3-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city of Harrison.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are
otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The special flood hazard areas
identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance
study (FIS) for Kootenai County, Idaho and incorporated areas, dated May 3,
2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood
insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file
at the office of the Harrison city clerk, 100 Fredrick Avenue, Harrison, ID
83833.
   C.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special
flood hazard areas established in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   E.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of Harrison or by any officer or
employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 435, 5-3-2010, eff.
5-3-2010)
8-3-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Administrator: The building official is
hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator who is responsible for
administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Procedures: Application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the
administrator or the administrator's designee prior to starting development
activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Application Stage:
         a.   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project
area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures,
earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage
facilities;
         b.   Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or
highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including crawl spaces or
basement, of all proposed structures;
         c.   Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed;
         d.   Design certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection
8-3-5G2 of this chapter;
         e.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development.
      2.   Construction Stage:
         a.   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification
of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation
or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential
structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
         b.   Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain
administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the
corrections shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop
work order for the project.
      3.   Technical Review:
         a.   If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the
technical data that is part of the application, the community may contract for
an independent engineering review or require a review by FEMA through the
letter of map revision process. The applicant will pay the costs of an
independent technical review.
      4.   Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
         a.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and thereafter is
pursued to completion.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator: Duties of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have
been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including section 404 of the federal water pollution
control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; the endangered species act of
1973, 16 USC 1531-1544; and state of Idaho stream channel alteration permits,
Idaho Code 42 chapter 38 require that copies of such permits be provided and
maintained on file.
      3.   When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available,
then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are not
available, the floodplain administrator shall take into account the flood
hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building
site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      5.   Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to the
vertical datum on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest
floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially
improved structures.
      6.   Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to the
vertical datum on the effective FIRM to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      7.   When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
      8.   Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
chapter.
      9.   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk or the clerk's designee and shall be
open for public inspection. (Ord. 435, 5-3-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
8-3-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   Subdivision Standards:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      2.   All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include
the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for
subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five
(5) acres, whichever is less.
      4.   All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
      5.   All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   B.   Construction Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard the
following provisions are required:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      3.   New construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, that
includes a fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the
foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings meeting the following
criteria:
            (1)   A total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately
below the opening;
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.
         b.   To comply with the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of
vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises, or entry to the elevated area.
         c.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         d.   For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the
guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawlspace construction for structures located in
special flood hazard areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance,
specifically:
            (1)   Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceed five feet (5') per second;
            (2)   Interior grade of the crawl space below the BFE must not be
more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
            (3)   Height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
lowest interior grade of the crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must
not exceed four feet (4') at any point;
            (4)   Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space.
      5.   All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all
electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other facilities shall be designed and/
or elevated to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding.
      6.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      7.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      8.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
      9.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
that is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken
only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety
standards.
   C.   Manufactured Home Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where
the flood protection elevation is established, these standards for manufactured
homes and recreational vehicles that are an allowed use under the zoning
ordinance shall apply:
      1.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:
         a.   On individual lots or parcels.
         b.   In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions.
         c.   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a
flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood
protection elevation.
      2.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the
flood protection elevation or one foot (1') above the level of the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher.
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by
reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength) of no less than thirty six inches (36") above the highest adjacent
grade.
      3.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements.
      4.   Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the
flood vent requirements in subsection B4 of this section.
   D.   Accessory Structures: Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than two
hundred (200) square feet. Such a structure must meet the following standards:
      1.   It shall not be used for human habitation;
      2.   It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      3.   It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      4.   It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      5.   Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated
or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
      6.   It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection B4 of this
section.
   E.   Recreational Vehicle Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard,
recreational vehicles, that are an allowed use or structure under the zoning
ordinance, must either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition;
or
      3.   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new
construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
   F.   Floodway Standards: The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:
      1.   A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment
review to determine its effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must
include:
         a.   Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or
construction of a structure will not obstruct flood flows and will not cause an
increase in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the project site;
         b.   Determination and documentation that grading, excavation, channel
improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an obstruction, do
not cause increases in downstream flood flows;
         c.   Certification and documentation by a licensed professional
engineer that the project will not result in a rise in flood heights;
         d.   The administrator may make the encroachment determination for
minor projects.
      2.   An encroachment in the floodway or floodplain that will cause an
increase in the base flood elevation in excess of the allowable level must have
a conditional letter of map revision granted by FEMA before it will be
permitted.
   G.   Standards For Zones With Base Flood Elevations: In special flood hazard
areas designated A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following
provisions are required:
      1.   New Construction And Substantial Improvements:
         a.   Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction
or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the community's flood
protection elevation. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction:
         a.   New construction or the substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH must be floodproofed
if the new construction or improvement is not elevated. The structure and
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to
the flood protection elevation or to one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed
professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
these provisions, and shall provide certification to the administrator.
      3.   Cumulative Effect Of Proposed Developments: Where the floodway has
not been determined, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted in zones A1-30 and AE on the
effective FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. Applicants of
proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one foot
(1') are required to obtain and submit to the floodplain administrator, a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.
      4.   Flood Hazard Map Changes: Postconstruction, the applicant must apply
to FEMA for a letter of map revision for changes to the flood hazard map
proposed in the CLOMR.
      5.   Drainage Paths: In AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide floodwater around and away from proposed and existing structures.
   H.   Standards For Zones Without Base Flood Elevations And/Or Floodway (A
Zones): These standards apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist
but no base flood elevation data have been provided (A zones), or where base
flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated.
      1.   When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified
by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If data
are not available from any source, only then subsections H2 and H3 of this
section shall apply.
         a.   Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood
elevation data, applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot (1') shall obtain a conditional letter of map
revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision postconstruction.
      2.   No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located
within an area equal to the width of the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever
is greater, measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless certification by
a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment will not
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.
      3.   In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new
construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the
lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawl space)
elevated no less than two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade at the
building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsection B4 of this section.
   I.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Shallow flooding
areas designated AO zones, are areas of special flood hazard that have base
flood depths of one to three feet (3'), with no clearly defined channel. The
following provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the adjacent grade at least as high as the flood depth number
specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no flood depth
number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at
least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with the construction standards in subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant
utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be watertight to the
specified base flood level or at least two feet (2') above highest adjacent
grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these
provisions, and shall provide certification to the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away
from all proposed and existing structures.
   J.   Alteration Of A Watercourse: A watercourse is considered altered when
any change occurs within its banks.
      1.   The bank full flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bank full flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not
be diminished.
      2.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Idaho
department of water resources stream channel alteration program must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of
notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and to the
federal emergency management agency.
      3.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
      4.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in subsections K1 and K2 of this section when an alteration of a watercourse
results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area,
including the placement of culverts.
   K.   Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
      1.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date
such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         a.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         b.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         c.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts;
         d.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring
establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection A3 of this
section.
      2.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data
prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for
these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 435, 5-
3-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
8-3-6: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the city clerk on
the form provided by the city and include, at a minimum, the same information
required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis for the
variance request.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance
request will be set for public hearing at the next city council meeting in
which time is available for the matter to be heard.
      3.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published
in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice shall be
provided to all adjoining property owners.
      4.   The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
   B.   Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances may be issued upon:
         a.   A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
      5.   Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in
densely populated residential neighborhoods.
      6.   Variances should be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances.
   C.   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance
shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and
denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice
along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
   D.   Appeals: The city council shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the administrator.
      1.   An appeal must be filed with the city clerk within fourteen (14)
days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the administrator.
Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure to exhaust the
administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the
administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the
appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for
the next available city council meeting to be heard. The city council shall
consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
         a.   All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, including:
            (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
            (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
            (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
            (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
            (11)   The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   E.   Decision: The city council decision on appeal shall be in writing and
set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision.
(Ord. 435, 5-3-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
8-3-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered
unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 435, 5-3-2010, eff. 5-3-2010)
CHAPTER 4
SITE DISTURBANCE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Title
8-4-2: Authority
8-4-3: Purpose
8-4-4: Definitions
8-4-5: Applicability
8-4-6: Application And Information
8-4-7: Standards
8-4-8: Disturbance Restrictions
8-4-9: Hazards
8-4-10: Administration
8-4-11: Inspection
8-4-12: Maintenance
8-4-13: Prohibited Conduct, Enforcement, And Penalties
8-4-14: Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions
8-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SITE DISTURBANCE ORDINANCE OF HARRISON.
(Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is authorized under the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6518.
(Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect property, surface water, and
ground water against significant adverse effects from excavation, filling,
clearing, unstable earthworks, soil erosion, sedimentation, and storm water
runoff and to provide maximum safety in the development and design of building
sites, roads, and other service amenities. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: An official appointed by the city council to administer
provisions of this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water and erosion of soils.
CONVEYANCE: A mechanism for transporting water from one point to another,
including pipes, ditches, and channels.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL: A professional engineer, landscape architect, or geologist
registered for their respective profession by the state of Idaho or a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) as determined by the Soil
and Water Conservation Society and the International Erosion Control
Association.
DRIVEWAY: For purposes of managing and treating storm water, a driveway shall
be a means of vehicular access from a public or private road to a point within
an individual lot which is less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length.
EXCAVATE: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or other earthen material
is cut into, dug, uncovered, displaced, or relocated.
FILL: A solid material which increases the ground surface elevation or the act
of depositing such material by mechanical means.
GRADING: Any excavation, filling, or movement of earth for the purposes of
changing the shape or topography of the land.
GROUND WATER: Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the land surface or
a surface water body.
GUARANTEE OF FINANCIAL SURETY: A surety bond, cash deposit, or escrow account,
irrevocable letter of credit, or other means acceptable to or required by the
city to guarantee that infrastructure or improvements are completed in
compliance with the project's approved plans.
PRIVATE ROAD: A means of vehicular access which does not meet the definition of
"driveway" and is not maintained by the city of Harrison or Idaho
transportation department.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY AGENCY: The Idaho transportation department or the city of
Harrison with jurisdiction over public highways, public streets, and public
rights of way.
PUBLIC ROAD: Public highway or street which has been accepted for maintenance
by the city of Harrison or Idaho transportation department.
SITE: The parcel of land on which grading or excavation activity is conducted.
A road right of way shall be considered a separate site from adjacent
properties.
STORM WATER: That portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate
into the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, channels,
or pipes into a defined surface water channel, or a constructed infiltration
facility.
STORM WATER CONTROL: Those best management practices (BMPs) which are employed
to convey, direct, treat, or dissipate storm water and are typically necessary
when impervious area is created or the natural drainage is interrupted (see
definition of Best Management Practices (BMPs)).
STREAM: A watercourse of perceptible extent which confines and conducts
continuously intermittently flowing water.
SURFACE WATER: For purposes of this chapter, surface water shall include all
lakes, rivers, streams, wetlands, and similar features and any feature which
acts as a conveyance of water to a surface water feature. Conveyance features
may include natural or manmade ditches. Ponds, springs, or similar features
that are entirely contained within the property shall not be considered surface
water features.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLAN: A state certified plan to prevent contamination of
ground water that supplies the city's drinking water. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-5: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the permit
requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Activities approved by or operating under a permit issued by
applicable state or local agencies including, but not limited to, the U.S. army
corp of engineers, Idaho department of lands, and Idaho department of water
resources, or activities governed by and subject to the forest practices act.
Grading activities that are related to the project, but not subject to an
agency, are not exempt.
      2.   Agricultural practices in common local usage.
      3.   Cemetery graves.
      4.   Emergency situations involving immediate danger to life or property,
substantial fire hazards, or other public safety hazards as subsequently
determined by the city, or during the period covered by an emergency
declaration by the city.
      5.   In any twelve (12) month period, excavation or placement of fill
less than fifty (50) cubic yards in volume, which does not obstruct a stream,
drainage course, or surface waters.
      6.   Private road or driveway maintenance where work is limited to the
travelway, no cut or fill slopes are created, and no drainage features are
created or modified.
      7.   Excavation of test holes for soil testing activities, provided that
no access road will be created for test hole excavation, and the total
excavation is less than fifty (50) cubic yards.
      8.   Grading, excavating and placement of fill on a site that has less
than ten percent (10%) slope, and is more than five hundred feet (500') from
"surface water" as defined by this chapter, and that results in disturbance of
less than one-third (1/3) of the parcel.
   Excavation and grading activities which are exempted from the permit
requirement shall employ reasonable and knowledgeable best management practices
to prevent sediment from leaving the site.
   B.   Permit Required: Except as exempted under subsection A of this section,
a site disturbance permit shall be required for the following activities:
      1.   Construction of all new driveways, private or public roads, or
infrastructure authorized through the subdivision or conditional use permit
process.
      2.   Conversion of roads from one use to another (such as a logging road
to a private road, private road to a public road, etc.) regardless of the level
of improvement required on the road.
      3.   Excavation for the construction of structures.
      4.   Creation of a new commercial or industrial access or parking lot,
and conversion or paving of an existing access or parking lot for commercial or
industrial development.
      5.   All other excavation and grading activity, except as specifically
exempted under subsection A of this section.
   C.   Other Activities:
      1.   Site disturbing activities conducted by utility installers shall be
regulated as follows:
         a.   For major installation projects where utility service is regional
in nature intending to serve more than one subdivision or intending to upgrade
existing service to multiple subdivisions, or commercial or industrial
projects, utility installers shall comply with all requirements of this
chapter.
         b.   All other work conducted by utility installers shall use
knowledgeable and reasonable best management practices to prevent sediment from
leaving the site. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-6: APPLICATION AND INFORMATION:
   A.   Applications: All applications for a site disturbance permit shall be
submitted to the city on a form provided by the city.
      1.   Upon receipt of a completed application, the city will perform a
site inspection to determine the risk categories as outlined in subsection
8-4-11E of this chapter. Using the outcome of risk assessment, and the nature,
location, and time of year of the project, the administrator shall determine
whether the project is high, moderate or low risk.
   B.   Fee: The applicant shall pay the fee set by resolution of the city
council.
   C.   Improvement Plans: The required elements of site disturbance plans are
outlined in the city of Harrison "Plan Criteria Manual" adopted by resolution
of the city council.
   D.   Interagency Coordination: The administrator may request comment from
affected agencies where appropriate. Where coordinated permits are necessary,
signoffs from permitting agencies or copies of other permits may be required. A
list of affected agencies is contained in the city of Harrison "Plan Criteria
Manual" adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-7: STANDARDS:
   A.   Ground Water And Springs: Springs and other ground water sources that
are encountered during grading or excavation activity shall be returned to
subsurface flow where possible or conveyed through the site by an appropriate
means of conveyance that shall be nonerosive, avoids sediment transport, and
dissipates energy, all to be conducted in accordance with the best management
practices. For high risk sites, the owner shall contact the design professional
to ensure that the ground water will not interfere with the implementation or
function of the planned storm water or erosion control improvements.
   B.   Grading; Erosion; Storm Water: Standards for grading, erosion and
sedimentation control, storm water detention and conveyance and storm water
treatment are outlined in the city of Harrison "Plan Criteria Manual" adopted
by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-8: DISTURBANCE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Stream Protection Zones: During and after construction operations,
streambeds and streamside vegetation shall be protected to leave them in the
most natural condition possible to maintain water quality and aquatic habitat.
Protection zone dimensions and restrictions are outlined in the city of
Harrison "Plan Criteria Manual" adopted by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Waterfront Lots: Buffer zone requirements are outlined in the city of
Harrison "Plan Criteria Manual" adopted by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Source Water Protection Plan: Development within the area overlying the
aquifer from which the city wells draw their water shall be in conformance with
the city's wellhead protection plan which prohibits potential contamination of
the public drinking water. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-9: HAZARDS:
Whenever the administrator determines that an existing excavation, embankment,
fill, or roadway on private property has become a hazard to life and limb;
endangers other property; adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a
public or private access, drainage channel, or adjacent or contiguous
properties, the administrator may require the property owner(s) to eliminate
the hazard. The administrator shall give notice in writing to the owner or
other person(s) or agent(s) in control of the property. Within the period
specified in the notice, the owner(s) or their agent(s) shall have the hazard
corrected. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-10: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Duration Of Permit: Permits shall expire if the work authorized by the
permit is not started within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the
permit, or if work is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has
started for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. The administrator may
grant one time extension for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days on
written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control
of the permittee have prevented work authorized by the permit. The
administrator may set specific time limits to the permit for project initiation
and completion for environmental reasons or for coordination with other
permitted site work.
   B.   Guarantee Of Installation:
      1.   Subdivisions: Prior to initiating work on subdivision
infrastructure, the developer shall provide financial surety to ensure that
erosion control, site stabilization and storm water management improvements
will be completed.
      2.   Commercial And Industrial Development: For commercial and industrial
development, or development on high risk sites, the owner shall be required to
provide financial surety to the city prior to issuance of the site disturbance
permit.
      3.   Financial Guarantee: The financial guarantee shall be one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost to complete the plan. The design
professional employed by developers or owners shall provide an estimate of the
cost to implement the approved plan based on current local construction costs.
Prior to release of the financial guarantee, the design professional shall
submit a letter to the city approving the construction and certifying its
completion.
      4.   Moderate Risk Sites: For development on moderate risk sites, the
owner may be required to provide an acceptable guarantee of financial surety to
the city prior to issuance of the site disturbance permit. If required, the
owner shall provide an estimate of the cost to implement the approved plan,
subject to review and approval of the administrator. Estimated costs shall be
based upon the current local construction costs. The financial guarantee shall
be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost to complete the plan.
Prior to release of the financial guarantee, the city shall conduct an
inspection to approve the construction and certify its completion.
      5.   If Not Completed By Specified Date: If the required improvements
have not been completed by the specified date, the city may contract to have
the work completed with the money from the financial guarantee. The city may
also take additional enforcement measures as provided by law.
   C.   Appeal: Any and all affected persons may appeal the actions of the
administrator to the city council, such appeal to be in writing and brought
before the city council within ten (10) days of the administrator's actions.
(Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-11: INSPECTION:
   A.   General: All activities governed by these regulations shall be subject
to inspection by the city. An approved set of plans must be available for
review on site whenever work is in progress. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to keep the city notified of the progress of the project and
call for all required inspections.
   B.   High Risk Sites: At a minimum, two (2) inspections shall be required
for high risk sites: 1) after erosion and sedimentation controls have been
installed, prior to ground disturbance; and 2) after the project has been
completed, including revegetation. For sites which are active during the
winter, two (2) additional inspections shall be required: 3) after the site has
been prepared for the winter (typically in September or October); and 4)
sometime in January or February to ensure that the erosion and sedimentation
control measures are adequate and maintained. The permittee's design
professional shall perform the inspections and submit inspection reports to the
administrator.
   C.   Moderate Risk Sites: For moderate risk sites, the administrator shall
determine what inspections are necessary. The administrator, or their designee,
shall conduct the inspections for moderate risk sites.
   D.   Other Sites Where Risk Has Not Been Determined: For sites where
notification is required or other situations where the site risk has not been
evaluated, the administrator shall determine what inspections are necessary, if
any.
   E.   Site Risk Assessments: Site risk assessments shall be based upon the
following criteria:
      1.   Erosion Risk Assessment:
         a.   Slope: Slope, measured in percent, as an average across the area
to be disturbed.
 
Gradient                       Point Value
   0   -   10 percen 1lope
   11   -   25 perce 5slope
      >   25 percent 10pe
 
         b.   Soil K Factor: Soil K factor, for water erosion susceptibility,
as indicated in the "Soil Survey Of Kootenai County Area, Idaho", or other
supplementary study. The highest K factor within the proposed disturbed soil
profile will be used. Soil type from the soil survey will be verified on site
by physical description.
 
K Factor             Point Value
   0   -  � 1.2
   0.21   -  3� 0.4
      >    54
 
         c.   Proximity To Surface Water: Proximity to surface water or any
feature which conveys water to surface water. Surface water includes all lakes,
rivers, streams, wetlands, and similar features. Conveyance features may
include natural or manmade ditches. Ponds, springs, or similar features that
are contained within the property shall not be considered surface water
features. Distance is measured along the slope from the closest boundary of the
proposed disturbance to the conveyance or surface water feature.
 
Distance                 Point Value
      >    500 1et
   201   -     5 feet
   0   -    20 10et
 
         d.   Amount Of Disturbed Area: Amount of disturbed area, expressed as
a percentage of the parcel area. Areas to be disturbed during installation of
utilities must be included.
 
Disturbed Portion          Point Value
   0   -   33 pe 1nt
   34   -   66 p 5ent
   67   -    100 10cent
 
         e.   Buffer Strip: If the project has a usable buffer strip, which
provides the appropriate level of treatment for the type of project proposed,
subtract ten (10) points.
         f.   Determining Risk Category: The points for each factor shall be
added; the risk category shall be determined from the point total as follows:
 
   0   - �=�Low risk
   10   - =�Moderate or high risk; administrator makes determination
                  based on experience in the area
      >  =�High risk
 
      2.   Storm Water Risk Assessment:
         a.   Slope: Slope, measured in percent, as an average across the area
to be disturbed.
 
Gradient                 Point Value
   0   -   5 p 0ent
   6   -   10  3cent
   11   -   15 6rcent
   16   -   25 10cent
      >   25 p 15nt
 
         b.   Soil Permeability: Soil permeability, measured in inches per hour
as indicated in the "Soil Survey Of Kootenai County Area, Idaho", or other
supplementary study. The lowest permeability in the soil horizon shall be used.
Soil type from the soil survey will be verified on site by physical
description.
 
Permeability       Point Value
   0.5 or great 0
   < 0.5        5
 
         c.   Proximity To Surface Water: Proximity to surface water or any
feature which conveys water to surface water. Surface water includes all lakes,
rivers, streams, wetlands, and similar features. Conveyance features may
include natural or manmade ditches. Ponds, springs, or similar features that
are contained within the property shall not be considered surface water
features. Distance is measured along the slope from the closest boundary of the
proposed disturbance to the conveyance or surface water feature.
 
Distance                 Point Value
      >    500 0et
   201   -     5 feet
   0   -    20 10et
 
         d.   Impervious Area Ratio: Impervious area ratio, expressed as a
percentage of the parcel area covered with impervious surfaces.
 
Coverage                 Point Value
   0   -   19  0cent
   20   -   40 5rcent
      >   40 p 10nt
 
         e.   Total Impervious Area: Total impervious area, expressed in square
feet.
 
Coverage                 Point Value
   20,000 or greater  5
   < 20,000 square fe 0
 
         f.   Drainage Crossing Proposed: If the project requires crossing a
conveyance channel or drainage, add five (5) points.
         g.   Buffer Strip: If the project has a usable buffer strip, which
provides the appropriate level of treatment for the type of project proposed,
subtract ten (10) points.
         h.   Determining Risk Category: The points for each factor shall be
added; the risk category shall be determined from the point total as follows:
 
15 points or greater  High risk
0 - 14 points         Low to moderate risk
 
(Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-12: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Maintenance requirements and responsibility shall be clearly identified
for all projects where best management practices are employed, including BMPs
for erosion and sedimentation control and storm water management. When a storm
water system is designed to service more than one lot, a maintenance agreement
between all parties which benefit from the system must be established,
including assurance of adequate funding. Easements across private property for
maintenance access to community storm water systems shall also be required
where necessary. All maintenance agreements must be approved by the
administrator.
   B.   In the event that appropriate maintenance of any storm water system is
not conducted, the city shall have the option of requiring the property owner
or association to provide for maintenance, or take other enforcement measures
as outlined in section
8-4-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-13: PROHIBITED CONDUCT, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES:
The following actions shall be considered violations of this chapter:
   A.   Failure to obtain a permit prior to the start of grading activity.
   B.   Failure to call for inspections as required by this chapter.
   C.   Once grading activity has begun, failure to complete the grading
activity and install the necessary erosion and sedimentation control, storm
water management, and slope stabilization measures, in a timely manner.
   D.   Failure to maintain temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation
control measures, the storm water management system, or slope stabilization
measures.
   E.   Conduct work on a site which exceeds the scope of work outlined in the
approved plans.
   F.   Damage or otherwise impede the function of a storm water system.
   G.   Export sediment from a site in a manner not authorized by this chapter.
   H.   Continue work at a site after a stop work order has been placed.
   I.   Discharge storm water in a manner not authorized by this chapter.
   J.   Failure to correct a hazard as outlined in section
8-4-9 of this chapter.
If any of the above violations have occurred, the administrator may revoke the
permit, issue a notice of site disturbance violation or order the work stopped
by notice, in writing, served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such
work to be done. Such person shall stop all site work until authorized by the
administrator to proceed. The administrator may also withhold further issuance
of permits.
Violations of this chapter may be considered a criminal misdemeanor and shall
be punishable by a    maximum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or six
(6) months in jail, or both. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense. The city may also take civil action to compel performance and
completion of, or maintenance of, improvements installed pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
8-4-14: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All provisions of this current code or ordinances of the city of Harrison which
conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict, except that if a conflict occurs between this chapter and
provisions of the international building code or international residential code
adopted by the city, this chapter shall take precedence. (Ord. 409, 7-11-2006)
CHAPTER 5
LOT MERGERS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Intent And Purpose
8-5-2: Applicability
8-5-3: Application, Fees, Approval, Recording, Effect
8-5-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter relating to the voluntary lot merger of adjoining
platted city lots is to provide a procedure by which two (2) or more adjoining
platted lots or units of land located in the city of Harrison and owned by the
same property owner may be merged into one parcel without filing an amended
plat. (Ord. 460, 3-3-2015)
8-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions set forth in this chapter for the voluntary merger of
lots shall be applicable to two (2) or more adjoining platted lots of land
owned by the same owner under the following circumstances:
      1.   The owner of two (2) or more of the adjoining platted lots
voluntarily elects to merge the lots into one parcel; and
      2.   The owner has complied with the filing requirements set forth below;
and
      3.   The city council for the city of Harrison has determined that it is
in the best interest of the city to approve the voluntary lot merger and good
cause is found to support the decision.
   B.   Nothing in these provisions relating to merger of lots shall be
construed or interpreted to prohibit the sale, lease or financing of such
adjoining lots of land, or any of them, where the same have not been merged
pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 460, 3-3-2015)
8-5-3: APPLICATION, FEES, APPROVAL, RECORDING, EFFECT:
   A.   The owner of any two (2) or more adjoining platted lots or units or
parcels of land located in the city of Harrison which are owned by the same
owner, subject to the voluntary lot merger provisions set forth in section
8-5-2 of this chapter, may be merged upon the filing of an application and
supporting documents as set forth below:
      1.   The owner shall file with the city clerk an application for the
voluntary lot merger. The form of the application shall be approved by
resolution of the city council and shall include all of the requirements
necessary for approval of a voluntary lot merger and the issuance of a decision
by resolution or order.
      2.   The owner shall attach to the application all documents required in
the application form, which may include a current title report showing the true
legal description for the property, proof of ownership, any other persons with
an ownership or property interest in the lots to be merged, any easements of
record, including dedicated easements for roads, ingress and egress, utilities
or for any other purpose of record and a copy of the original and any amended
plat map showing the parcels to be merged.
      3.   The application shall be signed and acknowledged by the owner and
any other persons with an ownership or property interest in the lots to be
merged.
   B.   The owner shall pay an application and processing fee to the city clerk
at the time the application is filed, in accordance with a fee schedule to be
set by resolution of the city council, which may be modified from time to time
by resolution.
   C.   The city council may approve a completed voluntary lot merger
application at a regular or special meeting of the city council, duly noticed,
by the adoption of a resolution or order if the application is complete, the
fee has been paid, the lots proposed to be merged do not contain dedicated
easements along the interior lines of the lots to be merged for roads, ingress
and egress, utilities or for any other purpose that would be adversely affected
or interfered with by the lot merger, and the city has determined that it is in
the best interest of the city to approve the lot merger. If the application is
denied for any of these reasons, the owner will be required to prepare and file
an amended plat.
   D.   Any resolution or order approving a voluntary lot merger application
shall be recorded with the Kootenai County recorder by the city clerk within
thirty (30) days of approval by city council, shall be a covenant running with
the land and will be binding upon the owner and the owner's successors, heirs,
or assignees and will continue to be in effect unless released by the city
council for the city of Harrison after compliance with the city's subdivision
regulations.
   E.   Upon the approval of a lot merger application and the recording of the
resolution or order of the city council, interior lot lines within the merged
lots shall be disregarded for the purpose of zoning setbacks and building codes
and regulations. (Ord. 460, 3-3-2015)
TITLE 9
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Scope
9-1-3: Interpretations
9-1-4: Definitions
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the zoning ordinance and regulations codified in this title is
to encourage appropriate and orderly physical development in the city through
standards for provision of adequate open space for light and air, desired
levels of population density, workable relationships of land uses to the
transportation system, adequate community facilities, assurance of
opportunities for effective utilization of land, and to promote in other ways
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. (Ord. 341, 9-10-
1996)
9-1-2: SCOPE:
The regulations for each zoning district set forth by this title shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided:
   A.   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located;
   B.   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
      1.   To provide for greater height or bulk;
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces,
   than herein required, or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions
of this title; and
   C.   No yard or lot existing at the effective date hereof shall be reduced
in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or
lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum
requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-1-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, trust,
company or corporation, as well as an individual;
   B.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular;
   C.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
   D.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied"; and
   E.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel" and "tract". (Ord.
341, 9-10-1996)
9-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONMENT: To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to
resume, but excluding temporary or short term interruptions to a use or
activity during periods of remodeling, maintaining or otherwise improving a
facility, or during normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure.
ABUTTING: Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common
border by a right of way, alley or easement. Having property or district lines
in common.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal use.
ADJOINING: Two (2) or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary
line, or two (2) or more structures, buildings or objects in contact with each
other.
ADMINISTRATOR: An official having knowledge in the principles and practices of
zoning who is appointed by the city council to administer this title, if deemed
necessary in the future.
AGRICULTURE AND FOREST: The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage,
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the
produce; provided, however, that:
   A. The operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities; and
   B. The above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of animals or
poultry in penned enclosures within one hundred feet (100') of any residential
zoning district. Agriculture does not include the operation or maintenance of a
commercial stockyard or feedyard where large numbers of livestock are fed
concentrated feeds particularly for the purpose of fattening for market.
AIRPORT: Any runway, land area or other facility designed or used either
publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking off of aircraft,
including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars
and other necessary buildings.
ALLEY: A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
ANNEXATION: The act of attaching unincorporated land lying contiguous or
adjacent to a municipal corporation.
AQUIFER: A geological unit in which porous and permeable conditions exist and
thus are capable of yielding usable amounts of water.
AREA OF IMPACT: Land adjacent to the city boundaries whose future use would be
negotiated with Kootenai County 1 .
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: An area designated in the flood insurance study
as the natural 100-year floodplain, and the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year 2 .
AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, TRAVEL TRAILER AND FARM IMPLEMENT SALES: The sale or
rental of new and used motor vehicles, mobile homes, travel trailers or farm
implements, but not including repair work except incidental warranty repair of
same, to be displayed and sold on the premises.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: The repair, rebuilding, reconditioning of motor vehicles or
parts thereof, including collision service, painting and steam cleaning of
vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING: The dismantling of two (2) or more used motor vehicles,
mobile homes, trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially
dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BAR AND/OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE: Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold
at retail for consumption on the premises and minors are excluded therefrom by
law. It shall not mean a premises wherein such beverages are sold in
conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on the premises and the sale
of said beverages comprises less than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross
receipts.
BASEMENT: A dwelling unit all or partly underground but having at least one-
half (1/2) of its height below the average level of adjoining ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner occupied dwelling unit that contains no more than
six (6) guestrooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for
compensation and allows for adequate off street parking.
BENEFICIAL USES: The classification of surface waters by the state of Idaho
according to the use for which they are presently suitable or intended to
become suitable. The term is also commonly used to describe uses of land that
are in the public's interest.
BUFFER AREA: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the
view of two (2) adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building detached from, but located on the
same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the main building or use.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is situated.
CAMPGROUND: An area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary
occupancy are located or may be placed, including tents and major recreational
equipment, and which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains an
open air or natural character.
CAR WASH: A building or area that provides facilities for washing and cleaning
motor vehicles, which may use production line methods with a conveyor, blower
or other mechanical devices, and which may employ some hand labor.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human or
animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the
boundaries of such cemetery for which perpetual care and maintenance is
provided.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: A facility, place or home constituting a daycare center,
family daycare center or group daycare facility.
CHURCH OR PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP: A nonprofit organization, as determined
by the internal revenue service, which uses buildings, structures or land for
the teaching or practice of religious doctrine or related social functions.
CITY COUNCIL: The Harrison city council.
CLEAR CUTTING: The indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs or undergrowth with
the intention of preparing real property for nonagricultural development
purposes. This definition shall not include the selective removal of nonnative
tree or shrub species when the soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of
dead trees; or normal mowing operations.
CLINIC: A building used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of medical and surgical
attention; but which building does not provide board, room or regular hospital
care and services.
CLUB: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by an
organized association of persons for a social, literary, political, educational
or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of members and their
guests; but still not including any organization, group or association, the
principal activity of which is to render a service usually and ordinarily
carried on as a business.
COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: Any profit making activity which is
generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion picture theaters,
video arcades, carnivals, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and similar
entertainment activities.
COMMISSION: The joint planning and zoning commission appointed by the city
council 3 .
COMMUNITY CENTER: A place, structure, area, or other facility used for and
providing religious, fraternal, social and/or recreational programs generally
open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments
of the community.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the city
council, including such things as the general location and extent of present
and proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial and commercial
uses, major transportation, parks, schools and other community facilities.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use otherwise prohibited by the terms of any zoning
ordinance, which may be allowed with conditions under specific provisions of
the ordinance, subject to the ability of the city and other political
subdivisions, including school districts, to provide services for the proposed
use, and when it is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in
common with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real property,
together with a separate interest in a space in a residential building, such as
an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in
other portions of such real property.
CONSERVATION AREAS: Environmentally sensitive and valuable lands protected from
any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance
or character, except in cases of overriding public interest. Conservation areas
include freshwater marshes, shallow grassy ponds, natural shorelines (other
than natural beaches or dunes) and other areas of significant biological
productivity or uniqueness.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food
products, household items and other goods commonly associated with the same,and
having a gross floor area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
DAYCARE CENTER: A place, home or facility providing care for more than five (5)
children of preschool age.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
   Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be
developed, including public right of way.
   Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage
involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding public
right of way.
DISABLED VEHICLE: A vehicle that is inoperable or unregistered in which no
attempt has been made to repair and/or use, that sits on a public right of way
or front yard for a period of more than two (2) weeks.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of three (3) or more dwelling
units, including townhouses and condominiums, with varying arrangements of
entrances and party walls. Multi-family housing may include public housing and
industrialized units.
DWELLING, ROOMING HOUSE (BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, DORMITORY): A dwelling
or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or restaurant, where meals and/or
lodging are provided for compensation for three (3) or more unrelated persons
where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in the individual rooms.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only,
separated from other dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of two (2) dwelling units which may
be either attached side by side or one above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: Space within a dwelling comprising living, dining, sleeping room
or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing
and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its household employees.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a
specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single,
nonprofit housekeeping unit; provided that a group of four (4) or more persons
who are not within the second degree of kinship shall not be deemed to
constitute a family.
FRONTAGE: The front or frontage is that side of a lot abutting on a way or
street and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but shall not be
considered as the ordinary side line of a corner lot.
GARAGE (PUBLIC), SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil,
grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail.
GREENBELT: Areas of land designated to preserve vegetation, habitat, water
quality, aesthetics or open space for public and private benefit.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Any substances or materials that, by reason of their
toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise
coming into contact with such material or substance.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The local district health department or state department of
health and welfare that has jurisdictional authority.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation conducted entirely within a dwelling unit 4 .
HOTEL OR MOTEL AND APARTMENT HOTEL: A building in which lodging or boarding and
lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation. As such, it is
open to the public in contradistinction to a boarding house, bed and breakfast,
rooming house, lodging house or dormitory which are herein separately defined.
INFRASTRUCTURE: Facilities and services needed to sustain industry,
residential, commercial, and all other land use activities. Infrastructure
includes, but is not limited to, roads, water systems, sewer systems, schools,
police and fire protection, etc.
INSTITUTION: Building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of
mental, therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling or other correctional services.
JUNK: Any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material which is ready
for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to
some use. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and without
further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as when
new shall not be considered junk.
JUNK BUILDINGS, JUNK SHOPS, JUNK YARDS: Any land, property, structure, building
or combination of the same, on which junk is stored or processed.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more domesticated animals more
than four (4) months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or
sold, and/or which offers provisions for minor medical treatment.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET 5 : Space logically and conveniently located for bulk
pick ups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and
accessible to such vehicles when required off street parking spaces are filled.
Required off street loading space is not to be included as off street parking
space in computation of required off street parking space. All off street
loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right of
way.
LOT: A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements
for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as
herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or
on an approved private street, and may consist of:
   A. A single lot of record;
   B. A portion of a lot of record; and
   C. A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record.
LOT AREA: The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE: The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot
to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest
the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and
through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered
frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated under "yards" in this
section.
LOT LINE: The boundary line of a lot.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF: The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of
the right of way of any public or private street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of
the county recorder; or a lot or parcel described in metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot or parcel of land that has less than the required
minimum area or width as established by the zone in which it is located and
provided that such lot or parcel was of record as a legally created lot on the
effective date of this title.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots,
interior lots and through lots is as follows:
   Corner Lot: A lot at the intersection of two (2) or more streets;
   Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street;
   Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot;
and
   Through Lot: A lot other than a corner with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A factory built, single-family structure that is
manufactured under the authority of 42 USC 5401, the national manufactured home
construction and safety standards act, is transportable in one or more
sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and issued as a place of human
habitation; but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device
allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a
permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to
its body or frame.
MANUFACTURING, EXTRACTIVE: Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing,
storing, separating, cleaning or marketing of any mineral natural resource.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing
and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive
in character, require large sites, open storage and service areas, extensive
services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation and normally
generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air
pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are usually
controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet and free of objectionable or
hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor or dust; operating and storing
within enclosed structures and generating little industrial traffic and no
nuisances.
MARINA: A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, securing and
launching of private pleasure craft that may include the sale of fuel and
incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews and guests.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit built prior to enactment of
the national housing construction and safety standards act of 1974, which
became effective June 15, 1976, with all of the following characteristics:
   A. Designed for a long term occupancy and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities
with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside
systems;
   B. Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on
flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; and
   C. Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling,
including major appliances and furniture and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation
supports, connection to utilities and the like.
MOBILE HOME COURT: Any site or tract of land whereupon two (2) or more mobile
homes or travel trailers are placed, located and maintained for dwelling
purposes on a temporary basis.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A unified development of three (3) or more mobile home spaces
or stands arranged on a tract of land under private ownership. A unified
development of twenty (20) or more mobile home spaces for rent or lease,
arranged on a tract of land.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing apartments and/or rooming
units, each of which maintains a separate outside entrance. Such building or
group of buildings is designed, intended or used primarily for the
accommodation of automobile travelers and provides automobile parking
conveniently located on the premises.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A use or activity which lawfully existed prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this title, but which fails, by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the use district in which
it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use
regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable
regulations at the time the use was established.
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS: Land, building, structure or combination thereof for
the storage, cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants offered
for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or
landscaping.
NURSING HOME FOR THE AGED: A home or facility for the care and treatment of
more than five (5) pensioners or elderly people.
OPEN SPACE: An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot
with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental
features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and any other recreational
facilities that the commission deems permissive. Streets, parking areas,
structures for habitation and the like shall not be included.
PARK: An area open to the general public and reserved for recreational,
educational or scenic purposes.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET 1 : For the purpose of this title, an off street
parking space shall consist of an area adequate for parking an automobile with
room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to
a public street or alley and maneuvering room; but, shall be located totally
outside of any street or alley right of way.
PERFORMANCE BOND OR SURETY BOND: A financial guarantee by a subdivider or
developer with the city in the amount of the estimated construction cost
guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and
specifications within the time prescribed by the agreement.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers
services to the general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, barber shops,
beauty parlors and similar activities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land in which a variety of residential,
commercial and industrial uses developed under single ownership or control are
accommodated in a preplanned environment with more flexible standards, such as
lot sizes and setbacks, than those that would normally apply under these
regulations.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a
secondary or accessory use.
PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES: The use of offices and related spaces for such
professional services as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers,
architects, engineers and similar professions.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: The erection, construction, alteration, operation or
maintenance of buildings, power plants or substations, water treatment plants
or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants and other similar public
service structures by a public utility, by a railroad, whether publicly or
privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including the
furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport, communication, public water and
sewage services.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and
structures, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the
storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service
facilities.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges,
hospitals and other facilities of an educational, religious, charitable,
philanthropic or nonprofit nature.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A unified development under one ownership designed
primarily for transient service, on which recreational vehicles, pickup
coaches, self-propelled motorized vehicles, tent trailers or travel trailers
are parked or situated and used for the purpose of supplying to the public a
parking space for such vehicles, meeting all of the requirements of the this
code.
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES: Research, development and testing related to such fields
as chemical, pharmaceutical, medical, electrical, transportation and
engineering.
RESORT: A hotel or motel that serves as a destination point for visitors. A
resort generally provides recreational facilities for persons on vacation. A
resort shall be self- contained and provide personal services customarily
furnished at hotels, including the serving of meals.
ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale
of agricultural and related products and handicrafts.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In
addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawnstrips,
sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may include special features
(required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped
areas, viaducts and bridges.
SCENIC CORRIDOR: Those roadways that have a view of unusual natural
significance in the city.
SCENIC EASEMENT: An easement, the purpose of which is to limit development in
order to preserve a view or scenic area.
SEAT: For purposes of determining the number of off street parking spaces for
certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or
indicated or each twenty four (24) lineal inches of benches, pews or space for
loose chairs.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building
or structure may be located above ground except as may be provided in this
title.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the road right of way outside the roadway which is
improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on
the premises on which the sign is located.
   Illuminated: Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other artificial
lighting including reflecting or phosphorescent light.
   Lighting Device: Any light, string of lights or group of lights located or
arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign.
   Off Premises: Any sign unrelated to a business or profession conducted, or a
commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located.
   On Premises: Any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a
commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where such sign is
located.
   Projecting: Any sign which projects from the exterior of a building.
SPECIAL USE 1 : A special use permitted within a district, other than a
principally permitted use, requiring a permit and approval of the commission.
Special uses permitted in each district are listed in the official schedule of
district regulations.
STORY: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling
immediately above it.
STREET: A right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted. The
term "street" also includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms.
   Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
   Arterial: A street designated on the comprehensive plan for the purpose of
carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
   Collector: A street designated on the comprehensive plan for the purpose of
carrying traffic from minor streets to other collector streets and/or arterial
streets.
   Minor: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to
abutting properties.
   Private: A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance which
provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences
and billboards.
SUBDIVISION 8 : A tract of land divided into building lots.
SUPPLY YARDS: A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building
supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain and similar
goods.
USE: The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE 9 : A variance is a modification of the requirements of this title as
to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard,
setbacks, parking space, height of buildings or other provisions affecting the
size or shape of a structure or the size of lots. A variance shall not be
considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant
only upon a showing of undue hardship because of the characteristics of the
site and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming,
diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those
who are in need of medical or surgical attention and may include overnight
accommodations on the premises for the treatment, observation and/or
recuperation. It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary
activity.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means the
relationship of the proposed development to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
VISUAL ACCESS: A term used to describe the opportunity to view a beautiful
object or natural scene.
WALKWAY: A public way, four feet (4') or more in width, for pedestrian use
only, whether or not along the side of a road.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs
and similar areas.
YARD: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any structure or portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the general
ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments and
furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
   Front: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot and
from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
   Interior Side: A yard extending from the principal building to the side lot
line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing the
front and rear yards.
   Rear: A yard extending between the side lot lines across the rear of a lot
and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
   Street Side: A yard extending from the principal building to the secondary
street that adjoins the lot between the lines establishing the front and rear
yards.
ZONE: A portion of the territory of the city, exclusive of streets, alleys and
other public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises and buildings
are not permitted and within which certain yards and open spaces are required
and certain height limits are established for buildings.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP: The official certified map upon which the boundaries of
the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the
zoning regulations of the city.
ZONING DISTRICTS: A classification within which the regulations specified are
uniform and which is assigned to a particular area of the city by delineation
upon the zoning district map.
ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by the commission authorizing the uses of land
and structures, and the characteristics of the uses. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd.
Ord. 461, 5-5-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-8-2 of this code.
  2. See
2 Chapter 8 of this title for the FP floodplain overlay district, and
  title 8, chapter 3 for flood control
3 1. See section
  9-13-3 of this title.
4 1. See section
  9-4-5 of this title for required performance standards.
5 2. See
  Chapter 5 of this title.
1 1. See
  Chapter 5 of this title.
1 1. See
  Chapter 9 of this title.
8 1. See title 10 of this code.
9 2. See Chapter 10 of this title.
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
9-2-1: Intent
9-2-2: Zoning Districts; Establishment And Purpose
9-2-3: Zoning District Map
9-2-4: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
9-2-5: Transition Zoning
9-2-6: Zoning Of Annexed Lands
9-2-1: INTENT:
The following zoning districts set out in section
9-2-2 of this chapter are hereby established and have been formulated to
realize the general purposes as set forth in this title and in the city's
revised comprehensive land use plan. In addition, the specific purpose of each
zoning district shall be as stated in section
9-2-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-2-2: ZONING DISTRICTS; ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
   A Agricultural District: The purpose of the agricultural district is to
preserve and protect the decreasing supply of prime agricultural land
(including land used for timber production). This district is also established
to control the random spread of urban type development into agricultural areas
which will adversely affect agricultural operators.
   R-1 And R-2 Low Density Residential Districts: The purpose of the R-1 and R-
2 districts is to permit the establishment of low density single-family
dwellings, not to exceed one dwelling unit per acre in the R-1 district and two
(2) dwelling units per acre in the R-2 district.
   R-4 Medium-Low Density Residential District: The purpose of the R-4 district
is to permit the establishment of medium-low density single- and two-family
dwellings not to exceed four (4) dwelling units per net acre.
   R-8 Medium Density Residential District: The purpose of the R-8 district is
to permit the establishment of medium density single- and two-family dwellings
not to exceed eight (8) dwelling units per acre. City water and sewer
facilities are required.
   R-20 Medium-High Density Multi-Family Residential District: The purpose of
the R-20 district is to permit the establishment of medium-high density multi-
family dwellings not to exceed twenty (20) dwelling units per acre. The
predominant housing type will be townhouses or apartments. City water and sewer
services are required.
   C-1 Neighborhood Business District: The purpose of the C-1 district is to
permit the establishment of certain enumerated low impact business uses which
tend to meet the daily needs of the residents.
   CB Central Business District: The purpose of the CB district is to
accommodate existing, and encourage future, commercial development in the
historical core business area of the community. A variety of business, public,
quasi-public, cultural and other uses are encouraged in order to provide the
mix of activities that are necessary to protect the economic health of the
community.
   LM Light Manufacturing District: The purpose of the LM district is to
encourage the development of manufacturing establishments which are clean,
quiet and free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor,
dust, smoke or glare that is operated entirely within enclosed structures and
generate little industrial traffic. (Ord. 429, 12-16-2008)
   HM Heavy Manufacturing District: The purpose of the HM district is to
accommodate existing and encourage future industrial and manufacturing uses
which are generally major operations and extensive in character. These
operations require large sites, open storage, extensive service and facilities,
ready access to regional transportation and normally generate some nuisances
such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, light pollution, air pollution
and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary. All performance
standards and supplementary regulations as defined in chapter 4 of this title
are applicable to the HM zoning ordinance. No land or building shall be used in
this district unless all negative impacts are mitigated. (Ord. 426, 10-7-2008)
   FP Floodplain Overlay District 1 : The purpose of the FP district is to
guide future development in the flood prone areas of any watercourse, and to
minimize the expense and inconveniences to the individual property owners and
the general public which result from flooding. Uses to be encouraged in this
district are generally associated with open space and public recreational use.
This district is superimposed over other districts.
   SD Shoreline District: The purpose of the SD district is to provide access
to Lake Coeur d'Alene by the public for the purpose of recreation and to
provide for those businesses and facilities that will meet the needs of and be
compatible with recreational uses. Uses that would be permitted, subject to the
granting of a special use permit pursuant to the provisions of this title, and
subject to all other applicable federal, state, county and local regulations,
include public parks, docks (public and private), marinas, residential,
commercial and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including
accessory buildings when located on the same lot. All uses proposed in this
district shall be subject to chapter 4, "Performance Standards And
Supplementary Regulations", of this title.
   MU Mixed Use District: To provide for a variety and mixture of uses such as
limited office, limited commercial, and residential. This district is intended
to ensure compatibility of new development with existing and future
development. It is also intended to ensure assemblage of properties in a
unified plan with coordinated and harmonious development which shall promote
outstanding design without unsightly and unsafe strip commercial development.
Uses should complement the uses allowed within the CB district. (Ord. 429, 12-
16-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See
  Chapter 8 of this title.
9-2-3: ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
For the purposes of this title, the city is divided into districts as provided
in section
9-2-2 of this chapter. The use districts for parcels of land located within the
city are classified and reclassified as shown on a map entitled "The Zoning Map
Of The City Of Harrison, Idaho", on file in the office of the city clerk, which
map, with all explanatory matter thereon, shall be deemed to accompany, be and
is made a part of this title. No buildings or premises shall be used, and no
building shall be erected except in conformity with the regulations and
ordinances of the city prescribed for the use district in which it is located.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-2-4: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning districts
as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerline of street lines, highway right of way lines, the centerline shall be
construed to be such boundary.
   B.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   C.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map.
   D.   Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body
of water, said boundary line shall be construed to be at the limit of the
jurisdiction of the city unless otherwise indicated.
   E.   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary
shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad
line.
   F.   All areas within the corporate limits which are underwater and are not
shown as included within any district shall be subject to all of the
regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water area. If the
water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each district
shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they
meet the other district.
   G.   Any areas shown on the official zoning map as a park, playground,
school, cemetery, street or right of way, shall be subject to the zoning
regulations of the district in which they are located. In case of doubt, the
zoning regulations of the most restricted adjoining district shall govern.
   H.   In every case where property has not been specifically included within
a district, or where territory has become a part of the city by annexation, the
same shall automatically be classed as lying and being in the A agricultural
district until such classification shall be changed by an amendment to this
title as provided by law 1 .
   I.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated in the manner
authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then be subject to all
regulations in the extended districts. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-2-6 of this chapter.
9-2-5: TRANSITION ZONING:
   A.   Lots In Two Districts: Where a district boundary line, as established
in this title or as shown on the official zoning map, divides a lot which was
in single ownership and of record at the time of the effective date hereof, the
use thereon and the other district requirements apply to the least restricted
portions of such lot under this title shall be considered as extending to the
entire lot; provided, that the more restricted portion of such lot is entirely
within sixty feet (60') of said dividing district boundary line. The use so
extended shall be deemed to be conforming.
   B.   Lots In Residence District Adjacent To Business Or Light Manufacturing
Districts: The first residentially zoned lot having a side yard adjacent to any
CB or LM district may be utilized in accordance with the use requirements of
the next least restricted residential zone; provided, that the area, height and
other restrictions of the zone district in which it is located are met. In
addition, any single adjacent structure located or built upon the first sixty
feet (60') of such a residentially zoned lot with a side yard adjoining a CB or
LM district may be used for offices for groups of doctors, dentists,
architects, engineers or attorneys and insurance, institutional and real estate
offices. In addition, such other semicommercial uses as determined by the city
council to be of similar character are permitted. Such structure or use must
comply with the area, height and other restrictions of the zoning district in
which it is located.
   C.   Lots In Business Or Light Manufacturing Districts Adjacent To
Residential Districts: Where a lot in a business or light manufacturing
district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided along
such abutting lines a yard equal in width or depth to that required in the
residential district.
   D.   Mixed Residential And Business Or Light Manufacturing Frontage: Where
the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is
zoned partly as residential and partly as business or light manufacturing, the
front yard depth in the business or industrial district shall be equal to the
residential front depths of the residential district. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-2-6: ZONING OF ANNEXED LANDS 1 :
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the city council shall request
and receive a recommendation from the commission on the proposed comprehensive
plan and zoning ordinance changes for the unincorporated area. The commission
and the city council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures provided in
section
1-9-2 of this code. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an
ordinance of annexation, the city council shall amend the comprehensive plan
and zoning ordinance. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
 
Notes
  2. See subsection
1 9-2-4H of this chapter requiring newly annexed lands to be designated as in
  the A agricultural district.
CHAPTER 3
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Compliance With Regulations
9-3-2: Schedule Of Area And Height Regulations
9-3-3: Land Use Classification Matrix
9-3-4: Supplemental MU District Regulations
9-3-1: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
The regulations for each district as set forth in this title shall be construed
as minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided:
   A.   No building, structure or land shall be erected or altered:
      1.   To provide for greater height or bulk;
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
other open spaces, than required under this title, or in any other manner be
contrary to the provisions of this title; and
   B.   No yard or lot existing at the time of the initial passage of this
title shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this title
shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 341, 9-10-
1996)
9-3-2: SCHEDULE OF AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The official schedule of area and height regulations is set forth as follows:
(Ord. 426, 10-7-2008)
OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
                 Minimum Yard Requirements
         Maximum (Feet)                     Maximum Lot Minimum Lot   Density
District Height                             Coverage    Area Per DU   (Dwelling
         (Feet)  Front Rear Int Side        (Percent)   (Square Feet) Units Per
                                                                      Acre)
                 Minimum Yard Requirements
         Maximum (Feet)                     Maximum Lot Minimum Lot   Density
District Height                             Coverage    Area Per DU   (Dwelling
         (Feet)  Front        Rear Int Side (Percent)   (Square Feet) Units Per
                                                                      Acre)

A        45      60 (from     30   10  45   10          5 acres       -
                 road center)
R-1      35      25           25   10  20   30          40,000        1
R-2      35      25           25   10  20   30          20,000        2
R-4      35      25           25   10  20   30          10,000        4
R-8      35      25           25   10  20   30          5,000         8
R-20     35      25           25   10  20   20          2,000         20
C-1      35      25           10   5   5    60          5,000         -
CB       35      0            0    0   0    100         1,000         -
LM       35      0            0    0   0    100         5,000         -
HM       35      35           30   30  30   60          1.5 acres     -
SD       35      12           20   10  0    40          5,000         -
MU       35      101          152  5   10   80          1,000         10
 
Notes:
   1.    The maximum required setback is 20 feet where the residential use has
a front garage.
   2.    The minimum required setback is 5 feet where the residential use has a
rear garage.
(Ord. 429, 12-16-2008)
9-3-3: LAND USE CLASSIFICATION MATRIX:
The official land use classification matrix, identifying permitted uses of land
within each zoning district, is identified in the following table: (Ord. 426,
10-7-2008)
OFFICIAL LAND USE CLASSIFICATION MATRIX
Land Use Zone
         A R-1 R-2 R-4 R-8 R-20 C-1 CB LM HM FP SD MU
                                                                      Zone
Land Use                                                              A R- R- R- R- R- C- CB LM HM FP SD MU
                                                                        1  2  4  8  20 1
Residential:
   Single-family                                                   S P  P  P  P  P  P          S  P
                                                                                                         1
   Duplex                                                          S P  P  P  P  P  P  P        S  P1
   Multi-family                                                    S     S  S  P  P  P        S  P1
   Mobile home                                                     S   S  S  S  S            S  P2
   Manufactured housing                                            P P  P  P  P  P            S   
Commercial:
   Animal boarding facilities                                                             S
   Automotive sales/service                                                   P  P        S   
   Bed and breakfasts                                              S S  S  S  S  S  P  P          S
   Churches                                                                               S
   Communication transmitters, towers                                                     S
   Community use centers                                                                  S
   Equine centers, including stables, riding arenas, riding schools                       S
and trails
   Grocery and convenience stores                                                         S
   Home occupations/accessory uses                                                        S
   Hotels/motels3                                                             P  P        S  S
   Laundromats, dry cleaners                                                  P  P          S
   Limited service                                                        S  P  P  P        S  S
   Maintenance and storage facilities                                             P        S
   Marinas4                                                                             S  S
   Medical clinics/medical buildings or facilities                            P  P          S
   Parking and transit service facilities                                                 S
   Parks, playgrounds, indoor/outdoor recreation facilities,                              S
campgrounds, golf course facilities
   Professional offices                                                       P  P          S
   Public or private airports, heliport pads                                              S
   Restaurants, bars, brewpubs, nightclubs                                    P  P        S  S
   Sales or marketing facilities and model homes                                           
   Spas, salons, health clubs and fitness centers                             P  P          S
   Theaters, movie houses or other entertainment uses                                     S
   Uses related to on site development and construction, including
rock quarries, rock crushing and storage, asphalt and concrete batch                         S
facilities and associated manufacturing, construction yards, storage
and administrative buildings and landscape nurseries
   Wholesale/retail                                                       S  P  P  P        S  S
Manufacturing:
   Light manufacturing                                                          S  P         
   Heavy manufacturing                                                              S       
Agricultural:
   General agriculture                                             P                        
   Timber production                                               P                        
Public:
   Governmental buildings and facilities                                                  S
   Public and private clubs, lodges, or social halls, including all                       S
related buildings and facilities
   Public and private schools, daycare facilities, preschools and                         S
other educational facilities
   Public recreation                                                              P      S  S
   Public service and utility services, including all related                             S
buildings and facilities
 
Notes:
   1.    Uses include additional dwellings for immediate family members and
employees, condominiums, interval or fractional interest ownerships, and other
similar forms of single-family residential ownerships.
   2.    Mobile home use is permitted only for temporary interim use during
times of construction and development.
   3.    This category of uses also includes cabins, boarding houses, inns, and
other hospitality uses and facilities.
   4.    This category of uses also includes uses associated with the
development, operation, use and maintenance of recreational facilities,
including, but not limited to: golf courses, marinas, community docks, lodges,
ski and recreational resorts (including all related buildings, structures,
facilities and equipment), structured and surface parking and equipment
(including moorage facilities, boat storage, water taxi facilities, lodges and
day lodges).
(Ord. 434, 11-3-2009)
9-3-4: SUPPLEMENTAL MU DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The following supplementary regulations shall apply to the MU district:
   A.   Development Agreement, Planned Unit Development (PUD), Or Special Use
Permit (SUP) Required: All development requiring a special use permit in the MU
zoning district, as shown in this title, shall occur under the PUD and/or
development agreement process. Residential gross densities shall not exceed ten
(10) dwelling units per acre. When a property is being proposed for rezone to
the MU zoning district, a development agreement may be utilized in lieu of the
PUD and/or special use process. If approved by the city council the development
agreement shall include conditions of development that satisfy the requirements
of the PUD and special use process. Waivers to specific requirements of the PUD
may be granted by the city council if they find such waiver furthers
implementation of the standards under section
9-14-5 of this title.
   B.   Permitted Uses, Lot Size, Setbacks, And Parking: Permitted uses and lot
size, setback, parking requirements, height restrictions, street standards and
other dimensional or development regulations shall be specified through the PUD
application and/or development agreement, which shall be based on the
anticipated uses and overall planning goals for the proposed project. (Ord.
429, 12-16-2008)
CHAPTER 4
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Accessory Uses
9-4-2: Supplemental Yard And Height Regulations
9-4-3: Supplemental General Regulations
9-4-4: Commercial And Industrial Uses
9-4-5: Unique Land Uses
9-4-1: ACCESSORY USES:
Any accessory use customarily incidental to a use authorized in a district
shall be permitted as an accessory use. The city council shall determine the
applicability of this section to any proposed use. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-4-2: SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In addition to all yard regulations specified in the official schedule of area
and height regulations 1 , and in other sections of this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (2 1/2') and
ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the
area bounded by the right of way lines of such corner lots and a line joining
points along said street right of way lines twenty five feet (25') from the
point of intersection.
   B.   Fence And Wall Restrictions In Front Yards: In any required front yard,
no fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such
yard above the height of forty inches (40").
   C.   Yard Requirements:
      1.   Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings shall be considered
as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear yard
requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one front, one rear and
two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate district.
      2.   Nonresidential Uses Abutting Residential Districts: Nonresidential
buildings or uses shall not be located or conducted closer than forty feet
(40') to any lot line of a residential district, except that the minimum yard
requirements may be reduced to fifty percent (50%) of the requirement if
acceptable landscaping or screening approved by the city council is provided.
Such screening shall be a masonry or solid fence between four feet (4') and
eight feet (8') in height maintained in good condition and free of all
advertising or other signs. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence
shall consist of a strip of land not less than twenty feet (20') in width
planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less
than four feet (4') in height at the time of planting.
   D.   Architectural Projections: Open structures such as porches, decks,
canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar
architectural projections shall be considered parts of the building to which
attached and shall not project into the required minimum front, side or rear
yard. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-3-2 of this title.
9-4-3: SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL REGULATIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
   A.   Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted
to accommodate an increased number of dwellings unless:
      1.   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the
zoning regulations for new structures in that district;
      2.   The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district;
      3.   The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that
which is required for new construction in that district; and
      4.   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
ordinances.
   B.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, construction trailers,
equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work only may be
permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress,
but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the
completion of the construction work shall require a permit authorized by the
city.
   C.   Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked
or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely
enclosed building or carport. However, one boat and one travel trailer may be
stored in the side or rear yard.
   D.   Required Trash Areas: All trash and/or garbage collection areas for
commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on
at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence at least four feet (4') in
height or within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate vehicular access
to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage as
determined by the city shall be provided. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-4-4: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner
creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises;
except that any use permitted by this title may be undertaken and maintained if
acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce dangerous and objectionable
conditions to acceptable limits as established by the following performance
requirements:
   A.   Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or
explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment, and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved
as specified in the uniform fire code and the national safety foundation
publications.
   B.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful
radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
   C.   Noise: Objectionable noise as determined by the city which is due to
volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Air raid
sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from
this requirement.
   D.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without
instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
   E.   Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and
regulations established by the health authority.
   F.   Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible
from any property outside a manufacturing district or from any street.
   G.   Erosion: No erosion, by human, wind or water, shall be permitted which
will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
   H.   Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
   I.   Dangerous And Objectionable Elements: The city, prior to the issuance
of a zoning permit, may require the submission of statements and plans
indicating the manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in
processing and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to
acceptable limits and tolerances. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-4-5: UNIQUE LAND USES:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental
influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this title:
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Will not be located in any required front yard area; and
   B.   Will not be located closer than five feet (5') from any side or rear
property line.
AGRICULTURE (Buffer area):
   A.   Will be maintained as an untilled filler strip or natural vegetation
provided for between tilled ground and the normal high water elevation of any
surface water areas. The width of this strip shall vary according to the
average slope of the land as follows:
 
Average slope of land between tilled  Width of strip between tilled land and
land and normal high water elevation  normal high water elevation
(percent)                             (Ft. along the
                                      surface of the ground)
0 - 4                                 20
5 - 9                                 50
10 - 14                               90
15 and over                           110
 
   B.   Will be maintained to minimize soil erosion, sedimentation,
contamination and nutrient enrichment of ground and surface water.
ANIMAL CLINIC, ANIMAL HOSPITAL, VETERINARY OFFICE AND KENNEL:
   A.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any residence
including motels and hotels, except for the owner's residence. The city may
modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed in soundproof
structures that completely screen them from view of the abutting residential
property; and
   B.   Will comply with all federal, state and local regulations relative to
such an operation, and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to
prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of
noise and odor.
BULK STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES, ABOVE GROUND AND FOR RESALE:
   A.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from a residential
zone, a residence, motel, hotel, except for an owner's residence;
   B.   Will be erected subject to the approval of the fire chief; and
   C.   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off street parking
facilities subject to the approval of the fire chief.
CHEMICALS, PESTICIDE AND FERTILIZER STORAGE AND MANUFACTURING:
   A.   Will have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal
as approved by the fire chief or fire marshal.
CONTRACTORS YARDS:
   A.   Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from
any residence except for the owner's residence;
   B.   Will have a screening fence around areas utilized for storage of
equipment; and
   C.   Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to
contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
FILLING, GRADING, LAGOONING, DREDGING OR OTHER EARTH MOVING ACTIVITY:
   A.   Will result in the smallest amount of bare ground exposed for the
shortest time feasible;
   B.   Will provide temporary ground cover, such as mulch;
   C.   Will use diversions, silting, basins, terraces and other methods to
trap sediment;
   D.   Will provide lagooning in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish
trap conditions;
   E.   Will not restrict a floodway, channel or natural drainageway;
   F.   Will construct and stabilize sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels
and artificial watercourses to prevent erosion or soil failure;
   G.   Will not have below grade excavation except for drainageways within
fifty feet (50') of any lot line or public right of way; and
   H.   Will restore topsoil or loam to a depth of not less than four inches
(4").
GRAVEL PITS, ROCK QUARRIES, SAND AND CLAY PITS AND OTHER NATURAL RESOURCES OF
COMMERCIAL VALUE:
   A.   The extent and method of rehabilitation shall be determined in advance
of issuing any required permit with due consideration given to what is suitable
and compatible with the surrounding area;
   B.   Upon depletion of the area, all temporary buildings and structures,
except property line fences and structures for the loading, measuring or
weighing of salable material in storage, shall be entirely removed from the
property; and
   C.   Safety fencing shall be erected around all pits that create a safety
hazard.
HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   No more than one person other than members of the family residing on
the premises shall be engaged in such occupation;
   B.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
   C.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, nonilluminated
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
   D.   No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation and
any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
meet the off street parking requirements as specified in chapter 5 of this
title, and shall not be located in a required front yard; and
   E.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit, if conducted in other
than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING:
   A.   Manufactured homes shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation that is similar in appearance and durability to masonry foundation
of site built dwellings and which surrounds the entire perimeter of the
structure, completely enclosing the space between the siding and the finished
grade, such that the home is located not more than twelve inches (12") above
grade, or twenty four inches (24") above grade if the home is over a basement;
   B.   Manufactured homes shall have a minimum roof pitch of three inches of
rise to twelve inches of run (3":12");
   C.   Manufactured homes shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not
less than one thousand (1,000) square feet; and
   D.   Manufactured homes shall have exterior siding and roofing which in
color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which
is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings, as
determined by the local permit approving authority.
MOBILE HOME PARK:
   A.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
   B.   Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future neighboring
uses;
   C.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, and refuse disposal; or
that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed
park shall be able to adequately provide any such services;
   D.   Will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and the
comprehensive plan;
   E.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
streets or roads;
   F.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic
or historic features of major importance;
   G.   Will meet all minimum health standards prescribed by the Idaho state
department of health and welfare; and
   H.   Will have a minimum total area for the mobile home park of five (5)
acres.
OUTDOOR STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS:
   A.   Will be screened from view from any adjoining residence or
residentially zoned area, whether or not such property is separated by an
alleyway or street; and
   B.   Will not be located in any front yard setback area. (Ord. 341, 9-10-
1996)
CHAPTER 5
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
9-5-1: General Requirements
9-5-2: Standards
9-5-3: Off Street Parking Design And Dimensional Tables
9-5-4: Parking Space Requirements
9-5-5: Common Parking Facilities For Joint And Mixed Uses
9-5-6: General Interpretations
9-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered or its
use changed unless permanently maintained off street parking and loading spaces
have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use,
shall not apply to any existing building or structure. Where the new use
involves no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such
spaces as required by this chapter.
   C.   Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date
of this chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees,
number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for
an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, additional parking spaces
shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a
building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this chapter is
enlarged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area, number of
employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, said
building or structure shall then and thereafter comply with the parking
requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-5-2: STANDARDS:
   A.   Location Of Parking Spaces: The following regulations shall govern the
location of off street parking spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on
the same or adjoining lot as the use which they are intended to serve;
      2.   Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional use shall
be located not more than five hundred feet (500') from the principal use; and
      3.   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential
uses shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the
principal use.
   B.   Loading Space Requirements And Dimensions: Off street loading spaces
for commercial uses shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
 
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.) Quantity And Type
14,000 - 36,000            (1) B
36,001 - 60,000            (2) B
60,001 - 100,000           (2) B + (1) A
 
   For each additional 75,000 or fraction thereof, an additional type A space
will be provided.
      1.   The size of an off street loading space shall not be less than the
following, exclusive of access platform and loading area:
 
Type B spaces 12 feet wide and 35 feet long
Type A spaces 15 feet wide and 65 feet long
 
      2.   Convenient access to loading spaces from streets or alleys shall be
provided; they shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width.
      3.   The off street loading facilities required for the uses mentioned
shall not project into the public right of way. In no case shall the required
off street loading berths be part of the area used to satisfy the off street
parking requirements.
      4.   Design and location of entrances and exits for required off street
loading areas shall be subject to review by the commission.
   C.   Maintenance: The owner of property used for parking and/or loading
shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust,
trash and other debris.
   D.   Paving: The required number of parking and loading areas, as set forth
in section
9-5-4 of this chapter, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation
areas, shall be improved with such material to provide a durable and dust free
surface.
   E.   Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper
drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways.
   F.   Lighting: Any parking area which is intended to be used during
nondaylight hours shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Any lights
used to illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
away from adjoining property.
   G.   Screening And/Or Landscaping: Whenever a parking area is located in or
adjacent to a residential district, it shall be effectively screened on all
sides which adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes by an
acceptably designed wall, fence or planting screen. Such fence, wall or
planting screen shall be not less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet
(6') in height and shall be maintained in good condition. The space between
such fence, wall or planting screen and the lot line of the adjoining premises
in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or
evergreen ground cover, and maintained in good condition. In the event that
terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of such fence,
wall or planting screen will not serve the intended purpose, then no such
fence, wall or planting screen shall be required.
   H.   Wheel Blocks: Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel
blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a
parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
   I.   Minimum Distance And Setbacks: No part of any parking area for more
than ten (10) vehicles shall be closer than twenty feet (20') to any dwelling
unit, school, hospital or other institution for human care located on an
adjoining lot, unless separated by an acceptably designed screen. If on the
same lot with a single-family residence, the parking area shall not be located
within the front yard required for such building. In no case shall any part of
a parking area be closer than four feet (4') to any established street or alley
right of way.
   J.   Disabled Vehicles: The parking of a disabled vehicle on a city street,
public right of way or front yard of a private residence for a period of more
than two (2) weeks shall be prohibited.
   K.   Joint Use: Two (2) or more nonresidential uses may jointly provide and
use parking spaces when their hours of operation do not normally overlap;
provided that a written agreement approved by the commission shall be filed
with the application for a zoning permit. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-5-3: OFF STREET PARKING DESIGN AND DIMENSIONAL TABLES:
The design and dimensions of off street parking spaces shall be in accordance
with the following table:
 
                       45°60°90°Parallel
Width of parking space  13' 10' 9'  9'
Length of parking space 15' 18' 19' 23'
Width of driveway aisle 13' 17' 12' 12'
 
TABLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6bcec8e26d4cfae1255eec1cba19db841b8abe61/
IMAGES/0-0-0-953.png]
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-5-4: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following parking space requirements shall
apply:
Type Of Use  Parking Spaces Required
Type Of Use                               Parking Spaces Required
Residential:
 Apartments or multi-family dwelling    1 1/2 for each unit
 Bed and breakfast or rooming houses    1 for each sleeping unit or 1 for
                                          each permanent occupant
 Mobile home park                       1 for each unit plus 1 space for each
                                          5 units
 Single-family or two-family dwelling   2 for each unit
Commercial:
 Automobile service garages which also  1 for each 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for
  provide repair                          each service bay
 Banks, financial institutions and      1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
  similar uses
  Funeral parlors, mortuaries and         1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
 similar type uses                      in slumber rooms, parlors or service
                                          rooms
 Hotels, motels                         1 per each sleeping room plus 1 space
                                          for each 2 employees
 Offices, public or professional        1 for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area
  administration or service buildings
 Retail stores                          1 for each 250 sq. ft. floor area
  All other types of business or
 commercial uses permitted in any       1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area
  business district
Recreational Or Entertainment:
 Auditoriums, sports arenas, theaters   1 for each 4 seats
  and similar uses
                                          4 for each alley or lane plus 1
 Bowling alleys                         additional space for each 100 sq. ft.
                                          of the area used for restaurant,
                                          cocktail lounge or similar use
 Dance floors, skating rinks            1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
                                          used for the activity
 Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns,    1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
  nightclubs, etc.
 Marinas                                1 for every 2 boat slips
                                          1 for each 5 persons capacity plus 1
 Outdoor swimming pools, public or      for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30 sq.
  community                               ft. floor area used for seating
                                          purposes, whichever is greater
Institutional:
 Churches and other places of           1 for each 5 seats
  religious assembly
 Hospitals                              1 for each bed
 Libraries, museums and art galleries   1 for each 400 sq. ft. floor area
                                          1 for every 200 sq. ft. floor area of
 Medical and dental clinics             examination, treatment room, office
                                          and waiting room
  Sanitariums, homes for the aged,
 nursing homes, children's homes,       1 for each 2 beds
  asylums and similar uses
Schools (Public, Parochial Or Private):
 Business,technical and trade schools   1 for each 2 students
 Colleges, universities                 1 for each 4 students
                                          2 for each classroom and 1 for every
 Elementary and junior high schools     8 seats in auditoriums or assembly
                                          halls
 High schools                           1 for every 10 students, and 1 for
                                          each teacher and employee
 Kindergartens, childcare centers,      2 for each classroom but not less
  nursery schools and similar uses        than 6 for the building
Manufacturing
                                          1 for every 2 employees permitted (on
  All types of manufacturing, storage     the largest shift for which the
 and wholesale uses permitted in any    building is designated) and 1 for
  manufacturing district                  every motor vehicle maintained on the
                                          premises
 
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-5-5: COMMON PARKING FACILITIES FOR JOINT AND MIXED USES:
Joint or mixed use of parking facilities shall be permitted as follows:
   A.   Mixed Uses: Total requirements for off street parking shall be the sum
of the requirements for various uses within the development or structure.
   B.   Joint Uses: The joint use of off street parking facilities is allowed
provided:
      1.   The applicant shows that there is no substantial conflict in the
principal operating hours of the building, structure or use for which the joint
use of the parking facilities is proposed;
      2.   The parking facility for joint use is not further than two hundred
feet (200') from the primary entrance of each use; and
      3.   The parties concerned shall submit a written agreement for such
joint use approved by the city attorney as to form and content, and such
agreement, when approved, shall be recorded in the county recorder's office.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-5-6: GENERAL INTERPRETATIONS:
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following shall govern:
   A.   Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed in
this chapter shall be determined by the commission;
   B.   Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number; and
   C.   Where there is an adequate public transit system or where for any other
reason parking demand is unusually low, then the parking space provisions cited
above may be reduced proportionately by the commission. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Intent
9-6-2: Public Signs
9-6-3: General Requirements
9-6-4: Permitted Signs
9-6-5: Sign Setback Requirements
9-6-6: Violation; Penalty
9-6-1: INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising,
outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to
protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business
climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community and
preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further
intended to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs
overhanging or projecting over public rights of way, provide more open space,
curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance community
development. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-6-2: PUBLIC SIGNS:
For the purpose of this chapter "sign" does not include signs erected and
maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or
required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation. (Ord. 341, 9-10-
1996)
9-6-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The regulations contained in this section shall apply to all signs and all use
districts:
   A.   Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall emit a light of constant
intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing,
intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights. In no event shall an
illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed to permit the beams
and illuminations therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public
thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises or to cause glare or
reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance;
   B.   No sign shall employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate,
whirl, spin or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention. This
subsection and subsection A of this section shall not apply to any sign
performing a public service function indicating time, temperature, stock market
quotations or similar services;
   C.   All writing, fittings and materials used in the construction and
operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the local electrical code in effect, if any;
   D.   No projecting sign shall be erected or maintained from the front or
face of a building a distance of more than two feet (2'), including those
projecting from the face of any theater, hotel or motel marquee. In general,
projecting signs are not encouraged;
   E.   No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building, except those signs
whose supporting structure is screened so the sign appears to be a continuation
of the face of the building;
   F.   No portable or temporary sign shall be placed on the front or face of a
building or on any premises, except as herein provided;
   G.   No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters,
pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar moving devices. Such
devices, as well as strings of lights, shall not be used for the purpose of
advertising or attracting attention when not part of a sign;
   H.   No sign erected or maintained in the window of a building, visible from
any public or private street or highway, shall occupy more than twenty percent
(20%) of the window surface;
   I.   No sign of any classification shall be installed, erected or attached
in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape or any door or window giving
access to any fire escape;
   J.   All signs hung and erected shall be plainly marked with the name of the
person responsible for maintaining the sign;
   K.   Should any sign be or become unsafe or be in danger of falling, the
owner thereof or the person maintaining the same shall, upon receipt of written
notice from the commission, proceed at once to put such sign in a safe and
secure condition or remove the sign;
   L.   No sign shall be placed in any public right of way except publicly
owned signs, i.e., traffic control signs and directional signs. Signs directing
and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising
matter shall be permitted on any property; and
   M.   Signs along primary highways shall conform to the Idaho state
transportation department regulations. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-6-4: PERMITTED SIGNS:
The following signs may be permitted upon the issuance of a zoning certificate
by the commission:
   A.   Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which
the sign is located shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, except in
all residential districts where the area of the sign shall not be more than six
(6) square feet;
   B.   Professional nameplates not to exceed four (4) square feet in area;
   C.   Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises,
not to exceed two (2) square feet in area;
   D.   Temporary signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area announcing
special public or institutional events, the erection of a building, the
architect, the builders or contractors may be erected for a period of sixty
(60) days plus the construction period;
   E.   On premises wall signs pertaining to a nonconforming use shall be
permitted on the same premises of such use, provided that the area of such sign
does not exceed twelve (12) square feet; and
   F.   Political signs, provided that, such signs shall not be posted in any
place or in any manner that is destructive to public property upon posting or
removal. No political sign shall be posted in a public right of way nor shall
such sign be posted on a utility pole. No political sign shall be posted more
than sixty (60) days before an election. All candidates for public office,
their campaign committees or other persons responsible for the posting on
public property of campaign material shall remove such material within two (2)
weeks following election day. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-6-5: SIGN SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Off premises signs shall not be erected in front of the required setback line
for the appropriate zoning district, except for the following:
   A.   For every square foot by which any on premises sign exceeds fifty (50)
square feet, the setback shall be increased by one-half foot (1/2') but not to
exceed one hundred feet (100');
   B.   Real estate signs and bulletin boards for a church, school or any other
public, religious or educational institution within residential zoning
districts may be erected not less than ten feet (10') from the established
right of way line of any street or highway provided such sign or bulletin board
does not obstruct traffic visibility at a street or highway intersection; and
   C.   On premises signs where permitted shall be erected or placed in
conformity with the side and rear yard requirements of the district in which it
is located, except that in any residential district, on premises signs shall
not be erected or placed within ten feet (10') of a side or rear lot line.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-6-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in
violation of any of the terms of this chapter, the commission shall notify, in
writing, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign to comply with this
chapter. Political signs posted in violation of this chapter are subject to
removal by the commission after five (5) days written notice of violation.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
CHAPTER 7
URBAN FORESTRY
SECTION:
9-7-1: Title
9-7-2: Purpose
9-7-3: Definitions
9-7-4: Applicability Of Provisions
9-7-5: Enforcement
9-7-6: Public And Private Responsibility
9-7-7: Permit Requirements
9-7-8: Replacement Trees
9-7-9: General Regulations
9-7-10: Commercial District Regulations
9-7-11: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
9-7-12: Public Nuisances; Abatement
9-7-13: Violation; Penalty
9-7-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the URBAN FORESTRY ORDINANCE
of the city (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-2: PURPOSE:
Trees and shrubs planted along city streets, in public parks and on private
property provide a variety of benefits to people and to the environment. By
providing shade and reducing glare from pavement, sidewalks and buildings,
trees and shrubs aid in energy savings. A city's trees help to maintain
windbreak protection, abate soil erosion, muffle noise and, if in good
condition, can increase property values. The purpose of this chapter is to
preserve, protect, maintain and enlarge the urban forest of the city to thereby
enhance the natural beauty of the city. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: A person who is applying for a license or permit required under this
chapter.
BOLE: The trunk of a tree.
CONTROLLER: The owner of private real property that abuts a right of way upon
which a public tree or shrub is located.
CUTTING BACK: See definition of "drop crotch pruning".
DISEASED TREE: A tree or part thereof which has become blighted, defaced or has
acquired a disease.
DROP CROTCH PRUNING: The reduction of tops, sides, under branches or individual
tree limbs to be undertaken as specified in national arborist standards.
PARK TREES: All public trees in public parks and in all areas owned by the city
or to which the public has free access, but excluding those trees in the public
right of way.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, nonprofit
organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, city, county, special
district or any other group or combination acting as an entity, except that it
shall not include the city of Harrison.
PRIVATE TREE: A tree that is not a public tree.
PRUNING: The removal of branches over one inch (1") in diameter.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: A portion of property reserved for public use, and
accepted for such by the city council, to provide circulation and travel to
abutting properties, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
provisions for public utilities, cut and fill slopes and open public space.
PUBLIC TREE OR SHRUB: A tree or shrub that is situated in such a manner so that
fifty one percent (51%) or more of the tree trunk or shrub base at ground level
is on public property or public right of way.
REPLACEMENT TREE: A tree having a minimum diameter of one inch (1") at one and
one-half feet (11/2') above ground level.
ROOT BARRIER: A device designed to force roots downward in order to prevent
surface root growth and reduce root damage to sidewalks, streets and curbs.
ROOT CONTROL PLANTER: A root barrier which completely surrounds the roots on
all sides while leaving the top and bottom open and which functions to direct
root growth in a downward direction.
SHRUB: A multiple stemmed, woody plant which is usually bushy in appearance and
which does not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height at maturity.
STREET: That portion of public right of way which is improved, maintained and
intended for use by vehicles to provide traffic circulation, primary access to
abutting properties and parking. This definition includes all of the area
typically located between curbs.
STREET TREES: All public trees located within the public right of way.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs within a tree's crown to such a
degree that only shrubs remain, or the removal of the top part ( trunk and
limbs) of a conifer tree, thereby removing the normal canopy.
TREE: A woody perennial plant having one main stem or trunk and many branches.
It usually exceeds fifteen feet (15') in height at maturity.
TREE LAWN: That portion of the public right of way lying between the curb and
private property lines which is generally unpaved and planted with grass or
other vegetation.
TREE STANDARDS: A set of specifications concerning the care and maintenance of
trees published by the National Arborist Association as adopted by resolution
of the city council.
URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE: An advisory committee appointed by the mayor to
assist the city in the management of its urban forest. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-4: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall apply to any public trees and all trees and shrubs located
in the public right of way, in public parks, and on other city property as well
as those trees and shrubs located on public and private property that have been
declared to be a public nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of subsection
9-7-12A2 of this chapter. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The city, or its designee, shall be charged with the enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-6: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Public Responsibility: The city shall be responsible for the following:
      1.   Care and maintenance of park trees and shrubs;
      2.   Removal of dead, diseased or hazardous park trees and shrubs;
      3.   Systematic planting of new and replacement park trees and shrubs;
      4.   Spraying of park trees and shrubs to control insects or disease.
   B.   Private Responsibility: Every controller shall be responsible for the
following:
      1.   Meeting all the requirements and obtaining written approval from the
city for work done on public trees as described in this chapter;
      2.   Care and maintenance of public trees and shrubs located on the right
of way adjacent to the private real property owned by the controller;
      3.   Removal and replacement of public trees or removal of those portions
of public trees declared to be a public nuisance which are located on the right
of way adjacent to the private real property owned by the controller; (Ord.
341, 9-10-1996)
      4.   Trimming or pruning of public trees and shrubs located on the right
of way adjacent to the private real property owned by the controller. Branches
of mature trees that overhang sidewalks must be trimmed to provide clearances
over streets as provided in section
6-1-6 of this code. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd. 2004 Code)
      5.   Spraying of public trees and shrubs located on the right of way
adjacent to the private real property owned by the controller, when necessary,
to control insects or disease;
      6.   Spraying of private trees and shrubs on the private real property
owned by the controller, when necessary, to control insects or disease;
      7.   Repairing damage done to the street, sidewalk or curb by the roots
of any private trees or shrubs, or public trees and shrubs located adjacent to
the private real property owned by the controller;
      8.   Removal of private trees and shrubs located on the private real
property owned by the controller that have been declared to be a public
nuisance;
      9.   Removal and replacement of public trees located in the right of way
adjacent to the private real property owned by the controller which have been
topped or improperly pruned. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application: Application for a pruning, planting, topping, drop crotch
pruning or removal permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city, and
shall be submitted to the city for approval or denial based on the following
criteria:
      1.   The size or species of the tree or shrub is appropriate for the
location;
      2.   The condition of the tree or shrub creates a public hazard;
      3.   The tree or shrub creates a sight obstruction;
      4.   The condition of the street, curb or sidewalk adjacent to the tree
or shrub;
      5.   The tree or shrub interferes with utilities;
      6.   Written permission to top or drop crotch prune any public tree or
shrub shall not be approved unless the city has recommended such action
because:
         a.   The tree or shrub is severely damaged by storms or other causes;
or
         b.   The tree or shrub is located under primary utility lines or other
obstruction; or
         c.   The tree or shrub creates a hazard; or
         d.   In cases where other pruning practices are impractical.
   If written permission is denied, the applicant may appeal to the city
council.
   B.   Terms: A permit for the planting, pruning or removal of any public tree
or shrub shall be valid for sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. (Ord.
341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-8: REPLACEMENT TREES:
   A.   Required: Whenever a public tree or shrub is removed, a replacement
tree or shrub shall be required.
   B.   Selection: Selection of required replacement trees shall be based upon
the following guidelines:
      1.   Trees shall be of a species appropriate to existing conditions at
the planting site;
      2.   Special consideration shall be given to the planting of tree species
native to the area;
      3.   A variety of species shall be recommended so that no single species
shall exceed ten percent (10%) of the total tree population in the city; and
      4.   No tree having a diameter of less than one inch (1") at a distance
of one and one-half feet (1 1/2') above ground level shall be planted on the
street right of way.
   C.   Fee In Lieu: When a public tree is removed and no suitable adjacent
planting spot exists, a fee in lieu of planting shall be required. The fee
shall be set by resolution of the city council and monies collected thereby
shall be placed in a tree replacement fund to be used for acquisition of public
trees and shrubs. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-9: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Standards: The care and maintenance of public trees and shrubs shall be
governed by the standards developed by the National Arborist Association.
   B.   Clearing Debris: The person working on public trees is responsible for
removing all debris from the streets and sidewalks by sunset of the day on
which the work is done.
   C.   Spacing:
      1.   The spacing of public trees located in the street right of way shall
be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes as established by the
city. No trees except trees planted in special plantings designated or approved
by the city shall be planted closer together than the following:
 
Small trees  20 feet
Medium trees 30 feet
Large trees  40 feet
 
      2.   Street (public) trees shall be placed on the abutting public right
of way along the entire street frontage of the development no farther apart
than the following, except as otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
   D.   Distance From Curb And Sidewalk:
      1.   The distance trees may be planted from curbs and sidewalks shall be
in accordance with the three (3) species size classes established by resolution
of the city council, and no trees other than the exceptions listed in
subsections D2 and D3 of this section may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following:
 
Small trees  1 foot
Medium trees 2 feet
Large trees  3 feet
 
      2.   Street (public) trees may be planted in sidewalk right of way
locations in areas of commercial zoning or use subject to approval by the city.
      3.   The curb and sidewalk spacing requirements may be reduced by the
city when the controller agrees to install root control barriers between the
proposed tree planting location and the adjacent curbs and sidewalks.
   E.   Distance From Streetlights: The distance trees may be planted from
streetlights shall be in accordance with the three (3) species sizes classes
established, and no tree may be planted closer to any street light than the
following:
 
Small trees  15 feet
Medium trees 25 feet
Large trees  35 feet
 
   F.   Distance From Utilities: No public trees other than those species
listed as "small trees" shall be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet
of any primary power overhead line.
   G.   Stump Removal: When any public tree is removed, the stumps and roots
shall be cut back to a point flush with the ground level surrounding the stump.
   H.   Root Barriers Required: Root barriers shall be required in the
following cases:
      1.   The installation of curbs, sidewalks or streets less than two feet
(2') from an existing tree;
      2.   During repair of a curb, sidewalk or street that has been damaged or
upheaval by roots of a tree or shrub, when such tree or shrub is not removed.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-10: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
All trees planted in public right of way in commercial zoning districts shall
meet the following specifications:
   A.   Trees must be planted below grade level in accordance with the
standards developed by the National Arborist Association;
   B.   A minimum distance of nine and one-half feet (9 1/2') of clear sidewalk
must be provided as measured from the front edge of the building to the
proposed tree trunk location; (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
   C.   Noncolumnar trees selected for planting shall be of sufficient height
to allow for clearances measured from grade level of the sidewalk to the lowest
branch, as provided in section
6-1-6 of this code. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd. 2004 Code)
9-7-11: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Damage Or Destruction: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully
damage, mutilate or destroy any public tree or shrub.
   B.   Obstructions:
      1.   It is unlawful for any controller of any lot, place or area in the
city to plant, construct or maintain upon such lot, place or area, or public
right of way abutting same, any hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall or other sight
obstruction of any nature, except the bole of a tree and building, between the
heights of two and one-half feet (2 1/2') to ten feet (10'), measured from the
elevation at the centerlines of the intersecting streets, where these sight
obstructions constitute a traffic hazard.
      2.   When the city determines that such a traffic hazard exists, the city
shall notify the owner and order that the hazard be removed within sixty (60)
days. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-12: PUBLIC NUISANCES; ABATEMENT:
   A.   Nuisances Declared:
      1.   No controller shall permit a public nuisance to exist as herein
defined and found to exist by the city.
      2.   All trees dead, broken, dangerous or diseased, or that part of a
tree which constitutes a hazard, or that part of the roots of any tree or shrub
which interferes with or causes the surface of the street, curb or sidewalk in
public right of way to be upheaved or otherwise disturbed, or any tree or shrub
that has an infestation of pests, insects or eggs or larvae which may spread or
the continued existence thereof, constitutes a serious hazard, or any tree or
shrub or part thereof, whether public or private, which so overhang the public
right of way or are growing thereon in such a manner as to obstruct or impair
the free and full use of the right of way, or which constitute a sight hazard
are declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Abatement:
      1.   Notice To Exterminate: If it is determined by the city that a public
nuisance as defined in this chapter exists, the parks director shall cause a
notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed "Notice
to Abate Nuisance", shall contain a description of the property in general
terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance, shall
describe the nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same,
shall direct the abatement of the nuisance, shall specify the penalty
provisions as provided in this chapter, and shall specify the appeal process as
provided in this chapter.
      2.   Abatement Notice; Service: The notice required by this chapter may
be served in the following manner:
         a.   By personal service on the controller of the premises; and/or
         b.   By registered mail to the controller of said premises; or
         c.   If said controller does not live within the city, by registered
mail to the controller at the address shown on the last available assessment
roll or as otherwise known, and by personal service on the occupant of the
property if such person can be identified.
      3.   Appeal: Within thirty (30) days from the date of posting, mailing or
personal service of the required notice of area affected, the controller may
appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
city clerk. At the regular meeting of the city council, the city council shall
proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal, and the decision of the city council
thereon shall be final and conclusive.
      4.   Abatement Required; Time Limit: It shall be the duty of the
controller of any lot, place or area in the city which has been declared a
public nuisance as provided in this chapter, within thirty (30) days from the
date of notification, as provided in this chapter, or in the case of an appeal
to the city council, within thirty (30) days from the determination thereof
unless the same is sustained, to remove the public nuisance as required.
      5.   Failure To Abate; Legal Action: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal
of any controller so notified to remove the public nuisance as defined in this
section within the time specified, the city or its designee, as provided in
this chapter, shall notify the city attorney in writing of the last known legal
owner and property description in general terms, and the city attorney shall
cause legal action to be undertaken.
      6.   Abatement By City; Costs: At the city council's direction, upon the
failure or refusal of any controller so notified to remove the public nuisance
as herein defined within the time specified, the city shall proceed with the
work specified in the notice. The cost of the work shall be transmitted to the
city council which shall cause the same to be paid and levy a special
assessment against the property. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-7-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the general
penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FP FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-8-1: Purpose
9-8-2: Permitted Uses
9-8-3: Special Uses
9-8-4: Required Conditions
9-8-5: Prohibited Uses
9-8-6: Nonliability Provisions
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the FP district is to guide development in the floodway and
floodway fringe areas of any watercourse that floods, and to minimize the
expense and inconveniences to the individual property owners and the general
public caused by flooding. Uses permitted and conditional uses that are
authorized in this district are generally associated with open space,
recreational and agricultural land uses and shall not hinder the movement of
floodwaters. The FP district is superimposed over other districts. (Ord. 341,
9-10-1996)
9-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses are permitted in the respective districts with which the FP district
is combined, with the exception that structures used in carrying out those
permitted activities must be approved by the city council under the special use
permit procedure and deemed appropriate to be located within the floodway or
floodway fringe. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-8-3: SPECIAL USES:
When authorized under the procedure provided for special uses in this title,
the following uses will be permitted in an FP floodplain overlay district:
   A.   Structures used in carrying out permitted activities, provided detailed
engineering data is supplied by the applicant who bears the burden of proof
that such structures can be located in areas of plateaus, benches or upon
manmade fills or can be otherwise elevated so as not to be affected by
floodwaters, provided that:
      1.   Sewer and water systems shall be floodproofed and approved by the
district health department or the department of health and welfare that has
jurisdiction; and
      2.   No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building
or structure shall be extended or moved unless the main floor of said building
or structure is placed a minimum of one foot (1') above the elevation of the
100-year flood level. No basement floor shall be below this one foot (1')
safety margin. Foundations of all structures shall be designed and constructed
to withstand flood conditions at the site; and
   B.   Other structures used in carrying out permitted activities, provided
such structures will not be subject to substantial flood damage and will not
increase flood related damages on other lands. These may include structures
which can be readily removed from flood hazard areas during periods of high
water. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-8-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
   A.   General: Conditions that may be required by the city council in
approving the use of structures in an FP floodplain overlay district shall
include:
      1.   Limitations on periods of use and operation;
      2.   Imposition of deed restrictions;
      3.   Location and arrangement of structures within the floodway and
floodway fringe areas to avoid an increase in flood heights during the
recurrence of the 100-year flood discharge;
      4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees and other protective measures;
      5.   Placement of survey bench marks; and
      6.   Floodproofing measures designed to be consistent with the flood
protection elevation for a particular area:
         a.   Anchorage to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
         b.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters;
         c.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures;
         d.   Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls;
         e.   Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation;
         f.   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures;
         g.   Construction of on site water supply and waste treatment systems
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharges from the system into floodwaters;
         h.   Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation wall and
basement flood pressures;
         i.   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris;
         j.   Cutoff valves on sewage lines or the elimination of gravity flow
basement drains; and
         k.   Location of on site waste disposal systems so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment: Materials that are buoyant,
flammable, noxious, toxic or otherwise injurious to persons or property if
transported by floodwaters are prohibited. Storage of materials and equipment
not having these characteristics is permissible only if the materials and
equipment have low damage potential and are anchored or are readily removable
from the area within the time available after forecasting and warning.
   C.   Affect On Other Property Owners: The evaluation of the effect on a
proposed use in the floodway and floodway fringe areas causing increases in
flood heights is based not just on the effect of the single use acting alone
but upon the reasonable assumption that other land owners within the floodplain
may need to be allowed to develop to an equivalent extent within the floodway
and, therefore, the accumulative effects of all such encroachments must be
considered by the city council in making any decision. Construction materials
which resist damage caused by flooding shall be used in that portion of a
structure subject to flooding.
   D.   Height, Yard And Area Restrictions: Restrictions regarding height, rear
yards, side yards, front yard setback, minimum lot area, signs, vision
clearance and parking space shall be the same as set forth in each specific
district located within the FP floodplain overlay district area. (Ord. 341, 9-
10-1996)
9-8-5: PROHIBITED USES:
It shall be unlawful to erect, alter, maintain or establish in an FP floodplain
overlay district any building, use or occupancy not permitted or allowed in the
foregoing provisions, except existing nonconforming uses may continue as herein
provided. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-8-6: NONLIABILITY PROVISIONS:
The granting of approval of any structure or use shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature from or by the city
council or the commission or by any officer or employee thereof, of the
practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no
liability upon or cause of action against such public body, officer or employee
for any damage that may result pursuant thereto. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
CHAPTER 9
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Purpose
9-9-2: Contents Of Application
9-9-3: General Standards
9-9-4: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
9-9-5: Hearing Procedures
9-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of uses are appearing
daily, and that many of these and some other more conventional uses possess
characteristics of such unique and special nature relative to location, design,
size, method of operation, circulation and public facilities that each specific
use must be considered individually.
The commission shall hold a public hearing on each special use permit
application as specified herein. The commission may recommend approval,
conditional approval or denial of a special use permit under the conditions as
herein specified and considering such additional safeguards as will uphold the
intent of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-9-2: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the city clerk by
at least one owner of property for which such special use is proposed. At a
minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   B.   Legal description of property;
   C.   Description of existing use;
   D.   Zoning district;
   E.   Description of proposed special use;
   F.   A plan of the proposed site for the special use showing the location
and height of all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic access and
traffic circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas,
utilities, signs, yards and such other information as the commission may
require to determine if the proposed special use meets the intent and
requirements of this title; and
   G.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effect of such elements as view, noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on
adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and
other properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed used to
the comprehensive land use plan. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-9-3: GENERAL STANDARDS:
The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed special use in the terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
   A.   Will, in fact, constitute a special use as established on the official
schedule of district regulations for the zoning district involved;
   B.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives
or with any specific objective of the comprehensive land use plan and/or the
applicable zoning ordinance;
   C.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of
the same area;
   D.   Will not create a nuisance or safety hazard for neighboring properties
in terms of excessive noise or vibration, improperly directed glare or heat,
electrical interference, odors, dust or air pollutants, solid waste generation
and storage, hazardous materials or waste, excessive traffic generation or
interference with pedestrian traffic.
   E.   Will be adequately served by essential public facilities and services
such as access streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewer service, and schools. If existing facilities are not
adequate, the developer shall show that such facilities shall be upgraded
sufficiently to serve the proposed use;
   F.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
   G.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property,
scenic views or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of
traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
   H.   Will not generate traffic in excess of the capacity of public streets
or access points serving the proposed use and will assure adequate visibility
at traffic access points;
   I.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic
or historic feature of major importance;
   J.   Will be effectively buffered to screen adjoining properties from
adverse impacts of noise, building size and resulting shadow, traffic and
parking.
   K.   Will be compatible with the slope of the site and the capacity of the
soils and will not be in an area of natural hazards unless suitably designed to
protect lives and property. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-9-4: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
In granting a special use permit, the approving body may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards. Such conditions to be attached to the permit
may include but not be limited to:
   A.   Minimizing adverse impact on other developments;
   B.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
   C.   Controlling the duration of development;
   D.   Assuring the development is properly maintained;
   E.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
   F.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities and
services;
   G.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
under this title. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-9-5: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice: Prior to granting a special use permit, at least one public
hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall
be held. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the city. Notice shall also be
provided to property owners and residents: 1) within the land being considered;
2) three hundred feet (300') beyond the external boundaries of the land being
considered; and 3) any additional area that may be substantially impacted by
the proposed special use as determined by the commission. When notice is
required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, in lieu of
the mailing of notification, three (3) notices in the official newspaper or
paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided, the third notice appear
ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
   B.   Action By Commission: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing,
the commission shall enter written findings of fact, and a recommendation to
the city council to either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
application as presented. In its recommendation, the commission shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for recommending approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   C.   Action By City Council: Within thirty (30) days after receiving the
commission's recommendation, the city council shall take final action on the
recommendation, and shall provide the applicant with written notice of its
action on the request within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered.
   D.   Request For Hearing By Affected Persons: An "affected person" shall
mean one having an interest in real property which may be adversely affected by
the issuance or denial of a permit. Any affected person may at any time prior
to final action by the city council on an application for a special use permit,
petition the city council in writing to hold a second hearing on the
application. After any such hearing as may be held pursuant to such request,
the city council may:
      1.   Grant or deny a permit; or
      2.   Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for further
study or hearing.
   An affected person aggrieved by a decision may, within sixty (60) days after
all remedies have been exhausted under the ordinances of the city, seek
judicial review under the procedures provided by Idaho Code 67-5240 et seq.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
CHAPTER 10
VARIANCES
SECTION:
9-10-1: Granting Variances
9-10-2: Application And Standards
9-10-3: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
9-10-4: Hearing Procedures
9-10-1: GRANTING VARIANCES:
The city council may authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms
of the zoning ordinances and regulations in effect as will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of the zoning ordinances and regulations would result in
unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of the applicable
zoning ordinances and regulations would result in unnecessary hardship. (Ord.
341, 9-10-1996)
9-10-2: APPLICATION AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Application For Variance: A request for a variance shall not be
considered unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted
to the commission containing:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Description of existing use;
      4.   Zoning district;
      5.   Description of variance requested; and
      6.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
         b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of the applicable
zoning ordinances and regulations would deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties under the terms of applicable zoning
ordinances and regulations;
         c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant; and
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by the applicable zoning
ordinances and regulations to other lands, structures or buildings in the same
district.
   B.   A variance shall not be granted unless the commission makes specific
findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it
which support conclusions that the above described standards and conditions
have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-10-3: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
Under no circumstances shall the commission recommend granting a variance to
allow a use not permitted under the terms of applicable zoning ordinances and
regulations in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication
prohibited by the terms of any applicable zoning ordinance or regulation in
said district. In recommending the granting of a variance, the commission may
recommend appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with applicable
zoning ordinances and regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards,
when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of the city's zoning ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 341,
9-10-1996)
9-10-4: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the application for a variance, the
commission shall hold a public hearing, publish notice in a newspaper, and give
written notice to all parties as required for special use permits 1 .
   B.   Action By Commission: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing,
the commission shall enter written findings of fact, and a recommendation to
the city council to either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
application as presented. In its recommendation, the commission shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for recommending approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   C.   Action By City Council: Within thirty (30) days after receiving the
commission's recommendation, the city council shall take final action on the
recommendation, and shall provide the applicant with written notice of its
action on the request within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered.
   D.   Request For Hearing By Affected Persons: An "affected person" shall
mean one having an interest in real property which may be adversely affected by
the issuance or denial of a permit. Any affected person may at any time prior
to final action by the city council on an application for a variance, petition
the city council in writing to hold a second hearing on the application. After
any such hearing as may be held pursuant to such request, the city council may:
      1.   Grant or deny a permit; or
      2.   Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for further
study or hearing.
   An affected person aggrieved by a decision may, within sixty (60) days after
all remedies have been exhausted under the ordinances of the city, seek
judicial review under the procedures provided by Idaho Code 67-5240 et seq.
(Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-9-5 of this title.
CHAPTER 11
NONCONFORMING USES AND LOTS
SECTION:
9-11-1: Intent
9-11-2: Incompatibility Of Nonconforming Uses
9-11-3: Avoidance Of Undue Hardship
9-11-4: Single And Combination Nonconforming Lots
9-11-5: Repairs And Maintenance
9-11-6: Uses Under Special Use Provisions
9-11-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this title to permit nonconforming uses to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent
of this title that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-11-2: INCOMPATIBILITY OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Nonconforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts in which such use is located. A nonconforming use shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of this title by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by
the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in
the district in which such use is located. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-11-3: AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP:
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
the actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this
title or amendment thereto and upon which actual building construction has been
diligently carried on. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-11-4: SINGLE AND COMBINATION NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   Single Nonconforming Lots Of Record: In any district in which single-
family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record  1  at the
effective date of this title or amendment thereto, notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lot must be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements
for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district,
provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to
area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
   B.   Nonconforming Lots Of Record In Combination: If two (2) or more lots or
a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage of this title or amendment
thereto, and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no
portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor
shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or
area below the requirements stated in this title.
   C.   Nonconforming Uses Of Structures And Land In Combination: If a lawful
use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in combination,
exists at the effective date of this title or amendment thereto that would not
be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
      2.   No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any additional land
area;
      3.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structure and land may, upon the issuance of a special use permit
by the city council, be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the
city council shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting
such change, the city council may require appropriate conditions and safeguards
in accordance with other provisions of this title;
      4.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter be resumed;
      5.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for more than two (2) years (except
when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or
structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and
      6.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming use of the land. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See definition in section
  9-1-4 of this title.
9-11-5: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic
content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing
in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any building or part thereof declared unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official. (Ord.
341, 9-10-1996)
9-11-6: USES UNDER SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS:
Any use which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of
this title shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall,
without further action, be considered a conforming use. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
CHAPTER 12
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
9-12-1: General Provisions
9-12-2: Application And Transmittal Requirements
9-12-3: Public Hearing
9-12-4: Recommendations By Commission
9-12-5: Action By City Council
9-12-6: Resubmission Of Application
9-12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good
zoning practices require, the city council may, by ordinance after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the commission, and subject to procedures provided
by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and
boundaries or classification of property.
   B.   Amendments to this title may be initiated in one of the following ways:
      1.   By adoption of a motion by the commission;
      2.   By adoption of a motion by the city council; or
      3.   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who
has an existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-12-2: APPLICATION AND TRANSMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Contents Of Application: Applications for amendments to the official
zoning map adopted as part of this title shall contain at least the following
information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the city
council;
      3.   Present land use;
      4.   Present zoning district;
      5.   Proposed use;
      6.   Proposed zoning district;
      7.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the commission showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the commission may require;
      8.   A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered;
      9.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the
comprehensive plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with
the surrounding area; and
      10.   A fee as established by the city council.
   B.   Transmittal To Commission: Zoning districts shall be amended in the
following manner:
      1.   Requests for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
commission, which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested;
      2.   If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the commission may recommend, and the city council may adopt or reject, the
ordinance amendment under the notice and hearing procedures provided in section
1-9-2 of this code; and
      3.   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted comprehensive
plan, the request shall be submitted to the commission, which shall recommend
and the city council may adopt or reject an amendment to the comprehensive plan
under the notice and hearing procedures provided in Idaho Code 67-6509. After
the comprehensive plan has been amended, this title may then be amended as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-12-3: PUBLIC HEARING:
The commission shall hold a public hearing to make recommendations on proposed
zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or map revisions.
   A.   Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending
a zoning ordinance text amendment to the city council shall conduct at least
one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time and
place and the proposed amendment shall be published in the official newspaper
or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. Following the
commission's hearing, if the commission makes a material change from what was
presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the commission forwards the amendment with its recommendations to the
city council.
   B.   Zoning Ordinance Map Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a
zoning ordinance map amendment that is in accordance with the comprehensive
plan to the city council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing, notice of time and place and the proposed amendment
shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation
within the jurisdiction. Additional notice shall be provided by mail to
property owners and residents within the land being considered, i.e., three
hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered,
and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as
determined by the commission. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or
more property owners or residents, in lieu of the mail notification, three (3)
notices in the official newspaper or newspaper of general circulation is
sufficient, provided that, the third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing. Following the commission's hearing, if the commission makes a
material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice
and hearing shall be provided before the commission forwards the amendment with
its recommendation to the city council. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-12-4: RECOMMENDATIONS BY COMMISSION:
Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the proposed amendment, the commission
shall transmit its recommendation to the city council. The commission may
recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a
modification of the amendment requested, or it may recommend that the amendment
be denied. The commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for
amendments are in accordance with the comprehensive plan and established goals
and objectives. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-12-5: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the proposed
amendment to the zoning ordinance, as recommended by the commission, shall
conduct at least one public hearing using the same notice and hearing
procedures as the commission. Following the city council hearing, if the city
council makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing,
further notice and hearing shall be provided before the city council adopts the
amendment. The city council shall accept the recommendation of the commission's
report unless rejected by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members.
Upon granting or denying an application to amend the zoning ordinance, the city
council shall specify:
   A.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
   B.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
   C.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
requested change.
In the event the city council shall approve the amendment, such amendment shall
thereafter be made a part of this title upon the preparation and passage of an
amending ordinance. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
9-12-6: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied by
the city council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form or
with reference to substantially the same premises for the same purposes within
a period of one year from the date of final action, unless there is an
amendment in the comprehensive plan which resulted in a change in conditions
applicable to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-13-1: Enforcement
9-13-2: Building Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
9-13-3: Planning And Zoning Commission
9-13-4: Development Agreements
9-13-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The city shall continue to contract for the authority for the enforcement of
the international building code and the provisions of this title. (Ord. 341, 9-
10-1996; amd. Ord. 384, 10-4-2002; 2004 Code)
9-13-2: BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Building Permit Required: Any person or business wishing to erect a
building or other structure, move, add to, or structurally alter any existing
building or structure shall be referred to the building official to obtain the
proper permit. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 427, 6-2-2009)
   B.   Collection Of Fees, Charges And Expenses: The city shall continue to
contract for the responsibility for the collection of fees, charges and
expenses. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Certificate Of Occupancy: It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or
permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or part thereof, until
a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official. A
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official not
to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 427, 6-2-
2009)
   D.   Failure To Obtain Building Permit Or Certificate Of Occupancy: Failure
to obtain a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of
this chapter, and shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 341, 9-10-1996; amd.
2004 Code)
9-13-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Commission Established: There shall be established in the city a
planning and zoning commission to act in both capacities, which commission may
act with the full authority of the city council in planning and zoning matters,
excluding the authority to adopt ordinances.
   B.   Membership; Appointment: The mayor shall appoint the planning and
zoning commission, consisting of seven (7) members, and such appointments shall
be confirmed by a majority vote of the city council.
   C.   Terms: The initial terms of office of the commission members shall be
as follows: three (3) of said commission members shall serve for a term of six
(6) years and four (4) of said commission members shall serve for a term of
four (4) years.
   D.   Vacancies: Should a vacancy occur on the commission, the same shall be
filled by appointment by the mayor and confirmation by majority vote of the
city council, the same as the original appointments herein provided. (Ord. 301,
8-4-1986; amd. Ord. 326, 3-1-1994)
9-13-4: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to encourage private
participation in comprehensive planning and allow for zoning amendments that
are designed to address the specific character of a parcel of property, the
needs of the surrounding neighborhood and the public infrastructure needs, by
placing conditions upon that zoning amendment that provide for mitigation of
the impact of development upon the community.
   B.   Authority: In the event that a requested amendment to the zoning
designation of a parcel of property will, in the opinion of the city council,
have a substantial impact on the public infrastructure or will require
buffering between the subject parcel and adjacent neighborhood if the request
were to be granted, the city council is hereby authorized to condition approval
of the zoning amendment upon a written development agreement providing for
mitigation of the impact on the infrastructure and the property surrounding the
subject parcel.
   C.   Form Of Agreement: The development agreement shall be in a form
approved by the city council. It shall specify the duration of the agreement,
the permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the
maximum height and size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or
dedication of land for public purposes, buffering requirements and
infrastructure improvement requirements that are necessary to mitigate the
impact of the zone change. The development agreement may include conditions,
terms, restrictions and requirements for discretionary actions, provided, that
such conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for discretionary actions
shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or
intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The agreement may provide
that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the
project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.
   D.   Recording: All development agreements shall be recorded at the expense
of the subject property owner and the terms of the agreement shall run with the
land and be binding on subsequent property owners.
   E.   Modification And Termination: Development agreements may not be amended
or terminated without the city first providing notice and holding a public
hearing pursuant to the hearing procedures for adoption of the comprehensive
plan under the local planning act.
   F.   Enforcement: If the property owner fails to comply with the terms of
the development agreement, the city council may, following notice and public
hearing, terminate the agreement and reverse the zoning designation. The city
council is also authorized to enforce the terms of the agreement through civil
action for injunctive relief.
   G.   Periodic Review: Compliance with the development agreement may be
reviewed on a period basis of not less than once every twelve (12) months from
the effective date of the development agreement following the procedures set
forth herein:
      1.   Written notice of the periodic review shall be given in writing to
the property owner of the subject property at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the time at which the review will be conducted.
      2.   An investigation will be conducted as to whether or not there has
been good faith compliance.
      3.   If the person who is authorized by the city to conduct the
investigation finds that there has not been such compliance, written findings
shall be provided to the city administrator together with a recommendation as
to whether the development agreement should be terminated or modified or
enforced as written.
      4.   Upon receipt of the findings and recommendation, the matter shall be
placed on the council agenda for public hearing pursuant to the notice and
hearing procedures set out in the local planning act for adoption of the
comprehensive plan.
      5.   Nothing in this section is intended to preclude a review on a more
frequent basis upon the receipt by the city of a complaint that the terms of
the development agreement have been violated.
   H.   Discretionary Authority: Approval of a zoning amendment under this
section is at the discretion of the city council. (Ord. 408, 4-4-2006)
CHAPTER 14
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
9-14-1: Purpose And Intent
9-14-2: Permit Required
9-14-3: Ownership Requirements
9-14-4: Planned Unit Development Standards
9-14-5: Developer/Applicant Incentives And Benefits
9-14-6: Open Space/Common Area Amenities
9-14-7: Utility Requirements
9-14-8: Arrangement Of Uses
9-14-9: Procedure For Approval Of A PUD
9-14-10: Application For A Planned Unit Development
9-14-11: Recommendation By Zoning Official Or Commission And Decision By City
Council
9-14-12: Extension Of Preliminary Development Plan Approval
9-14-13: Final Development Plan
9-14-14: Improvement Guarantees
9-14-15: Amendments To Final Development Plan
9-14-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A planned unit development (PUD) is a parcel or combination of parcels of land
which is planned and developed as a unit under single ownership or control. It
may contain one or a mixture of uses, types of buildings, as well as common
open space, clustered development and/or recreational facilities. The purpose
of the PUD process is to provide opportunity for land development that
preserves and utilizes natural topographic, geologic and scenic features;
allows a more efficient pattern of residential and commercial uses; fosters
innovative design concepts and promotes flexibility in site design; and
provides for common open space or other amenities not found in traditional lot
by lot development. The PUD process allows the city to approve modifications
from the development standards of the underlying zoning designation in order to
encourage creative design for land use development than is generally available
under conventional zoning regulations. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every PUD requires a PUD permit. A PUD shall be subject to applicable
development requirements set forth in this code. Whenever there is a conflict
or difference between the provisions of this code, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-3: OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner(s) or a
person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the PUD.
The PUD application shall be filed in the name of the recorded owner of
property included in the development. However, the application may be filed by
the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property. In all applications,
sufficient proof that the record owner of the property consents to the
submission and processing of the application must be present prior to the
zoning official reviewing the application for completeness. The zoning official
may require the applicant to submit a title report for the subject property to
verify ownership. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards For Approval: The council may approve a PUD in accordance
with the following standards:
      1.   Density Formula: Density of residential areas of the PUD shall be
computed apart from the nonresidential uses (including, but not limited to,
office, commercial and public uses) of the PUD. For purposes of establishing
the density applicable to the residential portion of the PUD, actual density of
the residential area shall not exceed the number of dwelling units per acre
specified in the zoning district. Residential density in a PUD shall be
calculated by multiplying the gross residential area (gross acreage less
office, landscaped buffer strips or commercial use area) by the maximum number
of dwelling units per acre allowed for the zoning district in which the site is
located. A variety of housing types may be included in residential projects
including attached units, detached units, single-family units and multiple
units. Residential density shall not be provided for the following uses: FEMA
designated floodways; slopes over twenty five percent (25%) and public lands.
      2.   Open Space: Developed open space of at least twenty percent (20%) of
the gross area is required. (Landscaped open space is mandatory for all
developments and minimum landscape ordinance requirements will not be counted
as an amenity for the purposes of this provision.) In nonresidential zoning
districts, the applicant can request a waiver of the twenty percent (20%) open
space requirement from the city council but such waiver must require a minimum
of ten percent (10%) of open space of the gross area exclusive of required
street buffers and buffers between incompatible land uses. Such a waiver is at
the sole discretion of the city council.
      3.   Amenities: Two (2) or more of the following amenities shall be
provided as part of each PUD to ensure a public benefit:
         a.   Active open space recreational facilities of a size suitable to
meet the needs of the development. Active open space shall be defined as:
neighborhood areas that provide gathering areas for active recreation (e.g.,
such as a playground, picnic area, basketball or tennis court, swimming pool,
clubhouse, golf course, open fields, tot lot, and running/equestrian trails).
         b.   Passive open space including public pedestrian or bicycle
circulation system within the project (exclusive of required sidewalks adjacent
to public right of way) and connecting to existing or planned pedestrian or
bicycle routes outside the project, designed and constructed in accordance with
standards set forth by the city of Harrison. Passive open space shall be
defined as: neighborhood areas that provide a combination of linear open space
and scenic features (e.g., ponds, berms and provision of view corridors).
         c.   Other amenities appropriate to the size and uses of the proposed
development, as may be proposed by the applicant and approved by the city
council (e.g., natural or preserved areas).
         d.   Construction and maintenance of all amenities shall be specified
by the applicant prior to approval of the preliminary plat/final development
plan. Thereafter such maintenance and operation responsibilities of these
facilities shall be undertaken by a homeowners' association or by the city or
other governmental entity if dedicated to and officially accepted by the city
or other governmental entity.
      4.   Setbacks: Along the periphery of the PUD, setbacks shall be provided
as required by regulation of the district in which the development is located
unless an exception is provided. Where development already exists at the
periphery, the setbacks shall be aligned, where practical. Setbacks for
buildings within the interior of the site may be less than required in the
designated zoning district. Special landscape buffers between differing uses as
set forth in the landscape ordinance shall apply to PUDs. Attached structures
may be permitted in PUDs with strict compliance with the building code
requirements for party and fire separation walls. The minimum separation
between detached structures shall be ten feet (10') unless fire or building
codes require modified separation.
      5.   Driveways, Streets And Pathways: Driveways to one- and two-family
dwellings shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in width. Service driveways,
drive-through lanes and escape lanes shall have a minimum width of twelve feet
(12') per lane, without parking on either side. Publicly dedicated streets
shall be designed and constructed to city or applicable highway district
standards. Private streets may be utilized within the project with standards
that are less than public street standards subject to applicable laws and
regulations, if approved by the city council and set forth in a development
agreement.
      6.   Housing Types: A variety of housing types may be included within a
single PUD including, for example: attached units (townhomes, duplexes),
detached units (patio homes, single-family and multi-family units), regardless
of the underlying zoning classification of the site such that the overall
density limit of the zone is maintained.
      7.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall comply with the parking
requirements of the underlying zone. No common parking or maneuvering areas
shall be allowed within twenty feet (20') of the boundary of the PUD. All
common parking or maneuvering areas shall be buffered from adjacent properties.
The buffer area may include natural features, but must be landscaped (and may
include fencing or screen walls) with the objective of minimizing adverse
impacts to surrounding properties. In addition to the above requirements, where
on street parking is prohibited, at least one-half (1/2) additional parking
space per dwelling unit shall be provided either in approved parking bays along
the street or in an off street parking area.
      8.   Signs: Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of chapter 6 of
this title.
      9.   Stormwater Management: The management of stormwater shall conform to
the Idaho department of environmental quality and standard engineering best
management practices and any applicable stormwater management policies adopted
by the city.
      10.   Other Uses: Other types of uses, in addition to residential, may be
permitted within a single PUD (e.g., commercial or industrial) in compliance
with the provisions of this code and with the approval of the city council.
      11.   Comprehensive Plan: The PUD must meet the general objectives of the
comprehensive land use plan adopted by the city.
      12.   Streets And Utility Services: Existing and proposed streets and
utility services must be suitable and adequate for the proposed development.
      13.   Development Agreement: A development agreement shall be required
between the developer and the city which delineates commitments of the
developer to the city and of the city to the developer.
      14.   Public Hearing Requirement: The PUD is subject to the public
hearing requirements of this code.
      15.   Concurrent Review: Concurrent review of other applications may be
required. In cases where a subdivision is being proposed or would be required,
concurrent review of the detailed PUD and subdivision plat is required.
   B.   Area Size: A PUD shall have a minimum area size of eight thousand
(8,000) square feet. All land within the development shall be contiguous as
defined under Idaho Code 50-222. Parcels that are not contiguous due to
intervening streets are discouraged. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-5: DEVELOPER/APPLICANT INCENTIVES AND BENEFITS:
PUDs are intended to provide particular benefits to the public and to the
developer through a mixture of uses and integrated nature of the projects.
Public benefit is ensured by the provision of public improvements and the
amenities required by this code, and, for infill developments, by the increased
efficiency of the use of land and public services. Deviations from the
development standards and/or area requirements of the underlying zone may be
approved if the proposed uses are not detrimental to present and potential
surrounding uses and are not detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public. Any variation from the basic zoning district
requirements must be warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the
preliminary plat and/or final development plan. The commission and council may
consider lands that include intervening streets on a case by case basis. The
commission may recommend waiver or deferral of the minimum lot size, and the
council may grant such waiver or deferral for hotels which meet the definition
of "hotel" in section
9-1-4 of this title, or resorts which meet the definition of "resort" in
section
9-1-4 of this title, and conforms to all other requirements of the "mixed use
district (MU)" located in section
9-2-2 of this title. To provide the developer with an incentive to utilize the
PUD process, the following deviations from conventional development standards
may be incorporated into a PUD proposal:
   A.   Housing Types: A variety of housing types may be included in the
planned development.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for each building and setbacks
for buildings within the project may be reduced below those normally required
for the zoning district.
   C.   Use Exceptions: Twenty percent (20%) of the site may include uses not
normally permitted in the designated zoning district.
   D.   Clustering: Buildings may be clustered to preserve scenic, historic,
aesthetic or environmentally sensitive areas in the natural state, or to
consolidate small open spaces into larger, more usable areas for common use and
enjoyment.
   E.   Conditions Of Approval: The conditions of the approval established for
a PUD shall be consistently applied to all phases of the development, unless
specifically agreed to otherwise during the approval process.
   F.   Land For Public Use: A residential density bonus may be given for
dedications of land for public use such as: school, park, library, public
utility, fire station or recreational facility, which are provided to the
public entity by donation or at a cost less than, or equal to, the applicant's
predevelopment cost for that land.
   G.   Increased Residential Density: The commission may recommend, and the
council may authorize, an increased residential density of up to five percent
(5%) of the allowable number of residential dwelling units that are allowed in
the designated zoning district for each of the following:
      1.   Landscaping, street design and streetscape, open spaces (active and
passive uses) and plazas, use of required landscaping, pedestrian walkway
design and distribution, and recreation uses.
      2.   Siting visual focal points; use of existing physical features such
as topography, view, sun and wind orientation; motorized and nonmotorized
vehicle circulation pattern; physical environment; variation in building
setbacks and building clustering.
      3.   Design features; street sections (e.g., frontage and backage roads),
architectural styles, harmonious use of materials; parking areas augmented by
landscape features; and varied use of housing styles and housing options (e.g.,
estate homes, townhouses).
      4.   Permanent protection of significant natural features, view sheds and
historic sites and structures.
   H.   Dwelling Units Allowed: Residential density bonuses for all incentives
listed in subsection G of this section may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the allowable number of residential dwelling units that are allowed in the
designated zoning district. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-6: OPEN SPACE/COMMON AREA AMENITIES:
A minimum of twenty percent (20%), unless otherwise approved, of the gross land
area developed in any residential PUD project shall be reserved for common open
space and recreational facilities unless a waiver is granted pursuant to
section
9-14-5 of this chapter.
   A.   Construction And Maintenance: The required amount of common open space
land reserved under a PUD shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners
of the project area for the use of each owner who buys property within the
development or be dedicated to the public and retained as common open space for
parks, recreation and related uses. Public utility and similar easements and
rights of way for watercourses and other similar channels are not acceptable
for common open space dedication unless such land or right of way is usable as
a trail or other similar purpose and approved by the city council.
   The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified
by the developer before approval of the final PUD plan. The development must
have a perpetual agreement to maintain the open space and cannot dissolve this
clause in the master declaration or covenants, conditions and restrictions.
   B.   Open Space: Unless otherwise approved, not less than twenty percent
(20%) of the total gross area of a residential PUD shall be retained as
permanent open space and shall not include strips of less than fifteen feet
(15') in width unless designed to accommodate a water feature such as a pond or
stream. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of land area of a PUD devoted to
multiple-family residential uses shall consist of open space. A waiver of the
open space requirement may not be granted for a PUD devoted to multiple-family
residential uses. Of this required open space, portions may be "common area"
used for recreational or other collective enjoyment by occupants of the
development, privately owned properties dedicated by easements to assure that
open space will be permanent, and lands developed as active recreational areas
or preserved in their natural state when such areas contain unique natural
assets such as groves of trees, ponds, rivers or streambeds.
   C.   Dimension: In order to be functionally usable, open space should exist
in quantities of some minimum dimension. Therefore, the areas of each parcel of
open space to be used for active recreational use shall have a size and shape
consistent with the planned use.
   D.   Location: Open spaces shall be distributed within projects in locations
near the dwelling units of the people they are intended to serve. A minimum of
fifty percent (50%) of dwelling units shall be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of designated open space within the planned unit development.
   E.   Open Space Shared Or Public: Land indicated as open space, common
areas, amenities (tennis courts, playgrounds, swimming pool, etc.), streets and
sidewalks shall be shown on the preliminary plan and provide on the plan that
they be permanently maintained as such either by a homeowners' association
which provides private covenants, an agreement with the developer, or if
suitable and mutually agreeable, by public dedications.
   F.   Easements: Easements for pedestrian/bicycle/equestrian pathways in
accordance with the city's comprehensive plan and pathway plan.
   G.   Amenities: Amenities shall be provided as a part of each planned unit
development. A minimum of two (2) amenities shall be provided within a
development. As the project size increases the number and/or size of the
amenities shall also increase proportionally. These amenities may include, but
not be limited to, any of the following:
      1.   Private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool, tennis
court, barbecue area or playground of a size appropriate to meet needs of the
development.
      2.   Provision for public access to any public open space, park or lake/
river greenbelt.
      3.   Publicly dedicated land in a PUD for facilities such as school, fire
station, well site, public park, and public recreational facility.
      4.   Additional open space for parkways, boulevards, or other features
designed to mitigate vehicle/traffic impact.
      5.   Other amenities as approved by the commission and council. (Ord.
430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
Underground utility distribution and service facilities, including, but not
limited to: telecommunications, water, sewer, irrigation, cable, and electrical
systems, are required within the limits of all planned unit developments,
appurtenances to these systems which must be effectively screened. (Ord. 430,
12-16-2008)
9-14-8: ARRANGEMENT OF USES:
The plan of the PUD project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious
design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for
internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and
facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient
from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas. All
areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvement
or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and
orderly manner. Guidelines for commercial and residential PUDs are as follows:
   A.   Commercial: When proposed within a nonresidential area the plan of the
project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings,
and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal traffic
circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may be
necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the standpoint of
the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas. A twenty foot (20') wide
buffer area should be used along the exterior boundary of a PUD when abutting
residential areas or uses.
   B.   Residential: When residential projects include commercial uses as
allowed in this chapter and are located within a residentially designated area
the commercial uses should be designed and scaled to primarily serve the
residential portions of the project in which they are located and focus
internally to the development. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on
the perimeter of the commercial areas abutting residential areas. Commercial
areas shall not be located on the exterior of the project site so as not to
abut existing residential uses. A twenty foot (20') wide buffer area should be
used along the exterior boundary of a PUD when similar uses or like sized lots
are not provided. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-9: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A PUD:
   A.   Prior to the submission of an application for a PUD, the applicant
shall contact the zoning official or their designee and arrange for a
preapplication conference. The purpose of this conference is to provide
guidance to the developer in preparing the application. Therefore, the
developer should request the meeting well before preparing the application
materials. A draft site plan and preliminary plat map (if required) shall be
available at the preapplication meeting.
   B.   A PUD application may be submitted and processed as a concept plan. The
applicant must specify the application and site plan for which approval is
being requested. A concept approval is a statement by the city of Harrison that
a general development plan including the arrangements of uses, density,
location of major streets, open spaces, utilities, etc., is acceptable. A
concept review allows the applicant to obtain approval of a general development
plan without incurring the expense of detailed building plans until after
concept approval. It provides the developer and the city with guidelines for
the design of each phase of the project. Supporting information may be required
by the zoning official on issues of major importance for the project prior to
deeming the application complete.
   Each phase of a concept approval requires detailed subdivision plat approval
through a new application, fee and public hearing. The only exception to the
detailed subdivision plat requirement is single-family dwellings proposed as
the primary use within a development. The single-family dwelling portion of the
project shall be reviewed in detail under subdivision requirements of this
code.
   C.   Every PUD requires an application, including all plans and information
required by this code. Phasing plans shall be included if the project is to be
phased. The application is subject to the public hearing requirements of this
code.
   D.   Concurrent review of other applications may be required as determined
by the zoning official or their designee. In cases where subdivision platting
would be necessary, concurrent review of the PUD application may be required.
(Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-10: APPLICATION FOR A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   General Application Requirements: An application for approval of a
proposed PUD shall be made to the city clerk and shall include all information
specified in section
9-9-2 of this title. An application shall not be accepted until the zoning
official determines that the application is complete.
   B.   Preliminary PUD Development Plan: Ten (10) copies of the preliminary
PUD development plan, which shall consist of drawings and supplementary written
material adequate to provide the following information:
      1.   Statement of how the purpose and intent will be achieved by the
planned unit development, including sketches or illustrations of the proposed
character of the development, a description of how the planned unit development
will relate to surrounding land uses and identified key neighborhood features,
if any, and whether a zone change, comprehensive plan amendment, variance,
floodplain permit, preliminary plat is also requested.
      2.   An outline of the proposed planned unit development stating: land
use allocation by type, including the amount of land for housing, density, open
spaces, roadways and parking, the number and type of housing units, and how
necessary services will be provided and whether services are publicly or
privately owned and operated.
      3.   Preliminary drawings at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100'). The preliminary drawings shall display the following:
         a.   The name of the proposed planned unit development.
         b.   Date, northpoint and scale of drawing.
         c.   Legal description of the planned unit development other than
metes and bounds, sufficient to define its location and boundaries.
         d.   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners, designer of
the PUD, and engineer, planner and surveyor, if any, and the date of the
survey.
         e.   Appropriate identification of the drawing as a preliminary plan.
   C.   Natural Features And Existing Utilities Map: Ten (10) copies of a
natural features map showing an inventory of existing site features including:
      1.   Ground elevations shown by contour lines at two foot (2') intervals
or less.
      2.   General soil types as documented by a soils engineer or engineering
geologist, if necessary.
      3.   Fish and wildlife habitats, and special status plants and animals,
if any.
      4.   Existing stormwater facilities.
      5.   Water features, such as ponds, wetlands and watercourses.
      6.   Areas subject to flooding.
      7.   Natural features, such as trees, watercourses, historic sites, and
similar irreplaceable amenities.
      8.   Existing on site or abutting sanitary sewer, storm drainage and
water supply facilities. If such facilities are not on or abutting the site, an
indication of the direction and distance to the nearest ones.
      9.   Width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on
and abutting the site.
      10.   Information on land areas contiguous and adjacent to the proposed
planned unit development and existing adjacent areas, including zoning
classifications, land uses, densities, circulation systems, public facilities,
traffic study, unique natural features of the landscape, and approximate
locations of nearby structures.
   D.   Conceptual Site Plan: Ten (10) copies of a proposed conceptual site
plan showing:
      1.   The general locations of residential and nonresidential uses.
      2.   Location of major streets.
      3.   The proposed yard requirements for residential and nonresidential
uses.
      4.   The existing and proposed traffic circulation system serving the
PUD.
      5.   The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation system.
      6.   Conceptual plans for all necessary services including their location
and whether the services will be publicly or privately owned and maintained.
Location of utilities as would tie into the project.
      7.   Proposed location and treatment of any public or private common
areas or structures including open spaces, park or recreation areas, and school
sites.
      8.   The approximate amount, location and type of buffering and/or
landscaping.
      9.   Proposed architectural styles.
      10.   Identification of the location and configuration of open space
(active and passive).
      11.   Identification of hazard areas.
      12.   An economic feasibility study.
   E.   Traffic Impact Analysis: All subdivisions containing more than twenty
(20) lots shall provide a traffic impact analysis based on information that
reflects current traffic conditions. A traffic impact analysis may be required
of any development as deemed necessary by the zoning official (or designee) on
a case by case basis.
   F.   Development Schedule: A development schedule indicating to the best of
applicant's knowledge the approximate date on which construction of all phases
of the entire project can be expected to begin, the anticipated rate of
development, and completion date. The schedule, if approved by the city
council, shall become a part of the final development plan and shall be adhered
to by the owner of the property in the planned unit development and his
successors in interest.
   G.   Additional Information: Any additional information required by the
zoning official (or designee), city engineer, city attorney or city council.
   H.   Approval: Approval of the preliminary development plan does not
constitute approval of the final development plan/preliminary plat. If the
applicant is requesting preliminary subdivision plat approval concurrently with
the preliminary PUD approval, a preliminary subdivision plat shall be
submitted.
   I.   Taxes And Assessments: Verification that all outstanding taxes and
assessments levied by political subdivisions have been paid on the property
included in the application. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-11: RECOMMENDATION BY ZONING OFFICIAL OR COMMISSION AND DECISION BY CITY
COUNCIL:
The zoning official (or designee) shall review the preliminary development plan
application and draft a written recommendation for the city. On any PUD
application, the city council shall submit the application to the commission
for a recommendation from the commission. Within sixty (60) days after receipt
of the zoning official's or commission's recommendation on a PUD application,
the council should hold a public hearing on the application and either approve
the application with or without supplementary conditions or give reasons for
its disapproval.
The council should find that the facts submitted with the application and
presented to them establish that:
   A.   The proposed development shall be initiated within two (2) years of the
date of approval.
   B.   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will
not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations.
   C.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD.
   D.   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the intensity
and locations proposed.
   E.   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by the
design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the planned unit development and the adopted policy of the
council.
   F.   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development.
   G.   The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan.
   H.   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
   I.   The reasons for approval or denial; and the actions, if any, that the
applicant could take to obtain a permit if the application is denied. If the
application is either approved or approved with conditions, the council shall
direct the zoning official (or designee) to issue zoning permits only in
accordance with the approved PUD plan, and preliminary plat and the
supplementary conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-12: EXTENSION OF PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL:
The applicant may request one extension of the two (2) year time limit not
later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the preliminary
development plan one year limit. Any extension requested beyond the two (2)
year requires that a public hearing be held pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-
6509. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-13: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Application For Approval: Upon approval in principle of a preliminary
development plan, an application for approval of the final development plan
shall be filed with the zoning official (or designee) by at least one property
owner or person having a presently existing interest in the property for which
the PUD is proposed. Each application shall be signed by the owner or lessee,
attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the
application for final development plan. Each application shall clearly state
that the approval shall expire and may be revoked if construction on the
project has not begun within one year from the date of issuance of the
approval. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information:
      1.   A survey of the proposed development site showing the dimensions and
bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography and existing features
of the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses;
      2.   All the information required on the preliminary development plan,
the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling
units, nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;
      3.   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated
residential population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population;
anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for
each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposed an exception from
the standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing development;
      4.   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary,
water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations;
waste disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of
earthwork required for site preparation and development;
      5.   Site plan, showing buildings, various functional use areas,
circulation and their relationship;
      6.   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
      7.   Landscaping plans;
      8.   Environmental assessment, traffic study, grading plan or other study
necessary for the proposed site to substantiate the preliminary development
plan approval, including, but not limited to: habitat and wildlife mitigation;
fiscal mitigation agreements; design guidelines; approvals from jurisdictional
entities and service providers; hydrology studies and water rights; and final
site plans; and
      9.   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements
or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be
commonly owned and maintained.
   B.   Recommendation By Commission: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of
the final development plan, the commission shall recommend to the council that
the final development plan be approved as presented, approved with
supplementary conditions or disapproved. The commission shall then transmit all
papers constituting the record and the recommendations to the council.
   The commission shall find that the facts submitted with the application and
presented to them establish that:
      1.   The proposed development can be initiated within two (2) years of
the date of approval.
      2.   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will
not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations.
      3.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD.
      4.   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the
intensity and locations proposed.
      5.   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by
the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the planned unit development and the adopted policy of the
council.
      6.   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development.
      7.   The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan.
      8.   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
      9.   The reasons for approval or denial; and the actions, if any, that
the applicant could take to obtain a permit if the application is denied. If
the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the council
shall direct the zoning official (or designee) to issue zoning permits only in
accordance with the approved PUD plan, and preliminary plat and the
supplementary conditions attached thereto.
   C.   Action By The Council: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
final recommendations of the commission, the council shall either approve,
approve with supplementary conditions or disapprove the application as
presented. Upon granting or denying the application, the council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the application could take to obtain a
permit.
   If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the
council shall direct the zoning official (or designee) to issue zoning permits
only in accordance with the approved final development plan and the
supplementary conditions attached thereto.
   D.   Expiration And Extension For Approval Period: The approval of a final
development plan for a planned unit development shall be for a period not to
exceed two (2) years to allow for preparation and recording of the required
subdivision plat and the development of the project. If no construction has
begun within two (2) years after approval is granted, the approved planned unit
development plan shall be void. All phases of the planned unit development
shall be completed within five (5) years of the date of approval, or as
otherwise specified in the development agreement; approval of any uninitiated
phases will lapse after that time unless a time extension is granted by the
council. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
9-14-14: IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES:
   A.   Prior to final plat approval, the applicant shall either install and
complete all private service improvements, including streets, pedestrianways,
utilities, landscaping and buffering, or file an improvement guarantee for
these items.
   B.   The improvement guarantee is an agreement between the applicant and
city specifying a development schedule setting forth when service improvements
will be made.
   C.   The agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, and
shall be filed with the city clerk.
   D.   The applicant shall file with the agreement one of the following to
assure his full and faithful performance:
      1.   A certified check or checks;
      2.   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the state of Idaho.
      3.   Other surety acceptable to the city.
   E.   Assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for the amount of
one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated costs of improvements
approved by the city engineer, including related engineering and city
inspections.
   F.   At the discretion of the city, the improvement guarantee may be in the
form of separate bonds or checks covering individual portions or specific types
of improvements, rather than one bond or check covering the work.
   G.   Occupancy permits shall not be issued unless all improvements and
conditions of approval have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the building
official.
   H.   The city council shall not authorize the city clerk to return the
improvement guarantee or guarantees until the improvements related to the
guarantee are complete to the satisfaction of the city council. (Ord. 430, 12-
16-2008)
9-14-15: AMENDMENTS TO FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Any subsequent amendment to the final development plan changing location,
siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the city
council without additional public hearings, if required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. In no case
shall the city council authorize changes which may cause any of the following
without undertaking a public hearing process as required by Idaho law and this
code.
   A.   A change in the use or character of the development, or an increase in
the overall coverage of structures.
   B.   An increase of the intensity of use.
   C.   An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public
utilities.
   D.   A reduction of off street parking and loading space.
   E.   A reduction in required pavement widths.
   F.   All other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks and building
tracts, or in the provision of common open spaces and changes other than those
listed above which constitute substantial alteration of the original plan shall
require a public hearing and approval by the council. (Ord. 430, 12-16-2008)
CHAPTER 15
LAND USE APPLICATION PERMITS
SECTION:
9-15-1: Duties And Authorities
9-15-2: General Application Process
9-15-3: Public Hearing Process
9-15-4: Expirations Of Approvals
9-15-1: DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES:
   A.   City Council: The council shall have the authority to set policy and
legislation affecting land use and the administration of this title, including
establishing application fees by resolution.
   B.   Planning And Zoning Commission: The commission shall be the designated
planning agency for the city pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6504 and section
9-13-3 of this title. The commission shall be responsible for making
recommendations to the council on site specific permits and on land use
legislation, comprehensive plan amendments, and other policy matters.
   C.   Summary Of Actions: The following table is a summary list of the
actions that the city shall take in administration of this title, the body
responsible for the action, and the reference to the process under which the
action shall be taken unless otherwise required by Idaho Code.
TABLE 1.1: AUTHORITIES AND PROCESSES
 
CC = City council   PZ = Planning and zoning commission
PM = Public meeting PH = Public hearing
 
  Recommending Authority/Process Final Decision Making Body/Process
                             Recommending Authority/ Final Decision Making
                             Process                 Body/Process
Annexation                   PZ/PH                   CC/PM
Comprehensive plan amendment PZ/PH                   CC/PM
Development agreement        PZ/PH                   CC/PM
Planned use development:                             
 Preliminary                PZ/PM                   CC/PH
 Final                      PZ/PM                   CC/PM
 Amendment                  n/a                     CC/PM (subject to section
                                                     9-14-15 of this title)
Special use permit or        PZ/PH                   CC/PM
revocation
Subdivisions:                                        
 Minor                      n/a                     CC/PM (with comment
                                                     period)
 Major (8 or fewer lots)    PZ/PH                   CC/PM
 Major (9 or more lots)     PZ/PH                   CC/PH
Vacation of plat, alley or   PZ/PM                   CC/PH
street
Variance                     PZ/PH                   CC/PM
Zone ordinance amendment     PZ/PH                   CC/PM
Zoning district boundary     PZ/PH                   CC/PM
amendment
Other land use application   PZ/PH                   CC/PM
 
(Ord. 447, 3-5-2013)
9-15-2: GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to outline the general
application process for a permit or decision under provisions of this title
unless otherwise required by Idaho Code.
   B.   Application Requirements:
      1.   All requests for permits and decisions in accordance with this title
shall submit an application to the city on forms approved and provided by the
city.
      2.   At a minimum, the application shall require the following
information:
         a.   Name, address and contact information of the applicant and the
applicant's representative;
         b.   Proof of current ownership in the property which is subject of
the application or signed letter of authorization from the property owner for
making application;
         c.   Legal description of the property; and
         d.   Statement of project intent for making the application.
      3.   Some requests for permits and decisions shall require additional
application information as determined by the city.
      4.   The city may allow information to be submitted in an electronic
format.
      5.   All applications shall be accompanied by a deposit for anticipated
costs and a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount established by resolution.
   C.   Determination Of Completeness:
      1.   An application shall contain all information deemed necessary by the
city to determine if the proposal will comply with the applicable requirements
of this title.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application, or such later
time, but not to exceed sixty (60) days, as reasonably appropriate consistent
with staff or consultants workloads, the city shall certify the application as
complete for review or require additional information be submitted.
      3.   After the application is certified as complete, the council,
commission, or city may require applicants to submit additional information or
documentation.
      4.   No further action shall be taken on the application until such
additional information or documentation has been submitted. If the additional
information is not submitted within thirty (30) days for the city's request, or
the date mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the city, the application
will be returned to the applicant.
      5.   The city shall issue a notice of application acceptance and
completion either by letter to the applicant or by public notice of the pending
public hearing or action on the application.
      6.   The city shall begin processing the application once the application
is deemed complete. (Ord. 447, 3-5-2013)
9-15-3: PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to outline the specific
application process for actions that require a public hearing unless otherwise
required by Idaho Code.
   B.   Public Notice Requirements: Applications that require a public hearing
shall be noticed in accord with the noticing requirements, as set forth in
table 3.1 of this section, and the following relevant procedures:
      1.   Radius Notice: For applications that require radius notice:
         a.   Application Submittals: Application submittals shall include a
public notice describing the proposal on a form provided, and stamped,
addressed envelopes to all property owners required to be notified of the
public hearing.
         b.   Public Notice Sent: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing, the city shall send the public notice of the time, place and
description of the application by first class mail to the property owners
required to be notified of the public hearing.
         c.   Vacation And Minor Subdivision Requests: In the case of vacation
and minor subdivision requests, radius notice shall be sent by certified mail.
         d.   Alternate Mailing Notice: When mailed notice is required to two
hundred (200) or more property owners, alternate notice may be provided by a
display advertisement at least four inches (4") by two (2) columns in size in
the official newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date and
posting of notice on all external boundaries of the site.
         e.   Property Owners Within Three Hundred Feet: When mailed notice is
required to property owners or purchasers of record within three hundred feet
(300') as set forth in table 3.1 of this section, notice shall also be provided
to property owners or purchasers of record within the land being considered and
for any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposal.
         f.   Adjacent Property Owners: When mailed notice is required to
adjacent property owners or purchasers of record as set forth in table 3.1 of
this section, notice shall also be provided to property owners or purchasers of
record within the land being considered and for any additional area that may be
substantially impacted by the proposal.
      2.   Publication: For applications that require publication, the city
shall provide a public notice of the time, place, and description of the
application in the official newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing except as provided below.
         a.   Vacation Requests: Legal notice shall be published once a week
for two (2) successive weeks, the last of which shall not be less than seven
(7) days prior to the public hearing.
         b.   Comprehensive Plan Amendment: If the commission recommends a
material change to the plan after the public hearing, the public notice for the
council hearing shall include the commission's recommendation.
      3.   Posting On Site: For applications that require posting on site, a
public notice shall be posted by the city on all external boundaries of the
site for which the permit is sought. The notice shall be posted not less than
seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
      4.   Agency Notification: For applications that require agency notice, at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, the city shall give notice
to all political subdivisions providing services, including the school
district. The city may transmit the notice, application and other documents
submitted for review and recommendations to departments and other agencies and
community organizations as adopted by the commission resolution.
TABLE 3.1: PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
  Radius: Adjacent Radius: Properties Within Publication On Site Agencies
  Properties       300 Feet
                  Radius: Adjacent Radius:
                  Properties       Properties      Publication On Site Agencies
                                   Within 300 Feet
Annexation                        X               X           X       X
Comprehensive                                    X                  X
plan amendment
Development                                      X                  X
agreement
Planned use                       X               X                  X
development
Special use
permit or                         X               X           X        
revocation
Subdivision:                                                        
 Minor           X                                                  
 Major                           X               X                  X
Vacation of plat,                 X               X                   
alley or street
Variances         X                               X           X        
Zone ordinance                                   X                  X
amendment
Zoning district
boundary                          X               X           X       X
amendment
Other land use                                   X           X        
application
 
   C.   Planning And Zoning Commission Public Hearing:
      1.   Hearing Date: Within sixty (60) days of receipt of an application
certified as complete, or as reasonably appropriate consistent with staff or
consultant workloads, the commission public hearing shall be conducted.
Notwithstanding such certification, the commission may extend the time provided
for review and action by making a finding that additional materials and/or
information are required due to the complexity of the application or for other
reasons deemed appropriate.
      2.   Public Hearing:
         a.   The commission shall hear all persons interested in an
application at the duly noticed public hearing.
         b.   Written statements, mailed or hand delivered to city hall during
or in advance of the public hearing, shall be entered into the record of the
hearing.
         c.   The applicant shall offer competent evidence in support of the
application sufficient to enable the commission to consider the matter and to
make findings on the subject.
         d.   The applicant has the burden of providing all necessary and
relevant information and evidence in support of the application.
      3.   Commission Action:
         a.   After hearing the evidence and considering the application, the
commission shall make its decision or recommendation.
         b.   The commission shall report the facts upon which it based its
conclusion, the ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application,
the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain approval, and make
a decision or recommendation of approval or disapproval.
         c.   The commission shall make its findings and decision or
recommendations within thirty (30) days from the closing of the public hearing,
unless the commission determines that additional time is required to properly
evaluate the application.
      4.   Commission Transmittal: Upon the recommendations of approval or
disapproval by the commission, the application, together with a complete copy
of the commission's findings and decision or recommendations, shall be
transmitted to the council.
   D.   Council Action:
      1.   Public Hearing: Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the commission
recommendations, or as reasonably appropriate consistent with staff or
consultant workloads, the city shall decide whether or not they will hold a
public hearing.
         a.   A public hearing by the council is required for comprehensive
plan amendments and annexation proceedings if the commission recommends a
material change to the plan or annexation proposal after the public hearing and
does not hold a second public hearing or if the council makes a material change
in the recommendation or alternative options contained in the recommendation by
the commission.
         b.   A public hearing by the council is required if any person having
an interest in real property which may be affected by a special use permit or
variance permit may, at any time prior to final action by council, requests in
writing that a public hearing be held by council.
         c.   In all other cases, the decision to hold a public hearing is at
the discretion of council.
         d.   Unless otherwise required by the local land use planning act,
Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq., the public notice shall be made and the
hearing conducted in the same manner as before the commission.
      2.   Council Decision: Upon conclusion of its review, the council shall
take action on the application and adopt its findings of fact and conclusions
at the next regular scheduled meeting unless the council determines that
additional time is required to properly evaluate the application.
         a.   In its decision, the council shall base its findings upon record
and report of the commission and, if taken, testimony presented before it.
         b.   The council may adopt, modify with conditions, or reject the
recommendations of the commission; or remand the application to the commission
for additional proceedings and findings.
         c.   The council findings of fact and conclusions shall specify the
ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application, the reasons for
approval or denial, and the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to
obtain approval.
         d.   Written notice of the council's action shall be provided to the
applicant within ten (10) days of adoption of the findings of fact and
conclusions. (Ord. 447, 3-5-2013)
9-15-4: EXPIRATIONS OF APPROVALS:
   A.   Expiration: Approval of any application for annexation, variance,
subdivision or vacation shall expire one year from the date of approval unless:
      1.   The permitted activity is initiated on the site within one year of
approval,
      2.   A deed or other documents are filed with the county recorder's
office finalizing the approved activity, or
      3.   By condition of approval or development agreement, a time period for
completion of the application has been specified.
   B.   Expiration Date: The expiration date of the approval shall be stated on
the face of the permit or in the findings of fact and conclusions prepared by
the council.
   C.   Extension: An extension may be granted by the city council upon finding
that the application and/or applicable city regulations have not changed. Such
extension must be applied for in writing before the expiration date for the
original approval. (Ord. 447, 3-5-2013)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Authority And Jurisdiction
10-1-2: Application Of Regulations
10-1-3: Definitions
10-1-4: Subdivision Plan Approval Required
10-1-5: Subdivision Review And Approval Procedures
10-1-6: Plans And Specifications
10-1-7: Inspections
10-1-8: Conditions Of Subdivision
10-1-9: Penalties
10-1-1: AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION:
   A.   Authority: The requirements established by this title are authorized by
Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65  1 , which provides a process which is a
prerequisite to the filing of a subdivision plat when required by Idaho Code
title 50, chapter 13, or by Kootenai County ordinance.
   B.   Jurisdiction: The provisions of this title apply to the subdivision of
all land within the city. This title governs the design and improvement of
subdivision of land. It does not abrogate or otherwise modify any provisions of
Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, which governs requirements of subdivision
plats. In instances of potential conflict in application of this law and state
statute, the more stringent provision shall take priority. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed as a license to avoid filing of a subdivision plat
when otherwise required by state law. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-6513.
10-1-2: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of this title, a "subdivision" shall be defined as the
division of any tract of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts or
sites, for the purpose of sale, lease, establishing a regulated primary land
use or building development, whether immediate or future.
   B.   This title shall apply to both the division of a large tract of land
into multiple lots and the further division of any existing subdivision lot.
   C.   Any such division is hereby defined as a subdivision and shall proceed
only in compliance with this title and applicable state law.
   D.   The provisions of this title shall not apply to:
      1.   Divisions of land where the smallest tract is not less than twenty
(20) acres (gross area to include road rights of way).
      2.   Indefinite divisions of a tract of land made by testamentary
provision, the laws of descent or similar orders of partition entered by court
proceeding.
      3.   Divisions made for cemeteries or burial plots while used for that
purpose. This exemption is limited to exemption from internal improvement
requirements. No exemption is provided from boundary or exterior improvement
requirements necessary to provide services or access to or through a cemetery.
      4.   Divisions made for the purpose of lot line adjustments where no
additional building sites are created and where the resultant tracts comply
with zoning ordinance requirements 1 .
      5.   Mere recordation of legal descriptions, without actual conveyance of
the land described.
      6.   Any lot or lots forming a part of any subdivision created and
recorded prior to the effective date of this title.
   E.   Divisions of land which are the result of a conveyance which occurred
prior to the effective date of this title shill be governed by provisions of
the law which predated this title. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 9 of this code.
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the follow meanings:
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF SUBDIVISION: Any transfer of the land being subdivided
that involves two (2) or more lots or any of the land to be dedicated for
public use; any transfer or series of transfers totaling more than a twenty
five percent (25%) interest in a corporation, partnership or other entity
acting as a subdivider; or any transaction that purports to transfer
responsibility for compliance with this title regarding a certain subdivision
to another person or entity.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION: The division of land into more than four (4) lots or which
require dedication of rights of way.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: The division of a platted lot or divisions of one tract of
land into no more than four (4) parcels, all of which front upon an exiting
public road.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any contiguous ownership of into two (2) or more
lots, parcels, tracts or sites for the purpose of sale, offering for sale,
lease, building development or establishment of a primary land use, whether
immediate or future, inclusive of all redivisions of existing tracts of land or
subdivided lots and future divisions. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002)
10-1-4: SUBDIVISION PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED:
No person shall carry out actions which constitute the subdivision of land, as
defined by this title and/or state law, without first complying with the
provisions of this title and, when applicable, state platting law 1 ; nor shall
such actions contravene visions of the city zoning ordinance or any other
ordinance of the city relating to the subdivision or development of land,
adopted pursuant to authority granted by the local planning act. Failure to
comply shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with provisions of this
title. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-1301 et seq.
10-1-5: SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Any person seeking to subdivide land within the city shall
make application to the city clerk on forms provided by the city and pay all
applicable fees at the time of the application. The applicant shall be
responsible for providing names and addresses of property owners who must
receive notice pursuant to this title.
   B.   Minor Subdivisions: Proposals for minor subdivisions shall be heard by
the city council by way of an established comment period of at least fifteen
(15) days following confirmation of delivery, via return receipt mailing, of
notice to adjacent property owners. The proposed plat or record of survey must
be provided at least five (5) days prior to the notice period. No formal public
hearing shall be required in such matters unless ordered by the city council. A
record of survey prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer may be utilized in
circumstances where one lot or parcel is divided into two (2) parcels by a
straight boundary line.
   C.   Major Subdivisions:
      1.   Proposals for major subdivisions shall be approved only after public
hearing before the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning
commission shall schedule a public hearing on an application for a major
subdivision within sixty (60) days of the date of the application. Notice of
the hearing shall be published and provided to all property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the proposed subdivision no later than fifteen (15) days
in advance of the hearing. The proposed plat must be filed with the city clerk
no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The planning and
zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council to approve or
deny a major subdivision application after the public hearing is held. For
subdivisions of eight (8) or fewer lots, the city council need not hold a
public hearing. For subdivisions of nine (9) or more lots, the city council
shall conduct a public hearing utilizing the same notice procedures a set forth
above.
      2.   The city council may require major subdivisions to go through a two
(2) step procedure, first considering a preliminary plat and later considering
a final plat. Under such procedure, the planning and zoning commission will not
review the final plat nor will a public hearing be required when the final plat
is considered.
   D.   Action Taken: Final approval will not be granted until the city council
has approved all final plans for a subdivision. Upon receipt of a
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, the application shall
be put on the agenda for the next city council meeting. The city council may
approve the subdivision request, deny such request or approve the request with
conditions. The developer shall mitigate any negative impacts the development
may have on adjacent property or community services. If necessary, off site
improvements may be required to mitigate such impacts. The city shall require
bonding for public improvements not constructed and accepted prior to sale of
lots.
   E.   Changes After Final Approval: After approval of the plans for a
subdivision, any significant changes must be submitted to the planning and
zoning commission and the city council for reapproval.
   F.   Conditional Approval: Final approval of the preliminary plat or final
plat by the city council may be conditional, subject to applicable law and
zoning regulations, to ensure that the subdivision is compatible with adjacent
developments, adequate access is provided and services are provided. For major
subdivisions, a subdivision development agreement will provide, in writing, for
commitments made by the developer as well as by the city. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002)
10-1-6: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Plans must meet all specifications of the city ordinances and must be presented
to, and approved by, the city council before any work is done. Within ninety
(90) days of completion of construction, as built plans and inspection reports,
certified by a professional engineer, shall be provided to the city except
where a lesser period is stipulated by state law. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002)
10-1-7: INSPECTIONS:
The city engineer, or such other person as the city shall designate, shall
inspect the subdivision site and the subdivider and the subdivider's
contractors, subcontractors, employees and agents shall cooperate with such
inspections. City inspections shall be made as follows:
   A.   At the discretion of the city, upon twenty four (24) hours' notice to
the subdivider.
   B.   Before the covering of sewer, water or other buried utility
installations. Subdivider shall provide the city twenty four (24) hours' notice
before such installations are covered.
   C.   Upon completion of the subdivision or the completion of a phase of
public works construction that involves cessation of work for more than six (6)
months.
   D.   At reasonable times upon the request of the subdivider. (Ord. 381, 8-
29-2002)
10-1-8: CONDITIONS OF SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Expiration Of Subdivision Plan Approval: Subdivision plan approval
shall be effective for twelve (12) months. The subdivider may request an
extension of subdivision plan approval for one additional twelve (12) month
period by submitting the request, in writing, to the city council prior to the
scheduled expiration deadline.
   B.   Change Of Ownership:
      1.   Notice To City: Subdividers must give written notice to the city
upon a change in the ownership of the subdivision taking place after
application for subdivision approval.
      2.   Review: Upon any change in ownership of the subdivision taking place
after the approval of any aspect of the subdivision, the city may review that
approval to see if new circumstances arise with the change in ownership that
warrant withdrawal of approval or a change in the conditions of any conditional
approval. Upon good cause, the city may withdraw any approval or amend the
conditions of any conditional approval when a subdivision has changed ownership
after that approval.
   C.   Fees: The fees for preliminary subdivision plat and final subdivision
plat shall be set by resolution of the city council.
   All costs associated with providing public notice and hearings shall be
reimbursed to the city by the applicant.
   The city council is further authorized to adopt fees by resolution for
services associated with review and inspection of subdivision plan and
proposals. (Ord. 413, 9-6-2006)
10-1-9: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this title shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation exists may be considered a separate
offense, subject to the penalty as provided in the general penalty in section
1-3-1 of this code. In addition to the criminal penalties above, the city may
proceed against the violator in civil court for both prohibitive and mandatory
injunctions requiring the violator to conform to this title. In the event the
city prevails, the violator shall be responsible for all platting costs,
including a reasonable sum for attorney fees. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the city council or any other public official or private citizen from
taking such legal action as may be necessary to restrain or prevent any
violation of this title or of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 381, 8-29-2002; amd. 2004
Code)
 
