   HOLLISTER, IDAHO
   CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. -, passed 7-6-2020.
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/38e3e8607a50ade1e06e6e5a5cb08923b393b4b8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-354_511x331.jpg]
 
 
Ordinance #96-9-4 
 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING ZONING FOR THE CITY OF HOLLISTER;
PROVIDING FOR A SHORT TITLE; PROVIDING AUTHORITY, INTERPRETATION,
SCOPE, DEFINITIONS, USE DISTRICTS, AND NON-CONFORMING USES;
PROVIDING A ZONING MAP; REQUIRING BUILDING PERMITS AND -STREET
ACCESS; Providing A SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL, CITY OF HOLLISTER.
Section 1. Short Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited
as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hollister.”
Section 2. Authority. This Zoning Title is adopted pursuant to authority
granted by Title 67, Chapter 65 of the Idaho Code, and Article 12,    Section
2  of the Idaho Constitution, as amended or subsequently codified.
Section 3. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety and welfare, to remain and   enhance upon the
aesthetics of the community, to preserve and enhance land values,
to separate incompatible uses and to promote security within the community.
To protect the public, among other purposes, such provisions are intended
to provide for adequate light, safety from fire and other danger, and
undue concentration of populations.
Section 4. Scope. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions
of other laws or ordinance, except those specifically repealed
by this Ordinance, or with private restrictions placed upon
property by covenants running with the land to which the City is a party.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon
land, buildings or structure   than is imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
Section 5. Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have
the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(1)   "Accessory use or Buildings" is a subordinate use or building
customarily incident to and located on the same lot with the main use or
building.
 
(2)   ''Alley'' is any public space or thoroughfare twenty-five feet
(25') or less in width, but no less than fifteen feet (15’) in width which has
been dedicated or deeded to the public for public travel and which affords
secondary access to abutting property. Access through an alley to
property will not be considered legal access for purposes of fulfilling the
requirements of this ordinance.   
(3)   "Alterations" as applied ·to a building or structure, is a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit, facilities,
or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or in the moving from one location to another.
(4)   “Home Occupation” Any gainful operation, profession or craft which
is customarily incidental to carried on in a dwelling place
and wherein the use is clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and which occupation
is carried on only by the immediate members of the family
residing within dwelling place. Signage for the home occupation shall be
limited to two square feet and traffic will be minimal. The business
shall not ·create a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood in the form of
noise, odors, traffic generated or in any other manner.
(5)   "Junk Yard or Secondhand Sales" shall include any business in which used
goods are collected and sold for reuse even as a secondary business related to
the primary business on site. It shall consist of an outdoor
space where Junk, waste, discarded or salvaged material are stored or
handled, including automobile wrecking yards and yards for used building
materials and places or yards for storage of salvaged equipment, automobiles or
machinery.
(6)   "Manufactured Homes" means a structure, constructed according to the HUD/
FHA mobile home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or
more sections, which, in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in
width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site,
is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be use as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and include
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained
therein, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all with
the requirements of this   paragraph except the size requirements and
with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development and complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C.
5401 et seq.
 
(7)   "Mobile, Home" means a structure similar to a manufactured home, but
built to a state mobile home c9de which existed prior
to the Federal Manufactured Housing and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code).   
 
(8)   "Non-conforming use" A use of premises which does not conform to the
regulations of this Ordinance, but which was in existence
and conformance with the existing regulations at the effective date of the
Ordinance.
(9)   “Non-conforming building” A building, structure, or portion
threrof which does not conform to the regulations of this
Ordinance applicable to the zone or district in which such building
is situated, but which existed prior to and was in compliance with the existing
regulations as of the effective date of this ordinance.
(10)   " Dairy" shall mean the congregation of more than one animal unit per
acre on a single parcel of ground raised for the purpose of the production,
sale and distribution of milk, butter or cheeses.
Section 6. Use Districts. The City of Hollister, Idaho, is hereby divided
into three use districts which shall be known, in order of restrictiveness as:
 
 
1.   RA
2.   C
3.   I
Residential Agriculture Commercial Zone Industrial Zone
 
Zone
 
Section 7. Residential/Agriculture Zone - Designated Uses. The purpose of the
RA Zone is to have land area set aside by zoning procedures and in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan to preserve and enhance predominately single-family
living areas at a low-density standards with agricultural uses allowed.
(1)   The growing of all soi1 crops, including all farming, and all uses
incidental to the farming operation.
(2)   The raising of livestock and poultry under the following conditions:
It is unlawful to keep or maintain any horses, cows, sheep, goats, llamas, fowl
or any other animals in the city limits without first obtaining a permit from
the City Council, which permit shall be granted subject to the applicant
meeting the following specifications.
(A) To maintain or keep one cow or one horse or one sheep or one goat, the
applicant must have at least 10,000 square feet of pastureland, exclusive of
the homesite, for one animal and 5,000 square feet of pastureland for each
additional animal. Fences enclosing such animals must be so constructed so as
to prevent the animals from going upon the property of adjoining property
owners in any manner whatsoever.
(B) To maintain and keep fowl or rabbits, the application must have at least
5,000 square feet of real estate, exclusive of the homesite, for no more than
25 fowl or rabbits. In no event shall the fowl or poultry house, rabbit hut,
fowl, poultry or rabbit run be less than 40 feet from a dwelling other than
that of the applicant.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pigs or hogs within
the limits of the city.  
         D)   It is unlawful for any animal to be found running at large. The
owner, possessor or person who owns any animal found to be at large shall be in
violation of this provision. An animal shall be deemed to be  RUNNING AT LARGE 
when found on, off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper
thereof, or not under the immediate control of the owner, possessor or keeper
or his or her agent or servant or a member of his or her immediate family.
Also, an animal shall be deemed to be  RUNNING AT LARGE  when found upon the
private premises of others or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, highways,
vacant lots, schoolyards or other public places in the city. This provision
also applies to all fowl and/or rabbits. Other· Animals -
 maximum numbers shall be set by the Council or unless permitted to exceed this
amount by special permit.
Buildings housing horses and other usual farm animals shall not
be located closer than fifty feet (50') from any property line.
(3)   Single family dwelling, including manufactured home under the following
conditions:
a.   The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a
space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
b.   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and
backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is
located not more than twelve (12) inches above grade;
c.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, except
that no standards shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three (3)
feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width;
d, The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in
color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the
community or which is comparable to the
predominant materials used on surrounding dwelling as determined by the
local permit approval authority;
e.   Additions to a manufactured home shall be of compatible construction using
like materials.
f.   The manufactured home shall be no more than 10 years old
at the time of its installation.
(4)   Home Occupations
(5)   Churches or Parish Halls
(6)   Public Facilities such as Schools, City infrastructure, Parks and
Playgrounds.
Uses Requiring Special Use Permits:
A.   Farm Animals exceeding more than one animal unit per acre
B.   Temporary Residence placed during the construction of permanent residence,
not to exceed one year in duration
C.   Neighborhood commercial Uses
 
D.   More than one permanent residence on a platted or recorded lot E, Multi-
unit dwellings
It is desirable that in this zone the principal designated uses involving
structures, be serviced from public sewer facilities. However, since such
public facilities might not be reasonably available or feasible throughout the
zone then the minimum lot requirement will be controlled by the specific
requirements as stated on paragraph below or the requirements of the Health
Department, whichever is greater.
In this agricultural zone, no building or premises not
customarily incidental to agricultural pursuits, as herein noted, shall be
used, nor shall any building, structure or land usage be hereafter erected or
altered (unless otherwise provided in this chapter) except for one or more of
the above uses in accordance with the following standards.
1.   The lot per dwelling unit and for all uses in an RA zone
dependent on City water supply and individual septic disposal systems
in accordance with Idaho Department of Health standards for
subsurface sewage are to be used, lots shall not be less than one acre. Parcels
established prior to August 15, 2023 that meet the previous requirement of
12,500 square feet may possibly be allowed to build a dwelling unit pending
council approval. The site shall be shown to have sufficient space, complying
with the Health Department standards, for future construction of a replacement
sewage disposal system.
2.   Front yard. No building (not including uncovered porches or steps)
shall be constructed nearer than 25 feet from the front lot line.
3.   Rear yard. No dwelling shall be constructed nearer than· 15
feet from the rear  lot line.
4.   Side yard. No dwelling shall be constructed nearer than 15
feet from  the side lot line.
5.   Accessory use buildings. No building shall be constructed nearer than
5 feet from the side and rear lot line and 25 feet from front lot line.
6.   Manufactured Home. One occupied mobile home may be placed on a lot size of
one acre. Parcels created prior to August 15, 2023 that meet the previous
zoning requirement of (12,500 sq. ft.) may possibly be allowed one mobile home.
The mobile/manufacture home must be no more than 10 years old at the time of
installation.
7.   Clear view of Intersecting streets. In all zones which
require a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of three
(3)   feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within triangular
area, from the street property line, except for a reasonable number of trees
pruned high enough to permit unobstructed view.
8.   Sewage disposal. All domestic and commercial sewage
disposal facilities must be approved by the Health Department.
9.   Well water. Well water for domestic use to be drilled and supplied only by
the City of Hollister.
Section 8. Commercial Designated Uses. The purpose of this zone is to
provide for areas that will fulfill the need for travel
related services, retail sales and professional offices as well as neighborhood
commercial services throughout the area and
servicing the major highways or arterials catering both to local and travel-
related services. Neighborhood Commercial shall be defined to provided local
commercial service needs primarily located at selected places at the perimeter
of low-density residential neighborhoods. All commercial applications will be
required to provide an environmental assessment of the use upon the community.
A.   All commercial uses that are retail in nature, both highway related and
neighborhood commercial.
B.   Public Facilities such as schools, City infrastructure, Parks and
Playgrounds
Uses Requiring Special Use Permit:
A.   Wholesale Operations
B.   Residential Use directly related to the commercial use on
the property. Residential use for rental purposes, other than in a motel or RV
park in which the stay is limited, shall not be allowed.
C.   Churches and Parish Hall
D.   Junk Yards/Second Han? Sales
E.   Adult Book Stores
Section 9.   Industrial Designated Uses. The purpose of the Industrial
zone is to provide areas by zoning procedures and in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan which encourage suitable areas in which industrial uses
may locate, substantially free from residential, light industrial or retail
commercial activities.
The zone shall also provide for industrial park development areas to create,
preserve and enhance areas containing manufacturing and related
establishments within an open and attractive setting, typically appropriate in
locations near major thoroughfares,
freeways and other suitable places. All industrial development applications
will be required to provide an environmental assessment of the use upon the
community'.
A.   All industrial uses, including light and heavy industries,
manufacturing plants, processing plants and related uses.
B.   Wholesale commercial businesses
C.   Public Facilities
 
 
Section 10. Non-conforming
A.   Continuation of Lawful structure, or land existing ordinance may be
continued, with the provisions of this conditions are met:
uses.
 
use. The lawful use of any building, at the time of the enactment of this
although such use does not conform Ordinance, provided the following
 
 
 
1 .
the of a
Unsafe Structure, nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion
building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority.
 
2.   Restoration. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the
reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming
building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, or Acts of God,
subsequent to the date of this Ordinance, wherein the expense of such work does
not exceed 40 percent of the replacement value of the building or structure at
the time such damage occurred.
3.   Wear and tear. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the
reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding of a conforming building, structure or
part thereof existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, rendered
necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation.
4.   Unlawful use not authorized. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be
interpreted as authorization for or approval of the
continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation of zoning
regulation in effect at the time of the effective data of this Ordinance.
Section 11.  Establishment of Districts and Zoning Map.
A.   Use Districts Established. For the purposes of this
Ordinance the City of Hollister is hereby divided into Use Districts as
hereinafter provided.
B.   Maps and Boundaries. The boundaries of the Use Districts are
hereby established as shown on a map entitled the Zoning Map of the City of
Hollister.
C.   As much as possible zoning district boundaries shall fall at
the alleyway or back property line so that like uses will be
fac ·i  ng each other.
D.   Zoning across lot lines. If a lot which was platted or recorded prior to
the adoption date of this Ordinance is split by two different zones, the lot
shall be considered, in whole, zoned to that use in which a majority of the lot
is zoned.
 
Section 12. Zoning Permits. The followland use changes shall
require a written application to the Council, accompanied by
the listed fees;
1) Lot Line Adjustment/land division/             $500
subdivision
2) Special Use Permit                            $300
3) Change of Zoning Designation                    $500
4) Zoning Variance                                $500
5) Vacating of streets/alleys                     $500 plus $0.20 per square
                                                   foot of area being vacated
Section 13. Building Permits. No vacant· land and buildings hereafter erected
or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part nor shall
any owner or tenant of any land or building hereafter
change the use classification or enlarge the use in any building or on any
premises without a certificate of occupancy from the City Council. Reference
should be made to the City Code concerning Building, Electrical and Plumbing
Permit processes.
Section 14. Street Access. No lot shall be developed without
proper access to a public street. Should such street not be improved, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner of the property being developed
to improve the street to City standard:
1)   Must have a recorded plat or other document dedicating public right-of-
way.
2)   Must be constructed to City standards with an eight (8) inch
ballast surface, a four (4) inch gravel base and leveling course, graded and
compacted with a 24 foot wide all weather driving surface placed
in the center of the right-of-way with 12 feet on each center line. Drainage
pits on either side shall be of a 4:1 ratio slope and at least one and one-half
feet deep.
3)   Must be constructed with a turnaround of sixty (60) feet for emergency
equipment if longer than 150 feet.
A private road will be allowed for access under the fol1owing conditions:
1)   Must have a recorded, permanent perpetual easement and a
recorded maintenance agreement signed by  those served.
?)  Must exist entirely upon private property and not make use of public right-
of-way.
3)   Must be constructed with six (6), inch gravel base and leveling course,
graded and compacted with a twelve (12) foot wide all weather driving surface.
4)   Must be constructed with a turnaround of sixty (60) feet for
emergency equipment if longer than 150 feet.
5)   Must be extended to within one hundred and fifty feet of the most distant
corner of all inhabited buildings,
Section 15. Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance Changes Upon Annexation of
Unincorporated Area. Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the City
Council shall request and receive a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission on the proposed Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance changes for
the unincorporated area. The Commission and Council shall follow the notice and
hearing procedures provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code. Concurrently or
immediately following the adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the
Council shall amend the Plan and Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 1451, 12-13-77)
Section 16. Administrative Procedures. Upon receipt of a development
application the City Council shall follow the
notification and public hearing requirements specified in Title
67 of Idaho Code. All applications must be signed by the property owner in
question. It shall be the applicants responsibility to collect and turn into
the City of Hollister as part of his/her application the-names of
all property owners within 300 feet of the property
(excluding streets and alleys) if such notification is required.
Applications for variances to the code shall be considered when
they are not contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will
result in an unnecessary hardship because
of the physical characteristics of the site. A variance is a modification
of the requirements of this ordinance such as minimum lot size, width,
depth, setbacks affecting the size or shape of the structure or the pla6ememnt
of the structure upon lots, or the size of the lots. A variance shall not
be considered a right or privilege and will only be granted to the applicant if
hardship is proven and it is not in conflict with the public
interest.
Section 17. Separability. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid, or
unconstitutional by any court of competent Jurisdiction, such porti6n shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions threrof.
 
 
 
      (Amended 7-6-2020, 8-15-2023)
Table 1 - Land Use Schedule
CODE:
R/A = Residential/Agricultural Zone C - Commercial Zone   •
I=   Industiral Zone
P - Permitted Use
5 = Special Use Permit Required Blank Space means use not allowed
LAND USE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R/A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ZONE
 
C   I
 
 
 
AGRICULTURAL                                                       p p
Agricultural, general Roadside Stand                          P P p   p p
Farm Animals (1 unit per acre)                                     s
Farm Animals (rnor? units per acre)
RESIDENTIAL                                                        s
Single Family Dwelling                                         P   s       s s
Manufactured ?ome
H6me Occupations                                               P   s       s
Temporary Housing (Construction)
More than one Dwelling Per Lot                                 S
Duplexes/Triplexes                                             S
Apartment Houses                                               S
Manufactured Horne Park                                       S
COMMERCIAL
Adult Book Store Amusement Centers, indoor Auto Sales/Repair              
Bakery Bank                                                        s        
Barber/Beauty Shop Bar                                         s s p p      
Building Supply Outlet Car Wash   •                     s   p        
Child Care Facility Dance Studio Dairies                       s s p p      
Drive In Restaurant Drug Store                                     p p     s
Dry Cleaner                                                        p       s
Equipment rental/sales
Feed  Lots
 
p
S   s
 
 
P S
 
 
 
 
p p p p p
 
p p
Food Store
 
Gift Shop   p
 
 
 
Hotel/Motel   p
s
Junk Yard/Second Hand Sales   s   s
Medical/Dental   p
s
Laundromat   s   p
Nursery   s   p
Office, Professional   p
Recreational Vehicle Park   p
Restaurant   s   p
Retail Stores/ services   p
Service Station   s   p
Theater   p
Wholesale Operations   s   p
 
 
PUBLIC/ SEMI-PUBLIC
Churches or Parish Halls Public Facilities
INDUSTRIAL
Light Industrias Heavy Industries Manufacturing Plants Processing Plants
p   s   s
p   p   p
 
p p p p
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Maintenance of city code
   
10.05   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.06   Public utility ordinances
   
10.07   Saving clause
   
10.08   General constructional rule
   
10.09   Plural and singular words
   
10.10   Masculine and feminine gender
   
10.11   Priority of ordinance
   
10.12   Definitions
   
10.13   Captions
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   This codification of the general ordinances of the City of Hollister is
declared to be the official City Code of the City of Hollister.
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   Any official copy of the code shall be received without further proof in all
courts and in all administrative tribunals of the state.
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending the code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended. All such ordinances
shall comply with the provisions of the code and Idaho Code Title 50, Ch. 9,
regarding passage, execution and publication of ordinances. All such amendments
shall be promptly forwarded to the codifiers by the City Clerk and such
ordinance shall be promptly published and inserted in its proper place in each
copy of the city code.
§ 10.04 MAINTENANCE OF CITY CODE.
   Upon receipt of each published ordinance from the codifiers, the City Clerk
shall promptly forward a copy of each page thereof to each person having an
official copy of the city code. The City Clerk may collect a fee for each copy
of the city code and an annual fee for maintenance thereof; provided, such fees
shall be established by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the City
Council.
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city are hereby repealed, except as herein
specifically preserved or are, by implication, reserved from repeal, subject to
the saving clauses herein contained, excluding without limitation the special
ordinances relating to the following subjects: tax levies; appropriation of
public moneys; boundaries and annexations; franchises; ordinances granting
special rights to persons or correspondence; contracts; issuance of warrants;
public salaries; ordinances establishing name or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement districts; bonds; local elections; the sale or
exchange of real estate; sign ordinances; economic development; urban renewal;
public utilities; zoning; and all special ordinances of any kind, except for
those provisions in such special ordinances which the code expressly amends.
§ 10.06 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance or section thereof relating to railroad or railroad crossings
of streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service
or rates of public utilities, shall be repealed by the adoption of the code or
by §
10.05 of this chapter, except as this code specifically provides for such
repeal.
§ 10.07 SAVING CLAUSE.
   Any ordinance amending or repealing any section of the code shall not be
deemed or construed to abate any pending action based upon such amended or
repealed section, nor shall the passage of such ordinance prevent the arrest,
prosecution and punishment of any violation of such section committed prior to
the effective date of such ordinance.
§ 10.08 GENERAL CONSTRUCTIONAL RULE.
   Except as expressly stated in the code, all words shall have their ordinary,
generally accepted meaning.
§ 10.09 PLURAL AND SINGULAR WORDS.
   Whenever any word in the code is used in either the singular or in the
plural form, then such word shall be deemed to include both the plural and
singular forms of such word, unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.
§ 10.10 MASCULINE AND FEMININE GENDER.
   When any person is referred to in any section of the code by use of the
masculine gender, then such reference shall be deemed to include the feminine
gender unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.
§ 10.11 PRIORITY OF ORDINANCE.
   In the event of any discrepancy or conflict between the code and any
ordinance passing or amending the same section of the code, then the provisions
of the ordinance shall prevail.
§ 10.12 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY. The City of Hollister, Twin Falls County, State of Idaho.
   CITY ATTORNEY. An attorney appointed by the Mayor to provide general counsel
and legal assistance to the city and to prosecute or defend all civil actions
in which the city is a party.
   COUNCIL. The lawfully elected City Council of Hollister, Idaho.
   COUNTY. The County of Twin Falls, Idaho.
   CRIME. An act in violation of this code.
   FELONY. A crime as defined under Idaho Code § 18-111.
   INFRACTION. A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is
punishable only by a penalty not exceeding $100 and for which no incarceration
may be imposed.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, trade,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Every crime, except a felony.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. A crime or other violation of this code.
   OPERATOR. The person who is generally in charge of or responsible for
conducting any business, profession or enterprise.
   OWNER. Any person owning real or personal property, including any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, remainderman or person
holding a life estate or reversionary interest of any kind.
   PERSON. A human being and any public or private corporation, firm,
partnership, trust, estate, sole proprietorship, association, organization,
government or any other entity recognized under state law.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Money, goods, chattels, effects, rights in action and all
written instruments evidencing any pecuniary obligation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STATE. The State of Idaho.
   STREET. All public roads, ways, alleys and rights-of-way used for the
movement of vehicular traffic, including any public sidewalks adjacent thereto.
   TENANT. Any person who occupies any building or real property for a
consideration to the owner.
§ 10.13 CAPTIONS.
   The captions and titles used at the commencement of each section or division
of the code are used only to indicate the content of the section and shall not
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions thereafter.
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor penalty. Whenever any act or omission constitutes a crime
not constituting a felony or infraction and no specific penalty is stated in
the code, such crime shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 or by
imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment for any single violation.
   (B)   Infractions. Whenever any person commits an infraction and no specific
penalty is provided for such act, such person shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $100 and no imprisonment may be imposed.
   (C)   Applicability of penalty. The penalties provided in this section shall
be applied as though they were a part of every separate section of the code.
   (D)   Multiple violations. Whenever the same person violates the same
section of the code on two or more days, then each violation on each day shall
be deemed a separate offense and shall be separately punishable for each such
offense.
   (E)   Prosecutorial discretion. Whenever the same offense, act or omission
is punishable under different sections of the code, the city may elect under
which section to proceed; but no more than one sentence of imprisonment may be
imposed against the same person for the same offense; provided that, revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a penalty so as to bar
imposition of a penalty under the code.
   (F)   Penalty against officers. The penalty provisions of this section shall
not apply to any section of the code which designates the duties of any officer
or employee of the city unless the intention to impose a fine or penalty is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
31.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Salaries and compensation
Meetings
   
30.15   Time and place of meetings
   
30.16   Holidays observed
   
30.17   Quorum
   
30.18   Order of business
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.
   Commencing 10-1-2018, the salaries of the Mayor and the members of the City
Council shall be as follows.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall receive a monthly salary of $500, in the sum of
$6,000 per year.
      (2)   In addition, the Mayor shall be paid a mileage reimbursement
according to the federal mileage rates, to be paid monthly.
   (B)   (1)   Each member of the Council shall receive an annual salary in an
amount equal to 100% of the cost charged by the city to individual residents
for water, garbage and one container. Said salary shall be paid to members of
Council on a monthly basis.
      (2)   In addition, each member will be paid a mileage reimbursement
according to federal mileage rates, to be paid monthly.
(Ord. 09/04/2018, passed 9-4-2018)
MEETINGS
§ 30.15 TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.
   The Mayor and Council shall hold their regular meetings on the first Monday
of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Hollister Grange Hall and the planning
meeting will be held on the third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the
Hollister City Hall. Said Mayor may from time to time designate such other
hour. However, should said meeting days fall on holidays, then such meetings
shall take place on the next business day following the holiday. The Mayor or
any three members of the Council shall have power to call special meetings of
the city, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing and
the call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon
the journal by the Clerk.
(Ord. 10-19-15, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 30.16 HOLIDAYS OBSERVED.
   The city shall observe the following holidays: New Year’s Day; Martin Luther
King Jr. Day; President’s Day; Easter; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor
Day; Thanksgiving; Christmas Day; and New Year’s Eve.
(Ord. 10-19-15, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 30.17 QUORUM.
   At all meetings, a majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(Ord. 10-19-15, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 30.18 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The order of business shall be as follows:
   (A)   Call to order;
   (B)   Pledge of Allegiance;
   (C)   City Administrator reports;
   (D)   Department head reports;
   (E)   Old business;
   (F)   New business;
   (G)   City Council discussion and possible action items;
   (H)   Public comments;
   (I)   Executive session; and
   (J)   Adjournment.
(Ord. 10-19-15, passed 10-19-2015)
CHAPTER 31: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Petty Cash Transactions
   
31.01   Scope
   
31.02   Uses; maximum amount; receipts and reports
   
31.03   Definitions
   
31.04   Deviations
   
31.05   Amendments
PETTY CASH TRANSACTIONS
§ 31.01 SCOPE.
   This subchapter specifies the maintenance and accounting procedures for
petty cash and petty cash transactions.
(Res. 08-17-15, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 31.02 USES; MAXIMUM AMOUNT; RECEIPTS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The Petty Cash Fund is not limited to the Maintenance Department and
is to be used for miscellaneous city-related items under $100, approved by the
Mayor.
   (B)   Maximum petty cash funds available in the account shall not exceed
$2,500. On a periodic/ monthly basis, the Petty Cash Fund should be balanced
and replenished by check to the original established amount.
   (C)   Receipts and supportive documentation shall be retained on file for
all petty cash transactions. For example, these could include postage receipts,
cash register receipts or other documentation to explain the petty cash item
that was purchased or paid for.
   (D)   A petty cash financial report shall be provided and included with the
monthly financial reports for City Council meetings, upon request by the
Council.
   (E)   All checks will need two signatures: Mayor and City Clerk.
(Res. 08-17-15, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 31.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise defined in this subchapter, terms defined in the
declaration shall have the same meaning herein.
(Res. 08-17-15, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 31.04 DEVIATIONS.
   The Council may deviate from the procedures set forth in this subchapter if,
in its sole discretion, such deviation is reasonable under the circumstances.
(Res. 08-17-15, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 31.05 AMENDMENTS.
   This subchapter may be amended from time to time by the City Council.
(Res. 08-17-15, passed 8-17-2015)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Water rates
   
50.02   Sanitation rates
   
50.03   Administrative fees; past due account procedures
§ 50.01 WATER RATES.
   Water rates to be established at:
 
Cattle tanks      $100 per month when meter is running or cattle are in
                  pasture, 6,000 gallons
Commercial        $120, includes 20,000 gallons
Meter fee         $100
Overages          $8 per 1,000 gallons
Residential       $39, includes 10,000 gallons
Water hook-up fee $500, plus parts and labor
 
(Res. 09-04-18, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 50.02 SANITATION RATES.
   Sanitation rates to be established at:
 
1 supplied garbage can $12
Each additional can    $12
 
(Res. 09-04-18, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 50.03 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; PAST DUE ACCOUNT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The water deposit shall be $100. The deposit will be returned upon the
account closing. Any unpaid balance will be subtracted from the deposit.
   (B)   Payments are due on the tenth of the month and are considered late on
the eleventh.
   (C)   If payment has not been received on or before the tenth, a $10 late
fee will be assessed.
   (D)   Accounts that are not current by the eleventh will receive a
disconnection notice and water will be turned off on the fifteenth. A $35
reconnection fee will be charged to accounts whose meters have been turned off
and will be payable prior to reactivation.
   (E)   Checks returned for “insufficient funds” will be charged a $35
processing fee.
(Res. 09-04-18, passed 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 51: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
   
51.01   Purpose; scope
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Nuisance; protecting water supply
   
51.04   Connection and disconnection of service
   
51.05   Backflow prevention devices
   
51.06   Inspections
   
51.07   Sprinkler systems
   
51.08   Enforcement; remedies
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health of water
consumers by the control of actual and potential cross-connections.
   (B)   Rules and regulations of the state’s Department of Environmental
Quality pertaining to public water supplies have specific provisions to control
cross-connections in public water systems. For the purpose of protecting the
health of consumers receiving water from the city, it is considered that the
requirements established by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality in
rules for public drinking water systems.
   (C)   This chapter is adopted for the benefit of public health to water
users receiving their water supply from the city by protecting the public water
system from actual or potential contamination.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BACK PRESSURE BACKFLOW. The backflow of a higher pressure non-potable
water supply into a lower pressure potable supply.
      BACK SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. Backflow of a non-potable supply into a potable
water supply that is a result of negative or reduced pressure.
      BACKFLOW. The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any
foreign liquids, gases or substances into the city public water supply
distribution system.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device to counteract back pressure or to
prevent back siphonage.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply
is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other
device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste
or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of contaminating
the public water supply system of the city as a result of backflow.
   (B)   All definitions contained in state rules for public drinking water
systems, IDAPA 58.01.08, as the same may hereafter be revised or amended, shall
be considered as definitions within the meaning of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 51.03 NUISANCE; PROTECTING WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   No water service connection from the city water system to any premises
shall be installed or maintained unless the city water supply is protected, as
determined to be necessary by backflow prevention devices as required by rules
and regulations of the state’s Department of Environmental Quality, the state
rules for public drinking water systems and/or the AWWA PNS Cross-Connection
and Control Manual and by this chapter.
   (B)   The installation or maintenance of a cross-connection which will
endanger the water quality of the city water supply system is prohibited.
   (C)   Any such cross-connection now existing or hereafter installed is
hereby declared a nuisance and shall be abated.
   (D)   The control and/or elimination of cross-connection with the
distribution system of the city shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the state’s Department of Environmental Quality and the city.
   (E)   The City Council may establish requirements of cross-connection
control within the city more stringent than state regulations.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 CONNECTION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   Service to any property, landowner or water user receiving his, her or its
water supply from the city water system shall be contingent upon compliance
with all requirements of the rules and regulations of the state’s Department of
Environmental Quality and of this chapter pertaining to cross-connections.
Service shall be discontinued to any premises, water user or property owner for
failure to comply with such regulations. Discontinued service will not be
reestablished until the city has approved compliance by that particular
premises, water user or landowner with such requirements of the rules and
regulations of the state’s Department of Environmental Quality and of this
chapter pertaining to cross-connections.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 51.05 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   Required. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed where, in the
judgment of the city, the nature and extent of activities or the materials
stored on the premises would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to
health and/or be deleterious to the quality of the water should a cross-
connection occur even though such cross-connection does not exist at the time.
Backflow prevention devices shall be installed under circumstances including,
but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply;
      (2)   Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impossible to ascertain
whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (3)   Premises where entry is restricted or denied;
      (4)   Premises having a history of cross-connections being established or
reestablished;
      (5)   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply or where a cross-connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters;
      (6)   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
in such a way that, if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard
might result; and
      (7)   Other premises, as specified by the city, where backflow prevention
devices are required to protect the public water supply.
   (B)   Type of protective device. The AWWA PNWS Cross-Connection Control
Manual, as it now exists or is hereafter amended, is adopted by the city by
reference and shall be followed in determining the type and installation of
cross-connection control devices. A copy of the current manual being used by
the city shall be kept at the City Clerk’s office at City Hall.
   (C)   Place of installation. Backflow prevention devices required by this
chapter shall be installed at the property line of the premises or at a
location designated by the city. The device shall be located so as to be
readily accessible for maintenance and testing and where no part of the device
can become submerged.
   (D)   Installation. Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter
shall be installed under the supervision of, and with the approval of, the
city. Only backflow prevention devices approved by the American Association of
Sanitary Engineers (AASE), International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials (IAPMO) and the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) will be allowed.
   (E)   Inspection and testing. Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant
to this chapter, except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be inspected and
tested annually, or more often if necessary, by a state-certified backflow
prevention device tester. Inspections, tests and maintenance shall be at the
owner’s expense. Whenever the devices are found to be defective, they shall be
repaired, overhauled or replaced at the owner’s expense. Annual test results
and records of supporting data, or copies thereof, must be filed with the
city’s Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 51.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Required prior to occupancy. No water shall be delivered to any
structure hereafter built within the city or within areas served by city water
until the same has been inspected for possible cross- connections and been
approved as being free of same by the Department of Public Works. The Building
Inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit without the Department of Public
Works’ inspection having been completed. Upon completion of such inspection by
the Department of Public Works, notification will be given to the Building
Inspector.
   (B)   Periodic inspections. Inspection shall be made periodically by the
city of all buildings, structures or improvements of any nature receiving water
through the city system for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross-
connections exist.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Permit required. No underground sprinkling device will be installed
without a sprinkler installation permit issued by the city water master. The
city water master will have final design approval of all new sprinkler system
installations. No sprinkling system will be installed without a sprinkler
installation permit and without adequate backflow prevention device(s) located
at the point from which the water for irrigation is taken from the public water
supply. The application for a sprinkler installation permit shall be obtained
from the City Clerk’s office.
   (B)   Inspection of design plan. Upon receipt of the application, the city
water master will inspect the design, order such changes as may be required to
comply with this chapter and issue a sprinkler installation permit once the
sprinkler system as built complies with this chapter.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 ENFORCEMENT; REMEDIES.
   (A)   For the purposes of carrying out this chapter, the city shall be
authorized to inspect all premises receiving water service from the water
supply system of the city, as the city determines to be necessary, in order to
exercise effective cross-connection control.
   (B)   In the event an improper cross-connection is not corrected within the
time limit set by the city, or in the event the city employee authorized is
refused access to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not
cross-connections exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until
the deficiency is corrected to the satisfaction of the city. In addition, the
city may affect the necessary repairs or modifications at the property owner’s
expense and refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof
shall have been paid.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violators of this chapter shall be liable to the city for all costs
and expenses of remediation of the city public water system caused by such
violation. Such costs must be paid to the city before city water will be
supplied to such violator.
   (B)   (1)   Misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to
be a misdemeanor. The violator, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each 24-hour period the violation exists is a
separate violation.
      (2)   Civil action.
         (a)   Whenever it appears to the City Council that any person has
engaged or is about to engage in any act or practice violating any provisions
of this chapter, the City Council may institute a civil action in the district
court to enforce compliance with this chapter. Upon a showing that a person has
engaged or is about to engage in an act or practice constituting a violation of
this chapter, a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order or other
such relief as the court deems appropriate may be granted. The City Council
shall not be required to furnish any bond in said civil processing.
         (b)   The city may file a civil suit to collect all expenses and costs
and attorney fees the city incurred as a result of a violation of this chapter
which were not paid within ten days after billing the same to the violator.
         (c)   The city shall be entitled to costs and reasonable attorney fees
on any suits brought to enforce this chapter or collect fees due the city.
(Ord. 05-18-15, passed 5-18-2015)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
   
70.01   Oversized vehicles
   
70.02   Speed limits
   
70.03   No parking areas
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 OVERSIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   All vehicles or combination of vehicles, other than school buses,
having a gross weight of greater than 16,000 pounds shall not operate within
the city without first obtaining a permit.
   (B)   The city or its designee shall have the authority to impose special or
seasonal weight limits.
(Ord. 02-11-2015, passed 2-16-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   A maximum speed limit of 25 mph for motor vehicles traveling upon the
following streets or portions of the streets, including any future development
or addition of new streets, within the city is hereby established:
      (1)   Main Street;
      (2)   Idaho Avenue;
      (3)   Oakley Avenue;
      (4)   Bliss Avenue;
      (5)   Wendell Avenue;
      (6)   Jerome Avenue;
      (7)   Salmon Avenue;
      (8)   Nevada Avenue; and
      (9)   Western Avenue.
   (B)   This section became effective on 11-3-2014.
(Ord. 10-28-2014, passed 11-3-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 NO PARKING AREAS.
   The intersection of U.S. Hwy. 93 and Main Street and 200 feet north and
south along U.S. Hwy. 93 from said intersection is hereby designated as a “no
parking area” on both sides of U.S. Hwy. 93.
(Res. 11-25-2014, passed 12-1-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any owner or operator who is in violation of any of the provisions of
§
70.01 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to the following schedule:
 
Pounds Overweight Fine
Up to 1,000       $25
1,001 to 2,000    $0.03 per pound overweight
2,001 to 5,000    $0.05 per pound overweight
5,001 to 7,500    $0.07 per pound overweight
7,501 or more     $0.10 per pound overweight
 
   (C)   A violation of §
70.02 of this chapter shall be an infraction within the meaning of Idaho Code
Title 49, Ch. 15.
(Ord. 10-28-2014, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 02-11-2015, passed 2-16-2015)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
Livestock
   
90.01   Application
   
90.02   Keeping livestock; permit requirements
   
90.03   Revocation of permit; inspections; hearing
Dogs
   
90.15   Definitions
   
90.16   Enforcement
   
90.17   Licensing, registration, fees and tags
   
90.18   Harboring more than four dogs
   
90.19   Vicious animals
   
90.20   Running at large prohibited
   
90.21   Cruelty to animals
   
90.22   Poisoning prohibited
 
   
90.99   Penalty
LIVESTOCK
§ 90.01 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all animals and poultry now within the city
and to those subsequently brought into the city.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.02 KEEPING LIVESTOCK; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful to keep or maintain any horses, cows, sheep, goats, llamas,
fowl or any other animals in the city limits without first obtaining a permit
from the City Council, which permit shall be granted subject to the applicant
meeting the following specifications.
   (A)   To maintain or keep one cow or one horse or one sheep or one goat, the
applicant must have at least 10,000 square feet of pastureland, exclusive of
the homesite, for one animal and 5,000 square feet of pastureland for each
additional animal. Fences enclosing such animals must be so constructed so as
to prevent the animals from going upon the property of adjoining property
owners in any manner whatsoever.
   (B)   To maintain and keep fowl or rabbits, the application must have at
least 5,000 square feet of real estate, exclusive of the homesite, for no more
than 25 fowl or rabbits. In no event shall the fowl or poultry house, rabbit
hut, fowl, poultry or rabbit run be less than 40 feet from a dwelling other
than that of the applicant.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pigs or hogs
within the limits of the city.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any animal to be found running at large. The owner,
possessor or person who owns any animal found to be at large shall be in
violation of this provision. An animal shall be deemed to be RUNNING AT LARGE
when found on, off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper
thereof, or not under the immediate control of the owner, possessor or keeper
or his or her agent or servant or a member of his or her immediate family.
Also, an animal shall be deemed to be RUNNING AT LARGE when found upon the
private premises of others or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, highways,
vacant lots, schoolyards or other public places in the city. This provision
also applies to all fowl and/or rabbits.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 7-6-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; INSPECTIONS; HEARING.
   (A)   Evidence of non-compliance. The code officer shall recommend to the
City Council the revocation of any permit upon evidence that any of the
conditions set forth in this subchapter as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
permit have been violated or that the permit was issued upon fraudulent or
untrue representations, or that the person holding the permit has violated any
of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Petition of adjacent residents. The code officer shall recommend to
the City Council the revocation of any permit when 50% of the owners or
residents of the property abutting upon the premises where any of the said
animals are being kept or maintained file a petition for such revocation.
   (C)   Premises open to inspection. All places and premises upon which any of
said animals are kept or housed shall always be open for inspection by the
city. If, upon inspection, there is found to exist any violation of any
provision of this subchapter, the city shall give the person responsible for
such violation a written notice specifying the violation and requiring such
offender to abate or correct the same within a period of 24 hours. If such
violation is not abated or corrected within such period, the city shall
recommend to the City Council that the permit of such person be revoked.
   (D)   Hearing on revocation. When the code officer has recommended to the
City Council that the permit be revoked, the City Council shall notify the
permittee by registered or certified mail to appear before the City Council and
be heard upon the recommendations of the city. The notice must be sent within
48 hours of the recommendation and the hearing held within 15 days of the
recommendation. At the hearing, if it shall appear to the City Council that
cause exists for cancellation of such permit, the permit may be revoked without
further process of law.
(Ord. passed - -)
DOGS
§ 90.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Any dog which is not confined within a fenced or completely
enclosed area or on a chain or leash.
   DOG. Any male, female, spayed female or neutered male dog of any age.
   DOG KENNEL. Premises where more than four dogs, over six months of age, are
raised, kept, housed or boarded.
   DOG OF LICENSING AGE. Any dog which has attained the age of six months.
   HOUSEHOLD or PREMISES OF A HOUSEHOLD. A dwelling place designed and normally
used for and by a traditional single-family unit such as a husband, wife and
child/children or the like, and includes, but is not limited to, separate
single-family structures, individual apartments, mobile homes, RVs and the
like. The fact that a unit may be occupied by multiple, adult, unrelated
persons shall not affect the definition or limitations of use and numbers of
animals allowed by this subchapter.
   IMPOUNDED. Having been received into the custody of the Animal Control
Officer, Police Department, Code Enforcement Officer or any authorized agent or
representative thereof.
   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog.
   POUND. An animal shelter, lot, premises or buildings maintained by the city
for the confinement and care of dogs seized either under the provisions of this
subchapter or otherwise.
   UNLICENSED DOG. A dog for which the license for the current year has not
been paid or to which the tag provided for in this subchapter is not attached.
   VICIOUS DOG. A dog that has bitten, clawed or otherwise harmed, or
constitutes a physical threat, or a dog whose temperament or habits endanger or
menace any person or other animal without provocation by such person or animal.
This term shall not include a dog that bites, attacks or menaces a person or
other animal that has tormented or injured the dog.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 7-6-2020)
§ 90.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority and duties. The person designated by the City Council to act
as Animal Control Officer and the city officials shall have the following
duties:
      (1)   To enforce all provisions of this subchapter and any amendment
thereof and all ordinances enacted relating to dogs;
      (2)   To enforce licensing and control of dogs in the city;
      (3)   To file complaints against any person failing to license any dog as
provided or who otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter; and
      (4)   To capture dogs found running at large.
   (B)   Right of entry. In the enforcement of any provisions of this
subchapter, the Animal Control Officer or any city official is authorized to
enter the premises of any person to take possession of a licensed or
unlicensed, at large, dangerous or vicious dog when in fresh pursuit of such
dog at the time the dog goes onto private property.
   (C)   Interference with enforcement. It is unlawful for any person to
interfere with, molest, hinder or prevent the Animal Control Officer or city
official in the discharge of their duties as prescribed in this subchapter or
to violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 LICENSING, REGISTRATION, FEES AND TAGS.
   (A)   License and registration required.
      (1)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored or maintained by
any person in the city shall be licensed and registered.
      (2)   All dogs under the age of six months kept, harbored or maintained
by any person in the city and found to be at large, and impounded will be
required to be licensed and registered at the time the impound fees are paid in
order to be released back to the owner.
      (3)   Payment of the license fee shall be made to the City Clerk. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk and/or city official upon payment of
a license fee.
      (4)   All dog owners within the city shall renew their current dog
licenses on or before January 1 of each year. The owner shall state at the time
application is made for such license, his or her name, address, phone number
and the sex, breed and color of each dog owned or kept by the resident.
      (5)   The license fee shall cover the period of one year (12 months)
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31.
      (6)   Dogs used as guides or assistants for blind persons or other
handicapped persons shall be licensed and registered as other dogs provided for
in this subchapter.
   (B)   License fees.
      (1)   Annually, no later than January 1, the owner of the dog shall pay a
license fee of $5 for each dog.
      (2)   The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or any dog
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and official
metal registration tag for such dog within ten days after such acquisition or
age attainment. A new resident of the city who owns a dog of licensing age
shall make and apply for a license within ten days of moving into the city.
   (C)   License tags; issuance and removal.
      (1)   Upon payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall issue to the
owner a certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed.
      (2)   The tag shall have stamped thereon identifying information and the
license number corresponding with the tag number of the certificate.
      (3)   Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar or
harness to which the license tag shall be affixed and shall see that the collar
and the tag are constantly worn.
      (4)   Replacement dog tags shall be issued upon payment of $2.50 for each
tag so issued to replace the original tag that was lost or destroyed.
      (5)   Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason whatsoever.
      (6)   The original certificate shall be retained by the owner or harborer
of the licensed dog for inspection by the Animal Control Officer or city
official.
      (7)   No person shall remove or cause to be removed the collar or
metallic tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner, keeper or
harborer thereof.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 7-6-2020) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 HARBORING MORE THAN FOUR DOGS.
   (A)   Keeping in kennel. It is unlawful for any household to harbor or keep
within the city more than four dogs or any lost or strayed dog.
   (B)   Notify city officials of strayed dog. Whenever any dog is found which
appears to be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the
Animal Control Officer or city officials. The Animal Control Officer or
officials of the city shall impound the dog and dispose of the same as provided
in this subchapter for the disposition of a dog impounded for running at large
contrary to the terms of this subchapter. If there is attached to the dog a
license tag for the then current year, the Animal Control Officer or official
shall notify the person to whom the license was issued, at the address given in
the license.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Secure enclosure. Persons owning or having custody or control of any
dog or other animal that is vicious or dangerous shall keep such animal in a
secure enclosure from which the animal cannot escape and for which exit and
entry is controlled by the owner of the premises or owner of the animal.
   (B)   Running at large prohibited; right to kill vicious dog. No vicious or
dangerous dog or other animal shall run at large on private or public property
in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person off of said
premises or of any person lawfully entering such premises. Any vicious dog
removed from the secure enclosure must be restrained by a chain sufficient to
control the vicious dog. Any city official or Animal Control Officer may kill
any animal they find to be immediately threatening the safety of or endangering
the life or limb of any person, whether said animal is licensed or not.
   (C)   Dog rushing at person. Any owner or keeper of a dog that rushes at any
person on a public right-of-way or lawfully on any property, public or private,
or any postal, utility or city employee during the course of his or her
employment, or any cyclist or motor vehicle, shall keep such dog confined or
tethered in such a manner as to prevent such action by said dog.
   (D)   Offense of having custody of vicious dog. In any case where a person
has been charged or cited with the offense of owning or having custody of a
vicious or dangerous dog or other animal pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter, the City Clerk may file a motion requesting destruction of the
animal prior to a final adjudication of the criminal charges. The animal shall
remain confined at the animal shelter or pound pending a final decision on the
motion. The court may order the destruction of the animal upon making a finding
that the animal is “vicious”, as defined in this subchapter, and that it poses
a danger to the public if allowed to be released from confinement.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any dog to be found running at large.
The owner, possessor or person who keeps any dog found to be at large shall be
in violation of this provision.
   (B)   Description of running at large.
      (1)   A dog shall be deemed to be RUNNING AT LARGE when found on, off or
away from the premises of the owner, possessor or keeper thereof, or not under
the immediate control of the owner, possessor or keeper or his or her agent or
servant or a member of his or her immediate family, either by leash, cord,
chain or otherwise.
      (2)   Also, a dog shall be deemed to be RUNNING AT LARGE when found upon
the private premises of others or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks,
highways, vacant lots, schoolyards or other public places in the city.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to maltreat or torture any dog or, having the
right or authority to kill any dog, to kill such dog in an inhumane manner.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
 
§ 90.22 POISONING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously administer or
cause to be administered poison of any sort whatsoever to any animal, the
property of another, with the intent to injure or destroy such dog, or to
willfully or maliciously place any poison or poisoned food where the same is
accessible to any such animal.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of §
90.02 of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and menace. Violation of the
provisions of §
90.02 of this chapter shall be further punishable by a fine of $50, plus court
costs for a first offense, a fine of $100, plus court costs, for a second
offense and a fine of $200, plus court costs, for each subsequent offense
beyond the second.
   (C)   Violation of §
90.16(C) of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $150, plus court
costs.
   (D)   Violation of the provisions of §
90.17 of this chapter is punishable by a fine of $50 per violation, in addition
to court costs and the cost of the license.
   (E)   Violation of §
90.18(A) of this chapter is punishable by a fine of $100 per violation, in
addition to court costs.
   (F)   Violation of §
90.19 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $100, plus court costs,
for a first offense, a fine of $250, plus court costs, for a second offense and
a fine of $500, plus court costs, for each subsequent offense beyond the
second. If a dog or other animal has been found to have violated the terms of §
90.19 of this chapter two separate times, the dog or other animal shall be
deemed a nuisance and may be destroyed in a humane manner, in addition to any
other penalty imposed on the owner.
   (G)   Violation of the provisions of §
90.20 of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and menace to the public
health and safety, and the dog or dogs shall be taken up and impounded as
provided in §§
90.15 through
90.22 of this chapter. Violation of the provisions of §
90.20 of this chapter shall be further punishable by a fine of $50, plus court
costs, for a first offense, a fine of $100, plus court costs, for a second
offense and a fine of $200, plus court costs, for each subsequent offense
beyond the second.
   (H)   Violation of §
90.21 of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and the violator be fined
up to $500, plus court costs.
   (I)   Any person so offending, according to §
90.22 of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be fined up
to $500, plus court costs.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Prohibited activity
   
91.02   City policy
   
91.03   Complaint policy; assistance
   
91.04   Responsibilities
§ 91.01 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   Discrimination in the sale, rental, leasing, financing of housing or land to
be used for the construction of housing, or in the provision of brokerage
services because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin is prohibited
by Title VII of the 1968 Civil Rights Act (Federal Fair Housing Law).
(Res. 04-14-07, passed 4-14-2007)
§ 91.02 CITY POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of City Council to implement programs to ensure equal
opportunity in housing for all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex
or national origin.
   (B)   The Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 expands coverage to include
disabled persons and families with children.
(Res. 04-14-07, passed 4-14-2007)
§ 91.03 COMPLAINT POLICY; ASSISTANCE.
   Within the available resources, the city will assist all persons who feel
they have been discriminated against because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, disability or familial status to seek equity under federal and
state laws by filing a complaint with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Compliance Division.
(Res. 04-14-07, passed 4-14-2007)
§ 91.04 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The city shall publicize this chapter and, through this publicity, shall
encourage owners of real estate, developers and builders to become aware of
there respective responsibilities and rights under the Federal Housing Law and
amendments and any applicable state or local laws or ordinances.
(Res. 04-14-07, passed 4-14-2007)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
92.01   Nuisance defined and enumerated
   
92.02   Interference with city officials prohibited
   
92.03   Abatement; notice; failure to give notice; collection of cost
   
92.04   Police Department inspection
 
   
92.99   Penalty
NUISANCES
§ 92.01 NUISANCE DEFINED AND ENUMERATED.
   The term, for the purposes of this subchapter, shall mean:
   (A)   Bulky waste: stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines,
furniture, appliances and other waste materials other than construction debris,
dead animals, hazardous materials or stable matter with weights or volumes
greater than those allowed for containers;
   (B)   Construction debris: as waste building materials resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations;
   (C)   Dead animal: any animal, or portions thereof, equal to or greater than
ten pounds in weight that has expired from any cause, except those slaughtered
or killed for human use or consumption;
   (D)   Garbage: any and all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight,
except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste
(animal, vegetable and/or matter) that results from the preparation,
processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage,
transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish fowl, birds, fruits,
grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of
limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or
easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract
flies or rodents); except, in all cases, any matter included in the definitions
of “bulky waste”, “construction debris”, “dead animal”, “hazardous materials”,
“rubbish” or “stable matter”;
   (E)   Hazardous materials: any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or
article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or appropriate agency of the state government to be hazardous as that
term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law;
   (F)   Rubbish: waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings,
dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, cardboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded clothing, combustible waste pump and other
products such as are used for packing, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes,
cinders, flooring sweepings, grass, mineral and metallic substances and any and
all other waste materials not included in the definitions of “bulky waste”,
“construction debris”, “dead animal”, “hazardous materials”, “garbage” or
“stable matter”;
   (G)   Stable matter: excessive manure and other waste matter normally
accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure
and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock;
   (H)   Waste matter: unused or discarded matter having no substantial market
value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or
otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists (without limitation or
exclusion by enumeration) of such matter and material as:
      (1)   Rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile;
      (2)   Rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers; and
      (3)   Vehicle bodies and parts.
   (I)   Weeds: all eight-inch or taller grasses, annual plants, perennial
plants, noxious weeds or other weeds and all other rank uncultivated
vegetation, other than trees, bushes and cultivated plants, flowers and
agricultural products;
   (J)   Abandoned, wrecked and junked vehicles:
      (1)   MOTOR VEHICLES are defined as any vehicle propelled or drawn by
power other than muscular power design to travel on the ground by wheels,
treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or pulled
machinery including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers,
motorcycles and tractors.
      (2)   Reference to vehicles, and unsightly motor vehicles, which meet
anyone of the following qualifications:
         (a)   It does not carry a current valid state registration and license
plate; and
         (b)   It cannot be safely operated under its own power.
      (2)   (a)   Placement in street is unlawful. It is unlawful for any
person to place, allow, discard, maintain, park or store any abandoned, wrecked
or junked vehicle, major household furnishings or appliance or machinery, or
parts thereof, as defined in §
92.02 of this chapter, upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
property within the city.
         (b)   Placement in open view on private property is unlawful. It is
unlawful for any person, whether he or she be owner, tenant, occupant, lessee
or otherwise of any private property or premises, to place, allow, discard,
maintain, park, store or permit to be placed, allowed, discarded, maintained,
parked or stored up on such property or premises for a period of time exceeding
30 days any abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major household furnishings
or appliance or machinery, or part thereof, as defined in §
92.02 of this chapter; provided, however, that, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to any property or premises where the vehicle, furnishings,
appliance or machinery, or part thereof, is how is within a building or fence
so as to not be visible from the street or other public or private property, or
stored or parked in the lawful manner in connection with or incidental to a
business or commercial enterprise which is the primary or principal use of such
property or premises.
   (K)   Machinery: all articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or
equipment and any and all metal or wooden machinery, motors, equipment or
tools; and
   (L)   Major household furnishings and appliances: all articles usually
referred to as major household furnishings and appliances use in housekeeping,
including, but not limited to, chairs, tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators,
stoves, washers, dryers, furnaces and grease, oil and paint containers of five-
gallon or over capacity.
(Ord. 10-19-2015, passed 10-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICIALS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow
any authorize city officer or employee to enter upon private or public property
during usual business hours to enforce any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-19-2015, passed 10-19-2005) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 ABATEMENT; NOTICE; FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE; COLLECTION OF COST.
   (A)   The Mayor or City Council may cause the Code Enforcement Officer or
his or her designee to give notice in writing to the owner, occupant or agent
having charge of any lot, building or premises or parking lot, street or alley
to the middle of the street or alley upon which such premises abut, in or upon
which any nuisance shall be found, or upon him or her who may be the cause of
such nuisance, requiring him or her to abate the same within five working days
of such notice.
   (B)   The failure of the Mayor and City Council to cause notice to be given
to the author of any nuisance, as provided in §
92.02 of this chapter, shall in no way relieve such author from any of the
penalties provided in this code for any violations contained in §
92.99 of this chapter.
   (C)   If the owner, occupant, agent or person to whom the notice provided
for in §
92.02 of this chapter is directed shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with
the requirements of such notice within the specified time, the city, through
the Mayor, shall immediately cause the nuisance to be abated in accordance with
the notice. The cost of the abatement shall be assessed to the responsible
party who has created, caused or maintained the nuisance, in accordance with
the provisions of Idaho Code § 50-1008. The assessment will be added to the
subsequent city utility bill.
(Ord. 10-19-2015, passed 10-19-2005)
§ 92.04 POLICE DEPARTMENT INSPECTION.
   For the purpose of carrying the provisions of this subchapter into effect,
it shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee to
investigate any reports regarding the unsanitary conditions of the city and
submit a report to the proper city authorities for prosecution of all
violations of this subchapter.
(Ord. 10-19-2015, passed 10-19-2005)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.04 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person who shall create or maintain a nuisance shall, for every
24-hour period after five working days from the service of the notice provided
in §
92.02 of this chapter for which the nuisance is maintained, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 10-19-2015, passed 10-19-2005)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
110.01   Sales on holidays and Sundays
§ 110.01 SALES ON HOLIDAYS AND SUNDAYS.
   Established bars in the city shall be able to serve liquor by the drink on
Sundays and holidays, effective 10-31-2008.
(Ord. 06-27-12, passed 12-27-2006; Ord. 1/11/08, passed 2-12-2008; Ord. 9/16/
08, passed 10-14-2008)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
[Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
150.01   Plan adopted by reference
§ 150.01 PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s Comprehensive Plan, and any and all amendments, is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. passed 8- -1996)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
151.01   Uniform Housing Code adopted
   
151.02   Building permit fees
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Housing Code, latest edition as copyrighted by the International
Conference of Building Officials, shall be adopted by the city and shall be the
minimum standard for all structures within the city for housing.
(Ord. 96-10-1, passed 10-1-1996) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   Construction valuation shall be based on the adopted valuation published in
the Building Safety Journal for the purpose of assessing building permit fees.
   (A)   The valuation of any structure not listed in this section or building
safety valuation data shall be determined within the provisions of the adopted
building codes.
   (B)   Building permit fees shall be based on the fee structure set forth in
Table 1-A of the 1997 Uniform Building Code, except for the siting of
manufacture homes the building permit fee shall be assessed at $0.27 per square
foot.
   (C)   For residential projects listed below, the valuation shall be:
 
Carports             $19.50 sq. ft.
Decks with roof      $17 sq. ft.
Finished basements   $34.41 sq. ft.
Unfinished basements $25.97 sq. ft.
 
   (D)   Where the residential basement is declared to be unfinished and,
therefore, would be non- habitable space, the permit holder and/or owner is
required to record a statement, attached to the deed, declaring the basement to
be unfinished, prior to building occupancy. Windows in an unfinished basement
are required to comply with the International Building Code.
   (E)   Dairy barns and related structures, where permitted, are classified as
“industrial” for valuation purposes.
(Res. 11-05-2009, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Unless otherwise prescribed, violation of the provisions adopted by §
151.01 of this chapter are a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 a day for each of the violation or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 96-10-1, passed 10-1-1996)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Title
   
152.02   Authority
   
152.03   Purpose
   
152.04   Jurisdiction
   
152.05   Interpretation
   
152.06   Definitions
   
152.07   Vacations and dedications; application
   
152.08   Variances
   
152.09   Enforcement
   
152.10   Amendments
Approval Procedure
   
152.25   Subdivision approval required
   
152.26   Pre-application
   
152.27   Preliminary plat
   
152.28   Final plat
Design Standards
   
152.40   Minimum design standards required
   
152.41   Dedication
   
152.42   Location
   
152.43   Specifications
   
152.44   Street names
   
152.45   Intersections
   
152.46   Easements
   
152.47   Blocks
   
152.48   Lots
   
152.49   Public sites and open spaces
   
152.50   Improvement standards
Special Development Subdivisions
   
152.65   Purpose
   
152.66   Subdivision within a floodplain
   
152.67   Subdivision within an area of critical concern
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Subdivision Ordinance” of Hollister,
Idaho.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.02 AUTHORITY.
   These regulations are authorized by Idaho Code Title 50, Ch. 13, Idaho Code
Title 67, Ch. 65, and Art. 12, § 2, of the Idaho Constitution, as amended of
subsequently codified.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.03 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of these regulations are to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to provide for:
   (A)   The harmonious development of the area;
   (B)   The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with
other existing or planned streets and roads;
   (C)   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
   (D)   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
   (E)   The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in
either of the following:
      (1)   The lack of water supply, sewer when available, drainage,
transportation or other public services; and
      (2)   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services;
   (F)   The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
      (1)   Roads shall be created and improved; and
      (2)   Water and sewer (when available), other utility mains, piping
connections or other facilities shall be installed as condition precedent to
the approval of the plot.
   (G)   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat; and
   (H)   The administration of these regulations by defining the procedures for
the equitable review and approval of all plats and subdivisions covered by
these regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.04 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall apply to the subdividing and developing of all land
within the incorporated territory of the city.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.05 INTERPRETATION.
   All subdivisions, as herein defined, shall be submitted for approval by the
Council and shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. These
regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and where at variance with
other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply. This chapter shall not apply to any subdivision
created and forming a part of any lot or lots forming a part of any subdivision
created and recorded prior to the effective date hereof, except for the further
dividing of lots.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.06 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Interpretation of terms or words. For the purpose of these
regulations, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as
follows.
      (1)   The present tense includes the past or future tense, the singular
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
      (2)   The word “shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive; and the word
“should” is preferred.
      (3)   The masculine shall include the feminine.
   (B)   Meaning of terms or words. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building not intended for human occupation that has
an accessory use to the principal building on the lot.
      BLOCK. A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
      BUILDING. A structure designed or used as the living quarters for one or
more families, or a structure designed or used for occupancy by people for
commercial or industrial uses.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. An imaginary line established by subdivision
regulations and zoning ordinances requiring all buildings to be set back a
certain distance from lot lines.
      BUILDING SITE. An area proposed or provided and improved by grading,
filling, excavation or other means for erecting foundations or pads for
buildings.
      CITY. The City of Hollister, Idaho, as specified by city ordinance.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. An adopted document that herein may be referred to as
a “Comprehensive Plan”. The document shall show the general location and extent
of present and proposed development, including, but not limited to, housing,
industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks, schools and other community
facilities.
      CONDOMINIUM. An estate consisting of:
         (a)   Undivided interest in common in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property or in any combination thereof; together with
         (b)   A separate interest in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property or in any combination thereof.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Hollister, Idaho.
      COUNTY RECORDER. The office of the County Recorder.
      COVENANT. A written promise or pledge.
      CULVERT. A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or
driveway.
      DEDICATION. The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the
public. Land becomes DEDICATED, either by ordinance, resolution or entry in the
official minutes, or by the recording of a plat showing such dedication.
      DEVELOPER. Authorized agent(s) of a subdivider or the subdivider himself
or herself.
      DWELLING UNIT.
         (a)   Any building or other structure proposed or built for occupancy
by people; or
         (b)   A pre-fab dwelling unit which is a building or other structure,
proposed or built for occupancy by people that is designed for initial
transportation on streets and highways which arrives at a site where it is
installed on a permanent foundation.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the
public to use land for specific purposes. Also, a right acquired by
prescription.
      ENGINEER. Any person who is licensed in the state to practice
professional engineering.
      FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of
a river, stream or watercourse or other body of water which has been or may be
covered by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The FLOODPLAIN includes the
channel, floodway and floodway fringe, as described below along with other
terms.
         (a)   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible
extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or
periodically flowing water.
         (b)   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. A floodway whose limits have been
designated and established.
         (c)   FLOOD. The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and
inundated by overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
         (d)   FLOOD OF 100-YEAR FREQUENCY. A flood magnitude which has a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
         (e)   FLOODWAY. The channel or a watercourse and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water of any watercourse.
         (f)   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines limiting a designated
floodway.
         (g)   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The part of the floodplain which is beyond the
floodway encroachment lines limiting a designated floodway. Such areas will
include those portions of the floodplain which will be inundated by a flood of
100-year frequency, but which may be developed for use under land use
regulations without material effect upon the flood water levels. Such areas are
characterized by shallow flood depths and low velocities of water flow.
      HIGHWAY. A street designated as a highway by an appropriate state or
federal agency.
      IMPROVEMENT. Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
      LOT. A parcel, plot, tract or other land area of suitable size as
required in these regulations and the existing zoning ordinance; and created by
subdivision for sale, transfer or lease.
      LOT AREA. The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street,
highway, alley, road or other rights-of-way.
      LOT TYPES. As used in these regulations, lot types are as follows.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
only one street.
         (c)   REVERSED LOT. A lot with frontage on a side street or other
right-of-way other than interior or corner lot.
         (d)   THROUGH LOT. A lot with frontage on more than one street other
than a corner lot. Also known as DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, constructed according to the HUD/FHA
mobile home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or
is 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein; except that, such term shall include any
structure which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A park designed and intended for purposes of
rental spaces where residence is in manufactured homes exclusively.
      MONUMENT. Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe
or iron or steel rods, used to permanently establish any tract, parcel, lot or
street lines, as specified in Idaho Code § 50-1303.
      OPEN SPACE. An area open to the sky for outdoor recreation activity.
Streets, buildings or other covered structures are not included in computing
these areas.
      ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND. A lot or tract as recorded on any plat or record
on file in the office of the County Recorder or any unplatted contiguous parcel
of land held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of this
chapter.
      OWNER. The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided.
      PERFORMANCE BOND. An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by
the subdivider of his or her surety to the City Clerk and/or Recorder which
guaranteed that the subdivider will perform all actions required by an approved
plat; and, provided that, if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with
the provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his or her surety will
pay damages up to the limit of the bond or the surety will itself complete the
requirements of the approved plat.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION. A use or a combination of
residential, commercial and industrial uses planned for a tract of land to be
developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which is developed for
the purpose of selling or renting individual lots or estates, whether fronting
on private or dedicated streets, which may include two or more principal
buildings as governed by Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances. The requirements
of this chapter may be modified by the Council to achieve the best possible
planned development for the specific site under consideration.
      PLAT. The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery,
townsite or other tract of land or a re-platting of such including
certifications, descriptions and approvals.
         (a)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The first formal presentation by maps or
drawings of a proposed subdivision as required in these regulations.
         (b)   FINAL PLAT. The final and formal presentation by maps or
drawings of an approved subdivision development, the original and one copy of
which is filed with the County Clerk and Recorder.
      RESERVE STRIP. A strip of land between a dedicated street or partial
street and adjacent property, which is reserved or held in public ownership for
future street extension or widening.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public
way, which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities of
service areas.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of the street right-of-way outside the street
surface which is improved for pedestrian use.
      STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The specifications as may be specified in this
chapter or as officially adopted by the city.
      STATE. The State of Idaho.
      STREET. A right-of-way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term STREET also includes
the terms HIGHWAY, THOROUGHFARE, PARKWAY, ROAD, AVENUE, BOULEVARD, LANE, PLACE
and other such terms.
         (a)   ALLEY. A minor street providing secondary access at the back or
side of a property otherwise abutting a street.
         (b)   ARTERIAL. A street designated for the purpose of carrying
heavier traffic movements.
         (c)   COLLECTOR. A street designated for the purpose of carrying
traffic from minor streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
         (d)   CUL-DE-SAC. A street connected to another street at one end only
and provided with a turn-around space at its terminus.
         (e)   DEAD-END. A street connecting to another street at one end only
and not having provision for vehicular turn-around at its terminus.
         (f)   FRONTAGE. A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial street, which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
         (g)   MINOR. A street which has the primary purpose of providing
access to abutting properties.
         (h)   PARTIAL. A dedicated right-of-way providing only a portion of
the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of
land.
         (i)   PRIVATE. A street which provides vehicular and pedestrian access
to one or more properties, however, not accepted for public dedication or
maintenance.
         (j)   SIDE STREET. A secondary street that provides access to a corner
lot of which the principle building is not oriented toward.
      SUBDIVIDER. The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The SUBDIVIDER need not be the owner of the
property; however, he or she shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient
proprietary rights in the property to represent the owner.
      SUBDIVISION. The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or
parcel of land into more than two parts for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or development, which shall also include the dedication of a public
street and the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. However, this chapter
shall not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which
does not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of
each building site below the minimum zoning requirements and does not change
the original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
         (b)   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a
decedent or a court decree for the distribution of property;
         (c)   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation, as
defined and allowed in the Idaho Code;
         (d)   Widening of existing streets to conform to the Comprehensive
Plan;
         (e)   The acquisition of street rights-of-way by a public agency in
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; and/or
         (f)   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage of the
properties involved.
      SURVEYOR. Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land
surveyor to do professional surveying.
      UTILITIES. Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, storm water and similar facilities providing service to and used by
the public.
      VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations
where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.
      VICINITY MAP. A small-scale map showing the location of a tract of land
in relation to a larger area.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.07 VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application. Any property owner desiring to vacate an existing
subdivision, public right-of-way or easement, or desiring to dedicate a street
right-of-way or easement shall complete and file an application with the
Council and also file such other applications as are otherwise required by law.
These provisions shall not apply to the widening of any street which is shown
in the Comprehensive Plan, or the dedication of streets, rights-of-way or
easements to be shown on the recorded plat of a subdivision.
   (B)   Council action.
      (1)   When considering an application for vacation procedures, the
Council shall establish a date for a public hearing and give such public notice
as required by law. The Council may approve, deny or modify the application.
Whenever public rights-of-way or lands are vacated, the Council shall provide
adjacent property owners with a quit claim deed for said vacated rights-of-way
in such proportions as are prescribed by law.
      (2)   When considering an application for dedication procedures, the
Council may approve, deny or modify the application. When a dedication is
approved, the required street improvements shall be constructed or a bond
furnished assuring the construction, prior to acceptance of the dedication. To
complete the acceptance of any dedication of land, the owner shall furnish to
the Council a deed describing and conveying such lands to be recorded with the
County Recorder.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.08 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Council may grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter
on a finding that undue hardship may result from strict compliance with
specific provisions or requirements of this chapter or that application of such
provisions or requirements is impractical. It must be shown that strict
compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary
hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, other physical
conditions or other such conditions, which are not self-inflicted, or that
these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives
of this chapter, the Council may declare that variance, modification or a
waiver of these requirements be granted.
   (B)   The Council shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary to
or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the Council shall
take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use
of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be recommended unless the
Council finds, after a public hearing:
      (1)   There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
clearly be impracticable, or unreasonable; in such cases, the subdivider shall
first state his or her reasons in writing to the specific provisions or
requirements involved;
      (2)   The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which said
property is situated;
      (3)   Such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code;
and
      (4)   Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest
and purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   No subdivision plat required by this chapter or the Idaho Code shall be
admitted to the public land records of the county of recorded by the County
Recorder, until such subdivision plat has received final approval by the
Council. No public board, agency, commission, official or other authority shall
proceed with the construction of any of the public improvements required by
this chapter until the final plat has received the approval by the Council.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.10 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendment procedures. The Council may, from time to time, amend,
supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this chapter in the
manner prescribed by Idaho Code to better serve the city and outlying
community. A proposed amendment, supplement or repeal may be originated by the
Council or by petition from the public at large. In all cases, the proposal
shall be reviewed by the Council before any action is taken on the issue.
Adequate public notice shall be given to obtain comments from the public,
either for or against, prior to any action taken.
   (B)   Council public hearing.
      (1)   The Council shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on
proposed amendments.
      (2)   The Council shall conduct as least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days
prior to the hearing, notice of time and place and the amendment shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Action by Council.
      (1)   Upon granting or denying an application to amend the Zoning
Ordinance, the Council shall specify:
         (a)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
         (b)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
         (c)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
      (2)   In the event the Council shall approve and amendment, such
amendment shall thereafter be made a part of this chapter upon the preparation
and passage of an ordinance.
   (D)   Resubmission of application. No application for amendment which has
been denied by the Council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the
same form or with reference to substantially the same premises for the same
purposes within a period of six months from the date of such final action;
unless there is an amendment in the Comprehensive Plan which resulted from a
change in conditions as applying to the specific property under consideration.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
APPROVAL PROCEDURE
§ 152.25 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to create a subdivision as herein defined shall submit
all necessary applications to the city. No final plat shall be filed with the
County Recorder or improvements made on the property until the plat has been
acted upon and approved by the Council. No lots shall be sold until the plat
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.26 PRE-APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit a copy of a sketch plan to the
Council. This is entirely at the option of the developer. The sketch plan shall
include the entire developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision, in
schematic form and include the area proposed for immediate development in such
a form and content as required by the Council and shall include the following:
      (1)   The general layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;
      (2)   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
      (3)   Areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
   (B)   Fee. None required.
   (C)   Council action. At the regular meeting, the subdivider shall present
his or her pre-application and intent to the Council for review and comment.
The Council may, if it deems necessary, request review of the pre-application
by other agencies. The Council will review the pre-application to determine its
compliance with this chapter as well as the following concerns:
      (1)   The compliance of the proposed development with existing local or
state policies, goals and objectives or development plans;
      (2)   Determination of additional special permits or ordinance conflicts
such as rezoning, conditional use permit or variance that may be needed and the
determination of the manner that such requirements can be combined into one
permit;
      (3)   Advise the applicant of any unique environmental or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property, such as areas that have been designated by the state as areas of
critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, floodplain,
airport flight pattern and the like; and
      (4)   Provide the subdivider with all necessary forms.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.27 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Application. The subdivider shall file with the Council a completed
subdivision application form and preliminary plat data as required in this
chapter in such form and content as required by the Council.
   (B)   Combining both preliminary and final plats. The applicant may also
request that the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and
final plat if the following exists:
      (1)   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten lots;
      (2)   No new street dedication or street widening are involved;
      (3)   No major special development consideration are involved, such as
development in a floodplain, hillside development or the like; and
      (4)   All required information for both preliminary and final plat is
complete and in an acceptable form. A request to combine both preliminary plat
and final plat into one application shall be acted upon by the Council.
   (C)   Content of preliminary plat. The contents of the preliminary plat and
related information shall be in such a form as stipulated by the Council;
however, any additional maps or data deemed necessary by the Council may also
be required. The subdivider shall submit to the Council at least the following:
      (1)   Eight copies of the preliminary engineering plat of the proposed
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated; each
copy of the preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall have
dimensions of not less than 18 inches by 24 inches, shall be drawn to a scale
of not less than one inch to 100 feet, shall show the drafting date, and shall
indicate thereon, by arrow, the generally northerly direction;
      (2)   Eight sets of preliminary engineering plans including a master
utility map for streets, water, sewers and other required public improvement
maps; said engineering plans shall contain sufficient information and detail to
enable the Council to make a preliminary determination as to conformance of the
proposed improvements to applicable regulations, ordinances and standards as
outlined in this chapter;
      (3)   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat
on a form prescribed by the city; and
      (4)   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area, such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large-scale development,
hazardous and unique areas of development.
   (D)   Requirement of preliminary plats. The following shall be shown on the
preliminary plat submitted or shall be submitted with the same:
      (1)   The name of the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
subdivider(s) and the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat;
      (3)   The name and address of all adjoining owners of property whether or
not bisected by a public right-of-way as shown on record in the County
Assessor’s office;
      (4)   The legal description of the subdivision;
      (5)   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision, such
as: residential single-family; two-family and multiple housing; commercial,
industrial, recreational or agricultural; and a showing of any sites proposed
for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
      (6)   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed
subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;
      (7)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surrounding area (one-half mile minimum radius, scale optional);
      (8)   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and
the adjacent land;
      (9)   Streets, street names, rights-of-way and roadway widths, including
adjoining streets or roadways;
      (10)   Lot lines and the dimensions and numbers of each, and the total
number of lots by block;
      (11)   A site report as required by the appropriate health district where
septic tanks are proposed;
      (12)   Any proposed or existing utilities, including, but not limited to,
irrigation laterals, ditches, drainages, bridges, culverts, water mains, fire
hydrants, electric power lines, television cable lines, fiber optic lines and
their respective profiles or indicated alternative methods;
      (13)   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed
restrictions, or if none, a statement that none are proposed;
      (14)   Any dedications to the public and/or easements together with a
statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such;
      (15)   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in §§
152.65 through
152.67 of this chapter;
      (16)   A statement as to whether or not a variance will be requested with
respect to any provision of this chapter describing the particular provision,
the variance requested and the reasons therefor; and
      (17)   At the Council’s request the developer shall show contours at
five-foot interval s where land slope is greater than 10% and at two-foot
intervals where land slope is 10% or less, with an established benchmark,
including location and elevation.
   (E)   Fee. At the time of submission of an application for a preliminary
plat, a non-refundable fee as set by resolution shall be paid. There shall be
no additional fee for the combining of the preliminary and final plats.
   (F)   Submission requirements. The subdivider shall submit eight copies of
the preliminary plat and required supplemental material, along with the
required fee to the Council at least ten days prior to the regular Council
meeting. The submission shall also be in such form as prescribed by the
Council.
   (G)   Public notification.
      (1)   Notification to property owners. The subdivider shall notify all
adjoining property owners of the Council’s meeting by written notification and
posting of the subject land under consideration. Such written notification and
posting shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the Council meeting.
      (2)   Failure to notify. The failure of the subdivider to comply with the
notification provision shall invalidate the Council’s action.
   (H)   Council action. At the next regular Council meeting, the subdivider
shall present the preliminary plat for action. The Council may approve, approve
conditionally, disapprove or table the preliminary plat for additional
information. Such action shall occur within 30 days of the date of the regular
meeting.
   (I)   Approval period.
      (1)   Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of
the final plat application by the developer within one year after action by the
Council shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to be null and void,
unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Council prior to
the expiration date.
      (2)   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made
in successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of one year may be considered for final
approval without resubmission for preliminary-plat approval.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.28 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Application. After the approval or conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivided may cause the subdivision, or any part
thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the Council the
following:
      (1)   Three copies and the original of the final plat; and
      (2)   Three copies and the original of the final engineering construction
drawings for streets, water and other public improvements.
   (B)   Content of final plat. The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under Idaho Code Title 50, Ch. 13, and shall
be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to enable the
same to be placed on one sheet of 18-inch by 24-inch drawing paper, with no
part of the drawing nearer to the edge than one inch. The reverse of said sheet
shall not be used for any portion of the drawing, but may contain written
matter as to dedications, certifications and other information. The final plat
shall include at least the following:
      (1)   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated
by the Council;
      (2)   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat;
      (3)   Such other and further information as the Council may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat;
      (4)   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof;
      (5)   Conform to all requirements and provisions of this chapter; and
      (6)   Acceptable engineering practices and local standards.
   (C)   Fee. None required.
   (D)   Council review.
      (1)   Submittal of final plat. The Council shall review the final plat
for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved preliminary plat. If
the Council determines that there is substantial difference in the final plat
than that which was considered as a preliminary plat or conditions which have
not been met, the Council may require that the final plat be resubmitted in the
same manner as required in the preliminary plat process.
      (2)   Agency review. The Council may transmit one copy of the final plat,
or other document submitted, for review and recommendation to the same
departments and agencies, or others as they may deem necessary to insure
compliance with the preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary
approval. Such agency review shall also include the construction standards of
improvements, compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all
improvements and the legal review of the performance bond.
   (E)   Council action. The Council, at its next meeting, shall consider
comments from concerned persons and agencies to arrive at a decision on the
final plat. If said final plat conforms to the requirements of this chapter
applicable at the time of approval of the preliminary plat, all rulings made by
the Council on the preliminary plat, and the requirements of the state law, the
Council shall approve, approve conditionally, disapprove or table the final
plat for additional information within 30 days of the date of the regular
meeting at which the final plat is first considered by the Council.
   (F)   Approval period. Final plat and covenants, if any, shall be filed with
the County Recorder within one year after written approval by the Council.
Otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless prior to said
expiration date an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Council.
   (G)   Method of recording. Upon approval of the final plat by the Council,
the subdivider’s prepayment of recording fees, and the inclusion of the
following signatures on the final plat to the County Recorder for recording:
      (1)   Certification and signature of the Council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
      (2)   Certification and signature of an engineer or Building Inspector
verifying that the subdivision meets the city requirements and has been
approved by the Council; and
      (3)   Certification and signature of local or state health agency that
all health requirements have been complied with.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.40 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED.
   All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth hereinafter in this subchapter; provided, however, that, any higher
standards adopted by any highway district, state highway department or health
agency shall prevail over those set forth herein.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.41 DEDICATION.
   Arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all
cases; in general, all other streets shall also be dedicated to public use.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.42 LOCATION.
   Street and road location shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Street location and arrangements. When a major street plan or
comprehensive development plan has been adopted, subdivision streets shall
conform to such plans.
   (B)   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
   (C)   Stub streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivision shall be such that said streets
extend to the boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future
extension of said streets into adjacent areas. A reserve strip may be required
and held in public ownership.
   (D)   Street continuation and extension. The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new
subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the Council having jurisdiction over
such streets.
   (E)   Relation to topography. Streets shall be arranged in proper relation
to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
   (F)   Alley. Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial
subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off-street
loading and parking. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
   (G)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than 500 feet
in length and shall terminate with an adequate turnaround having a minimum
radius of 50 feet for right-of-way.
   (H)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract in
conformance with this chapter and where satisfactory assurance for dedication
of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a tract to be
subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the
street shall be dedicated within such tract.
   (I)   Private streets. Private streets and roads shall be prohibited.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.43 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Streets right-of-way widths. Street and road right-of-way widths shall
conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive development plan and
the rules of the state’s Department of Highways and the highway district or
department having jurisdiction.
 
Highway and Street Types            Widths
Arterials                           120 feet
Collector streets (major and minor) 90 feet
Expressway or freeway               160 - 2,600 feet
Local streets
   East/west                     70 feet
   North/south                   80 feet
 
   (B)   Street grades. Street grades shall not exceed 9% on either minor or
collector streets and 5% for arterial streets. No street grade shall be less
than three-tenths feet per 100 feet.
   (C)   Street alignment. Street alignment shall be as follows. Horizontal
alignment: when street lines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees
in alignment, the centerlines shall be connected by a curve having a minimum
radius of 500 feet for arterial streets, 300 feet for collector streets and 150
feet for minor streets. Between reverse curves on minor streets, there shall be
a minimum tangent distance of 100 feet and 200 feet on collector and arterial
streets respectively.
   (D)   Vertical alignment. Minimum sight distances shall be 200 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for collector and arterial streets.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.44 STREET NAMES.
   The naming of streets shall conform to the following. Street names shall not
duplicate any existing street name, except where a new street is a continuation
of an existing street; street names that may be spelled differently, but sound
the same as existing streets, shall not be used.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.45 INTERSECTIONS.
   Intersections shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Angle of intersection. Streets shall intersect at 90 degrees or as
closely thereto as possible, in no case, shall streets intersect at less than
80 degrees.
   (B)   Sight triangles. Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another
vehicle when each is 80 feet from the center of the intersection.
   (C)   Number of streets. No more than two streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   (D)   “T” intersections. “T” intersections may be used wherever such design
will not restrict the free movement of traffic.
   (E)   Centerline offsets. Street centerlines shall be offset by a distance
of at least 125 feet.
   (F)   Vertical alignment of intersection. A nearly flat grade with
appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat
section shall be extended a minimum of 100 feet each way from the intersection.
An allowance of 2% maximum intersection grade in rolling terrain and 4% in
hilly terrain, will be permitted.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.46 EASEMENTS.
   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines, rear
lot lines and/or side lot lines when deemed necessary; total easement width
shall not be less than 12 feet. Unobstructed drainage way easements shall be
provided as required by the Council.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.47 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Every block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots,
except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural feature or subdivision
boundary; blocks shall not be less than 275 feet long in all cases, nor exceed
600 feet in length.
   (B)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to adequate sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated; the zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; the need
for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and
the limitations and opportunities of topography.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.48 LOTS.
   Lots shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Lot sizes. No subdivision plat in the area included in a residential
district shall hereafter be approved by the city unless all lots shown thereon
shall have a frontage of 100 feet or more and a minimum area of 12,500 square
feet; except that, lots fronting on cul-de-sac circles may have reduced
frontage as approved by the Council, but shall not be less than 40 feet.
   (B)   Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to
straight streets and shall conform to the radius of curved streets.
   (C)   Width related to length. Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided.
   (D)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets or orientation to both streets.
   (E)   Uninhabitable areas. Land subject to flooding or which shall otherwise
be deemed to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential proposes or
for any other uses that may increase or create a danger to health, life, or
property or which may increase or create a flood hazard. Such land within a
subdivision shall be set aside for other uses such as parks, green belts or
other open space.
   (F)   Back-up lots. Lots shall back into such features as highways, arterial
streets, shopping centers or industrial properties, except where there is a
minor access street provided. Such lots shall contain a landscaped easement
along the rear at least 20 feet wide in addition to the utility easement. The
restricted access to the arterial street will minimize noise and protect
outdoor living areas.
   (G)   Lot frontage. All rectangular lots shall have at least 100 feet of
frontage upon a publicly- dedicated street. Variances may be permitted for an
approved planned unit development.
   (H)   Future arrangements. Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots (such as when large lots are approved for septic tank
operations) the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for
future resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan
thereof shall be approved by the Council prior to the taking of such action.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.49 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following.
   (A)   Public uses. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public
use shown on the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or part within a
subdivision, a suitable area for this purpose shall be dedicated to the public
or reserved for public purchase. If, within two years of plat recording, the
purchase is not agreed on, the reservation shall be canceled or shall
automatically cease to exist.
   (B)   Natural features. Existing natural features which add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourse, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved, insofar as possible, in the design of the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.50 IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish and define the
public improvements which will be required to be constructed by the subdivider
as conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the procedures and
responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and
agencies concerned with the administration, planning design, construction and
financing of public facilities and to further establish procedures for assuring
compliance with these requirements.
   (B)   Responsibility for plans. It shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider of every proposed subdivision to have prepared by a registered
engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross-
sections, specifications and other supporting data, for all required public
streets, utilities and other facilities. Such construction plans shall be based
on preliminary plans which have been approved with the preliminary plat, and
shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are
subject to approval by the city or Building Inspector and other responsible
public agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with
the public agencies’ standards or specification.
   (C)   Required public improvements. Every subdivider shall be required to
install the following public and other improvements in accordance with the
conditions and specifications as follows.
      (1)   Monuments. Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code §
50-1313.
      (2)   Street and alleys. All streets and alleys shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the Council.
      (3)   Drainage. An adequate storm drainage system may be required in all
subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision shall be
established by the Council and the appropriate construction shall follow the
specifications and procedures established for such facility designed to retain
or detain storm water.
      (4)   Installation of public utilities. Underground utilities are
recommended and may be required by the Council in areas where overhead
facilities would not be compatible with the surrounding properties.
      (5)   Driveways. All driveway openings shall be as specified by the city,
highway district or state’s Highway Department.
      (6)   Water supply system and sewer service (when available). When a
proposed subdivision is to be serviced by a public water supply system (or
sewer system, when available), fire hydrants and other required water system
appurtenances shall be provided by the subdivider.
      (7)   Private improvements and public utilities. It shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to arrange and provide for the development,
installation, construction or other improvement of private facilities and
public utilities for and within the subdivision in accordance with applicable
standards and requirements.
      (8)   Construction of public works.
         (a)   The scope of this section is to define the respective areas of
responsibility of the subdivider and the city relative to the installation,
construction or other improvements of public works en route to and within the
boundaries of a subdivision.
         (b)   In certain instances, the city may require formal written
agreements with the subdivider that more fully and specifically describe their
respective obligations and responsibilities.
         (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to complete, at
his or her sole expense, all the development and construction of public works
for and within his or her subdivision, except as specifically provided
otherwise to be the obligation and responsibility of the city, or as may be
accepted by the city as being within the spirit and intent of its
responsibilities.
         (d)   The subdivider shall complete the installation or construction
of all the different phases of public works for which he or she is responsible
before the city will accept any of them. This requirement may be satisfied by
completion of a stage is a staged development is called for in the approved
development plan.
      (9)   Guarantee of completion. Until the public works for which the
subdivider is responsible are completed, or an acceptable stage of the
development is completed, the city will issue no building permits for private
construction therein, unless a satisfactory performance bond or other suitable
guarantee of performance acceptable to the city is provided by the subdivider.
      (10)   Evidence of completion.
         (a)   The subdivider shall notify the city in writing when the public
works for which he or she is responsible have been completed.
         (b)   The city shall also certify in writing, a copy of which shall be
sent to the subdivider, that the said public works have been inspected by its
authorized representative, and that the said public works have been completed
in accordance with applicable standards and specifications. As built,
construction plans shall be submitted to the city on completion, if required.
         (c)   Compliance with the foregoing provisions shall constitute the
city’s acceptance of the public works. The city shall thereby accept said
public works and be responsible for their operation and maintenance in
accordance with city policies.
      (11)   Streets. The subdivider shall perform, install, construct or
otherwise complete, at his or her sole expense, the following items relative to
street improvements for and within the boundaries of the subdivision.
         (a)   The city shall perform, install, construct or otherwise
complete, at its sole expense, installation of traffic control signs and
signals and street name signs relative to street improvements within the
boundaries of the subdivision.
         (b)   The city shall also improve to the extent it deems suitable,
subject to budgetary limitation, such existing right-of-way it considers
necessary to provide adequate access to the subdivision.
      (12)   Water distribution system. The subdivider shall be responsible for
the installation of a culinary water distribution system for and within the
boundaries of the subdivision on public right- of-way. The subdivider shall
perform, install, construct or otherwise complete at his sole expense the
following items relative to a culinary water distribution system:
         (a)   Preparation of plans and specifications for the construction of
the water distribution system, including any required extensions from the
existing system, and the approval of said plans and specifications by the
state’s Department of Health and Welfare. Construction surveys of line and
grade within the subdivision;
         (b)   Installation of the water distribution system for and within the
subdivision, including water lines, control valves, fire hydrants and
appurtenant facilities;
         (c)   If water mains are located in a dedicated street or alley,
installation of a water service line to the property lines of each lot; and
         (d)   Inspection of construction to assure compliance with the plans,
specifications and applicable standards. Connections to the water mains shall
be in accordance with existing procedures and policies of the city; and the
subdivider shall be liable for the payment of water assessment and hookup
charges as provided by city ordinances.
      (13)   Reimbursement for oversizing. In the event the city requires the
subdivider to install oversized pipe lines or other excess facilities to make
provisions for present or future service needs in excess of the requirements
for the subdivision, the city shall reimburse the subdivider for the additional
costs of material and installation resulting therefrom.
      (14)   Building line setback.
         (a)   In all new subdivisions, the building line setback shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from the property line.
         (b)   In the event that a new subdivision is located along a street
with existing residences, the setback line shall be not less than other
structures along the street and preferable should be set back as an average of
the existing structures.
      (15)   Side and rear lot clearance.
         (a)   In all new subdivisions no building of any nature shall be
placed or constructed nearer than 15 feet from the side or rear property line.
         (b)   Where utility rights-of-way of other easements are provided
along property lines and lot lines, no structure of any nature shall be
permitted in such rights-of-way or easements, except for the purpose for which
they are provided.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
152.99
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
§ 152.65 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to identify the various types of special
developments that normally pose special concerns to the Council and elected
officials when reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests. Therefore, this
subchapter outlines the general plan submittal requirements and design
standards that shall be taken into consideration when acting on special
developments. The provisions of this subchapter are in addition to the plan
requirements and design standards that are required by §§
152.25 through
152.28 and
152.40 through
152.50 of this chapter. The required information shall be submitted to the
Council with the preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.66 SUBDIVISION WITHIN A FLOODPLAIN.
   (A)   Flood areas.
      (1)   For any proposed subdivision that is located within or partially
within a floodplain, the developer shall provide the Council with a development
plan of adequate scale and supporting documentation that will show and explain
at least the following:
         (a)   Location of all planned improvements;
         (b)   The location of the floodway and the floodway fringe per
engineering practices as specified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA);
         (c)   The location of the present water channel;
         (d)   Any planned rerouting or waterways;
         (e)   All major drainage ways;
         (f)   Areas of frequent flooding;
         (g)   Means of flood-proofing buildings; and
         (h)   Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures within the floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood; and, for new
construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated to or above the level of
the 100-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall be flood-proofed up to the level of the 100-year flood.
   (B)   Justification for development.
      (1)   Upon the determination that buildings are planned within the
floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated within the
floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the developer shall
demonstrate conclusively to the Council that such development will not present
a hazard to life, limb or property; will not have adverse effects on the
safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel or the natural
environment.
      (2)   No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills,
structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually
or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages. If any
part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the Council shall limit
development to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent
with that determination.
      (3)   Subdivisions shall be reviewed to assure that:
         (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
         (b)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages; and
         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      (4)   New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and require
on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.67 SUBDIVISION WITHIN AN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN.
   (A)   General. Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as an area of
critical concern by the Council or by the state. Special consideration shall be
given to any proposed development within an area of critical concern to assure
that the development is necessary and desirable and in the public interest in
view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous or unique areas that may be
designated as areas of critical concern are as follows:
      (1)   Sanitary landfills, dumps;
      (2)   Earthquake locations;
      (3)   Unstable soils;
      (4)   Unique animal life;
      (5)   Unique plant life;
      (6)   Scenic areas;
      (7)   Historical significance;
      (8)   Floodplain; and
      (9)   Other areas of critical concern.
   (B)   Plan submission. The developer shall prepare and submit an
environmental assessment along with the preliminary plat application for any
development that is proposed within an area of critical concern.
   (C)   Content of environmental assessment. The content of the environmental
assessment shall usually be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of
professionals that shall provide answers to the following questions:
      (1)   What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a
result of the proposed development?
      (2)   What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur
so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
      (3)   What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
      (4)   What beneficial or detrimental effect would the development have on
the environment such as animal life, plant life, social concerns, economic,
cultural resources, noise, visual, hazardous waste and others?
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered as a separate offense. The land owner, tenant,
subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the Council or any other public official or
private citizen form taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or
prevent any violation of this chapter or of state law.
(Ord. passed 9-11-1995)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Short title
   
153.02   Authority
   
153.03   Interpretation
   
153.04   Scope
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Use districts
   
153.07   Residential/Agriculture Zone
   
153.08   Commercial Zone
   
153.09   Industrial Zone
   
153.10   Non-conforming uses
   
153.11   District establishment; zoning map
   
153.12   Zoning permits
   
153.13   Building permits
   
153.14   Street access
   
153.15   Changes upon annexation of unincorporated areas
   
153.16   Administrative procedures
   
153.17   Land use schedule
Telecommunications Towers, Antennas and Related Facilities
   
153.30   Purpose
   
153.31   Definitions
   
153.32   County approvals; exemptions
   
153.33   Areas permitting location by conditional use or administrative
approval
   
153.34   Areas limiting location
   
153.35   Areas prohibiting location
   
153.36   Facilities 125 feet or less in height
   
153.37   Conditional uses
   
153.38   Annual information report
   
153.39   Removal; security for removal
   
153.40   Preexisting towers
   
153.41   Compliance
   
153.42   Structural, design and environmental standards
   
153.43   Separations and setback requirements
   
153.44   Permits
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Hollister”.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.02 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code Title
67, Ch. 65, and Art. 12, § 2, of the Idaho Constitution, as amended or
subsequently codified.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.03 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare, to retain and enhance upon the
aesthetics of the community, to preserve and enhance land values, to separate
incompatible uses and to promote security within the community.
   (B)   To protect the public, among other purposes, such provisions are
intened to provide for adequate light, safety from fire and other danger and
undue concentration of populations.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.04 SCOPE.
   (A)   It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinance, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by covenants running with the land to which
the city is a party.
   (B)   Where this subchapter imposes a greater restriction upon land,
buildings or structures than is imposed or required by such existing provisions
of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this subchapter shall
control.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.05 DEFINITIONS.
   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is
always mandatory and not merely directory. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDINGS. A subordinate use or building customarily
incident to and located on the same lot with the main use or building.
   ALLEY. Any public space or thoroughfare 25 feet or less in width, but no
less than 15 feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public
for public travel and which affords secondary access to abutting property.
Access through an ALLEY to property will not be considered legal access for
purposes of fulfilling the requirements of this subchapter.
   ALTERATIONS. As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit, facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height or in
the moving from one location to another.
   DAIRY. The congregation of more than one animal unit per acre on a single
parcel of ground raised for the purpose of the production, sale and
distribution of milk, butter or cheeses.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful operation, profession or craft which is
customarily incidental to carried on in a dwelling place and wherein the use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes, and which occupation is carried on only by the immediate members of
the family residing within dwelling place. Signage for the HOME OCCUPATION
shall be limited to two square feet and traffic will be minimal. The business
shall not create a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood in the form of
noise, odors, traffic generated or in any other manner.
   JUNK YARD or SECONDHAND SALES. Any business in which used goods are
collected and sold for reuse even as a secondary business related to the
primary business on site. It shall consist of an outdoor space where junk,
waste, discarded or salvaged material are stored or handled, including
automobile wrecking yards and yards for used building materials and places or
yards for storage of salvaged equipment, automobiles or machinery.
   MANUFACTURED HOMES. A structure, constructed according to the HUD/FHA mobile
home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or is 40 body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be use as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and include plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein; except that, such term shall include any structure
which meets all with the requirements of this definition, except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure similar to a manufactured home, but built to a
state mobile home code, which existed prior to the Federal Manufactured Housing
and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code).
   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A building, structure or portion thereof which does
not conform to the regulations of this subchapter applicable to the zone or
district in which such building is situated, but which existed prior to and was
in compliance with the existing regulations as of the effective date of this
subchapter.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use of premises which does not conform to the
regulations of this subchapter, but which was in existence and conformance with
the existing regulations at the effective date of the subchapter.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.06 USE DISTRICTS.
   The city is hereby divided into three use districts which shall be known, in
order of restrictiveness as:
   (A)   RA, Residential/Agriculture Zone;
   (B)   C, Commercial Zone; and
   (C)   I, Industrial Zone.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.07 RESIDENTIAL/AGRICULTURE ZONE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the RA Zone is to have land area set aside by
zoning procedures and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan to preserve and
enhance predominately single-family living areas at a low-density standards
with agricultural uses allowed.
   (B)   Designated uses.
      (1)   The growing of all soil crops, including all farming, and all uses
incidental to the farming operation;
      (2)   The raising of livestock and poultry under the following
conditions. Excluding commercial feed lots, raising of swine commercial
poultry, dairies (as defined), similar intensive agricultural use. Horses or
other usual farm animals are permitted when kept under the following standards:
         (a)   To maintain or keep one cow or one horse or one sheep or one
goat, the applicant must have at least 10,000 square feet of pastureland,
exclusive of the homesite, for one animal and 5,000 square feet of pastureland
for each additional animal. Fences enclosing such animals must be so
constructed so as to prevent the animals from going upon the property of
adjoining property owners in any manner whatsoever.
         (b)   To maintain and keep fowl or rabbits, the application must have
at least 5,000 square feet of real estate, exclusive of the homesite, for no
more than 25 fowl or rabbits. In no event shall the fowl or poultry house,
rabbit hut, fowl, poultry or rabbit run be less than 40 feet from a dwelling
other than that of the applicant.
         (c)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pigs or
hogs within the limits of the city.
      (3)   Single-family dwelling, including manufactured homes, under the
following conditions.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a
space of not less than 1,000 square feet.
         (b)   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and
backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is
located not more than 12 inches above grade.
         (c)   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof; except that, no
standards shall require a slope of greater than a nominal three feet in height
for each 12 feet in width.
         (d)   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing
which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or
which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwelling
as determined by the local permit approval authority.
         (e)   Additions to a manufactured home shall be of compatible
construction using like materials.
         (f)   The manufactured home shall be no more than ten years old at the
time of its installation.
      (4)   Home occupations;
      (5)   Churches or parish halls; and
      (6)   Public facilities such as schools, city infrastructure, parks and
playgrounds.
   (C)   Uses requiring special use permits.
      (1)   Farm animals exceeding units contained in the livestock ordinance;
      (2)   Temporary residence placed during the construction of permanent
residence, not to exceed six months in duration;
      (3)   Neighborhood commercial uses;
      (4)   More than one permanent residence on a platted or recorded lot; and
      (5)   Multi-unit dwellings.
   (D)   Public facilities. It is desirable that, in this zone, the principal
designated uses involving structures be serviced from public sewer facilities.
However, since such public facilities might, not be reasonably available or
feasible throughout the zone then the minimum lot requirement will be
controlled by the specific requirements as stated in division (E) below or the
requirements of the Health Department, whichever is greater.
   (E)   Newly erected or altered regulations. In this Agricultural Zone, no
building or premises not customarily incidental to agricultural pursuits, as
herein noted, shall be used, nor shall any building, structure or land usage be
hereafter erected or altered (unless otherwise provided in this subchapter),
except for one or more of the above uses in accordance with the following
standards.
      (1)   General. The lot per dwelling unit and for all uses in an RA Zone,
dependent on city water supply and individual septic disposal systems in
accordance with the state’s Department of Health standards for subsurface
sewage are to be used, lots shall not be less than 100 feet by 125 feet or
12,500 square feet. The site shall be shown to have sufficient space, complying
with the Health Department standards, for future construction of a replacement
sewage disposal system.
      (2)   Front yard. No building (not including uncovered porches or steps)
shall be constructed nearer than 25 feet from the front lot line.
      (3)   Rear yard. No dwelling shall be constructed nearer than 15 feet
from the rear lot line.
      (4)   Side yard. No dwelling shall be constructed nearer than 15 feet
from the side lot line.
      (5)   Accessory use buildings. No building shall be constructed nearer
than five feet from the side and rear lot line and 25 feet from front lot line.
      (6)   Manufactured home. One occupied mobile home may be placed on a lot
size of the area 100 feet by 125 feet or larger area (12,500 square feet) and
must be no more than ten years old at the time of installation.
      (7)   Clear view of intersecting streets. In all zones which require a
front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of three feet in height shall be
placed on any corner lot within triangular area, from the street property line,
except for a reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to permit an
obstructed view.
      (8)   Sewage disposal. All domestic and commercial sewage disposal
facilities must be approved the Health Department.
      (9)   Well water. Well water for domestic use shall be drilled and
supplied only by the city.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.08 COMMERCIAL ZONE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide for areas that will
fulfill the need for travel-related services, retail sales and professional
offices as well as neighborhood commercial services throughout the area, and
servicing the major highways or arteries catering both to local and travel-
related services. NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL shall be defined to provided local
commercial service needs primarily located at selected places at the perimeter
of low density residential neighborhoods. All commercial applications will be
required to provide an environmental assessment of the use upon the community.
   (B)   Designated uses.
      (1)   All commercial uses that are retail in nature, both highway-related
and neighborhood commercial; and
      (2)   Public facilities such as schools, city infrastructure, parks and
playgrounds.
   (C)   Uses requiring special use permit.
      (1)   Wholesale operations;
      (2)   Residential use directly related to the commercial use on the
property. Residential use for rental purposes, other than in a motel or RV park
in which the stay is limited, shall not be allowed;
      (3)   Churches and parish halls;
      (4)   Junk yards/second hand sales; and
      (5)   Adult book stores.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.09 INDUSTRIAL ZONE.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of the Industrial Zone is to provide areas by zoning
procedures and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan which encourage
suitable areas in which industrial uses may locate, substantially free from
residential, light industrial or retail commercial activities.
      (2)   The zone shall also provide for industrial park development areas
to create, preserve and enhance areas containing manufacturing and related
establishments within an open and attractive setting, typically appropriate in
locations near major thoroughfares, freeways and other suitable places. All
industrial development applications will be required to provide an
environmental assessment of the use upon the community.
   (B)   Designated uses.
      (1)   All industrial uses, including light and heavy industries,
manufacturing plants, processing plants and related uses;
      (2)   Wholesale commercial businesses; and
      (3)   Public facilities.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.10 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of
the enactment of this subchapter may be continued, although such use does not
conform with the provisions of this subchapter; provided, the following
conditions are met.
   (A)   Unsafe structure. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a building or
structure declared unsafe by a proper authority.
   (B)   Restoration. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the
reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any non-conforming
building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or Acts of God,
subsequent to the date of this subchapter, wherein the expense of such work
does not exceed 40% of the replacement value of the building or structure at
the time such damage occurred.
   (C)   Wear and tear. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the
reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding of a conforming building, structure or
part thereof existing at the effective date of this subchapter, rendered
necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation.
   (D)   Unlawful use not authorized. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuance of the use of a
structure or premises in violation of zoning regulation in effect at the time
of the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.11 DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT; ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Use districts established. For the purposes of this subchapter, the
city is hereby divided into use districts, as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Maps and boundaries. The boundaries of the use districts are hereby
established as shown on a map entitled the Zoning Map of the city.
   (C)   Alleys. As much as possible, zoning district boundaries shall fall at
the alleyway or back property line so that like uses will be facing each other.
   (D)   Zoning across lot lines. If a lot which was platted or recorded prior
to the adoption date of this subchapter is split by two different zones, the
lot shall be considered, in whole, zoned to that use in which a majority of the
lot is zoned.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.12 ZONING PERMITS.
   The following land use changes shall require a written application to the
City Council, accompanied by the listed fees:
 
Change to the comprehensive plan $150
Changing of zoning boundaries    $100
Special use permit               $50
Vacation of streets/alleyways    $50
Variance                         $50
 
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.13 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No vacant land and buildings hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied
or used in whole or in part, nor shall any owner or tenant of any land or
building hereafter change the use classification or enlarge the use in any
building or on any premises without a certificate of occupancy from the county.
Reference should be made to the city code concerning building, electrical and
plumbing permit processes.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.14 STREET ACCESS.
   (A)   No lot shall be developed without proper access to a public street.
Should such street not be improved, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner of the property being developed to improve the street to city
standard:
      (1)   Must have a recorded plat or other document dedicating public
right-of-way;
      (2)   Must be constructed to city standards with an eight-inch ballast
surface, a four-inch gravel base and leveling course, graded and compacted with
a 24-foot wide all weather driving surface placed in the center of the right-
of-way with 12 feet on each centerline. Drainage pits on either side shall be
of a four to one (4:1) ratio slope and at least one and one-half feet deep; and
      (3)   Must be constructed with a turnaround of 60 feet for emergency
equipment if longer than 150 feet.
   (B)   A private road will be all owed for access under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Must have a recorded, permanent perpetual easement and a recorded
maintenance agreement sign by those served;
      (2)   Must exist entirely upon private property and not make use of
public right-of-way;
      (3)   Must be constructed with six-inch gravel base and leveling course,
graded and compacted with a 12-foot wide all weather driving surface;
      (4)   Must be constructed with a turnaround of 60 feet for emergency
equipment if longer than 150 feet; and
      (5)   Must be extended to within 150 feet of the most distant corner of
all inhabited buildings.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.15 CHANGES UPON ANNEXATION OF UNINCORPORATED AREA.
   Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the county shall request and
receive a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission on the
proposed Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance changes for the unincorporated
area. The Commission and Council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures
provided in Idaho Code § 67-6509. Concurrently or immediately following the
adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the Council shall amend the Plan and
Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 1451, passed 12-13-1977; Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.16 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a development application, the county shall follow the
notification and public hearing requirements specified in Idaho Code Title 67.
All applications must be sign by the property owner in question. It shall be
the applicant’s responsibility to collect and turn into the city, as part of
his or her application, the names of all property owners within 300 feet of the
property (excluding streets and alleys) if such notification is required.
   (B)   Applications for variances to the code shall be considered when they
are not contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter will result in an
unnecessary hardship because of the physical characteristics of the site. A
variance is a modification of the requirements of this subchapter such as
minimum lot size, width, depth, setbacks affecting the size or shape of the
structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of the lots.
A variance shall not be considered a right or privilege and will only be
granted to the applicant if hardship is proven and it is not in conflict with
the public interest.
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
§ 153.17 LAND USE SCHEDULE.
Land Use Zone
         R/A C I
Land Use                              Zone
                                      R/A C I
AGRICULTURAL
   Agricultural, general           P   P P
   Farm animals (1 unit per acre)  P   P P
   Farm animals (more units per acrS)  S S
   Roadside stand                      P P
COMMERCIAL
   Adult book store                    S
   Amusement centers, indoor           P
   Auto sales/repair                   P
   Bakery                              P
   Bank                                P
   Barber/beauty shop              S   P
   Bar                                 P
   Building supply outlet              P
   Car wash                            P
   Child care facility             S   P
   Dairies                               S
   Dance studio                    S   P
   Drive in restaurant                 P
   Drug store                      S   P
   Dry cleaner                     S   P
   Equipment rental/sales              P
   Feed lots                             S
   Food store                      S   P
   Gift shop                           P
   Hotel/motel                         P
   Junk yard/secondhand sales          S S
   Medical/dental                  S   P
   Laundromat                      S   P
   Nursery                         S   P S
   Office, professional                P
   Recreational vehicle park           P
   Restaurant                      S   P
   Retail stores/services              P
   Service station                 S   P
   Theater                             P
   Wholesale operations                S P
INDUSTRIAL
   Heavy industries                      P
   Light industries                      P
   Manufacturing plants                  P
   Processing plants                     P
PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC
   Churches or parish halls        P   S S
   Public facilities               P   P P
RESIDENTIAL
   Apartment houses                S
   Duplexes/triplexes              S
   Home occupations                P
   Manufactured home               P   S S
   Manufactured home park          S
   More than 1 dwelling per lot    S
   Single-family dwelling          P   S S
   Temporary housing (construction)S   S S
 
(Ord. 96-9-4, passed 9-16-1996)
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND RELATED FACILITIES
§ 153.30 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a set of standards for
the development and installation of telecommunication towers, antennas and
related facilities. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect
and promote public health, safety and the community welfare of the county, and
to encourage managed development of telecommunications infrastructure, while
not unduly restricting the development of needed telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   The county shall apply these regulations to accomplish the following:
      (1)   Minimize adverse visual effects of telecommunication towers,
antennas and related facilities through design and siting standards;
      (2)   Maintain and ensure that a non-discriminatory, competitive and
broad range of telecommunications services and high quality telecommunications
infrastructure consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 are
provided to serve the community;
      (3)   Provide a process for obtaining necessary permits for
telecommunications facilities while at the same time protecting the interests
of the county citizens;
      (4)   Protect environmentally sensitive areas of the county by regulating
the location, design and operation of telecommunication facilities; and
      (5)   Encourage the use of alternative support structures, colocation of
new antennas on existing telecommunication towers, camouflaged towers and
construction of towers with the ability to locate more than one provider.
   (C)   Furthermore, this chapter is not intended to regulate residential
satellite dishes or residential television antennas that are used privately.
Additionally, it is not intended to regulate satellite dishes/ antennas whose
regulation is prohibited by state statutes or as preempted by federal law.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Clock towers, steeples, silos, light poles,
water towers, buildings or similar structures that may support
telecommunication facilities.
   ANTENNA. Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when
such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure.
ANTENNAS shall include devices having active elements extending in any
direction, and directional beam type arrays having elements carried by and
disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated
through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support,
all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the ANTENNA.
   ANTENNA, BUILDING MOUNTED. Any antenna, other than an antenna with its
supports resting on the ground, directly attached or affixed to a building.
   ANTENNA, GROUND MOUNTED. Any antenna with its base placed directly on the
ground.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.
   CAMOUFLAGED TOWER. Any telecommunication tower that due to design or
appearance entirely hides, obscures or conceals the presence of the tower and
antennas.
   CARRIER. Any company, corporation, firm or individual who provides or
supplies wireless telecommunication service. For the purpose of this
subchapter, PROVIDER shall have the same meaning as CARRIER.
   GUYED TOWER. A telecommunications tower that is supported in whole or in
part by guy wires and ground anchors or other means of support besides the
superstructure of the tower itself.
   HEIGHT, TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. The distance measured from the original
grade at the base of the tower to the highest point of the tower. This
measurement excludes any attached antennas, protection devices (e.g., lightning
rods) and lighting.
   LATTICE TOWER. A telecommunication tower that consists of vertical and
horizontal supports and crossed metal braces.
   MONOPOLE. A telecommunication tower of a single pole design.
   NAVIGABLE STREAM OR LAKE. As designated on the United States geological
survey (USGS) map and/or the county zoning map.
   NON-CONFORMING. Any preexisting telecommunications facility that was in
existence prior to the adoption of this subchapter and that has not been issued
a conditional use permit or was issued a conditional use permit prior to the
adoption date hereof.
   OPERATION. Other than nominal use; when a facility is used regularly as an
integral part of an active system of telecommunications, it shall be deemed in
OPERATION.
   PLATFORM. A support system that may be used to connect antennas and antenna
arrays to telecommunication towers or alternative support structures.
   SATELLITE DISH. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid,
open mesh or bar configured that is shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia
shaped and is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals. This
definition is meant to include, but is not limited to, what are commonly
referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (satellite television receive
only) and satellite microwave antennas.
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. A facility, site or location that contains one
or more antennas, telecommunication towers, alternative support structures,
satellite dish antennas, other similar communication devices and support
equipment, which is used for transmitting, receiving or relaying
telecommunications signals.
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY COLOCATED. A telecommunication facility comprised
of a single telecommunication tower or building supporting multiple antennas,
dishes or similar devices owned or used by more than one public or private
entity.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SUPPORT FACILITY. The telecommunication equipment
buildings and equipment cabinets.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including
camouflaged towers, lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. This
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, and common
carrier towers.
   UTILITY POLE MOUNTED ANTENNA. An antenna attached, without regard to
mounting, to or upon an existing or replacement electric transmission or
distribution pole, streetlight, traffic signal, athletic field light, utility
support structure or other similar structure approved by the county’s Planning
and Zoning Department.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The official appointed by the Board of County
Commissioners to administer the county’s Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.32 COUNTY APPROVALS; EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be permitted without county approvals:
   (A)   Accessory use antennas. The use of all television antennas, satellite
dishes and receive only antennas; provided that, the primary use of the
property is not a telecommunications facility and that the antenna use is
accessory to the primary use of the property;
   (B)   Amateur radio. This subchapter shall not govern the installation of
any antenna and its supporting towers, poles and masts that is owned and/or
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator, or is used exclusively
for receive only antennas;
   (C)   Temporary mobile services. Mobile services providing public
information coverage of new events of a temporary or emergency nature;
   (D)   Freestanding antennas. Freestanding (ground mounted antenna) antennas
(not supported on or attached to a building) and their supporting towers, poles
or masts and their equipment buildings 120 square feet or less in size, may be
installed without a zoning permit when the overall height of the antennas and
their supporting structures do not exceed a height of 20 feet above the
original grade at the site of the installation;
   (E)   Building, tower or structure mounted antennas. Antennas installed on,
or attached to, any existing building (building mounted antenna), an existing
telecommunication tower or alternative support structure and their equipment
buildings 120 square feet or less in size, when the height of the antenna and
its supporting tower, pole or mast is 20 feet or less above the highest part of
the building or alternative support structure to which it is attached. Antennas
installed on, or attached to, any existing building, an existing
telecommunication tower or alternative support structure and their equipment
buildings; and
   (F)   Utility pole mounted antennas. Utility pole mounted antennas if the
height of the antenna is 20 feet or less above the highest part of the utility
pole.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.33 AREAS PERMITTING LOCATION BY CONDITIONAL USE OR ADMINISTRATIVE
APPROVAL.
   Telecommunications facilities may be permitted in the following zones,
subject to the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   Agricultural Range Preservation Zone;
   (B)   Agricultural Zone;
   (C)   Rural Residential Zone;
   (D)   Commercial Zone; and
   (E)   Industrial Zone.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.34 AREAS LIMITING LOCATION.
   Telecommunication facilities may be permitted in the following areas,
subject to the provisions of this subchapter and are subject to review and
approval of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and other appropriate
agencies, if applicable:
   (A)   Two-mile radius from heliports;
   (B)   One-mile radius from private airport runway(s); and
   (C)   Three-mile radius from public use airport runway(s).
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.35 AREAS PROHIBITING LOCATION.
   No telecommunications facilities will be allowed in the following areas:
   (A)   Historic sites, as defined by state and/or federal regulation;
   (B)   Critical species habitats, as defined by state and/or federal
regulation;
   (C)   Wetlands, as defined by state and/or federal regulation; and/or
   (D)   Floodplains, as defined by state and/or federal regulation.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.36 FACILITIES 125 FEET OR LESS IN HEIGHT.
   (A)   General. Locating and constructing telecommunication facilities or a
new alternative support structure, including the buildings or other supporting
equipment used in connection with said facilities, 125 feet or less in height
shall require, except for exempt facilities, approval by the Planning and
Zoning Department. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve
or deny permits for telecommunications facilities in this category.
   (B)   Application review and processing. The applicant shall submit an
application to the Planning and Zoning Department for review on a form
prescribed by the county and shall include the information required in §
153.37 of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application
for completeness. Upon determination the application is complete, the process
will proceed as follows.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Department will notify the applicant to
proceed with notification as required by this subchapter.
      (2)   The applicant shall notify any property owner(s) within 300 feet of
the proposed location by first class mail and provided proof of mailing to the
Planning and Zoning Department within five days of mailing.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Department shall accept written comment for
15 days after date of mailing.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall then produce a report, which
includes a summary of such comment or evidence submitted, a reasoned
explanation of the grounds for his or her decision and a final order granting
or denying the permit, setting forth any conditions that the Zoning
Administrator might deem appropriate. Such report shall be filed at the
Planning and Zoning Department within 28 calendar days after the closing date
for accepting written comment, unless additional time for filing such report is
granted by the Board of County Commissioners, upon request of the Zoning
Administrator. Notice of such filing shall be provided in writing to the
applicant and to all parties entitled to notice by this subchapter.
      (5)   The decision of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the
Board of County Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of the county
ordinance.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.37 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Locating and constructing telecommunication facilities or a new alternative
support structure, including the buildings or other supporting equipment used
in connection with said facilities, shall require a conditional use permit for
telecommunications facilities over 125 feet in height.
   (A)   Submittal information. For all telecommunication facilities, the
Planning and Zoning Department shall require the following information to
accompany every application. Said information shall include, but may not be
limited to:
      (1)   Completed conditional use application;
      (2)   Original signature of applicant and landowner (if the
telecommunication facility is located in an easement or pursuant to a ground
lease, the beneficiaries of the easement or ground lease and underlying
property owner must authorize the application);
      (3)   The identity of the carrier, provider, applicant, landowner and
service provider and their legal status;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent and/or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the application;
      (5)   A plat of survey, showing the parcel boundaries, tower, facilities,
location, access, landscaping and fencing;
      (6)   A written legal description of the site;
      (7)   In the case of a leased site, a lease agreement or binding lease
memorandum, which shows on its face that it does not preclude the tower owner
from entering into leases on the tower with other provider(s) and the legal
description and amount of property leased;
      (8)   A description of the telecommunications services that the applicant
offers or provides, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions;
      (9)   Federal Communication Commission (FCC) license numbers and
registration numbers, if applicable;
      (10)   Copies of finds of no significant impacts (FONSI) statement from
the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) or environmental impact study (EIS),
if applicable;
      (11)   An alternatives analysis prepared by the applicant or on behalf of
the applicant by its designated technical representative, subject to the review
and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, which identifies all
reasonable, technically feasible, alternative locations and/or facilities which
could provide the proposed telecommunication service. The intention of the
alternatives analysis is to present alternative strategies which could minimize
the number, size, and adverse environmental impacts of facilities necessary to
provide the needed services to the county. The analysis shall address
justification for proposed height, alternative sites, potential for colocation
and potential to locate facilities as close as possible to the intended service
area. It shall also explain the rationale for selection of the proposed site in
view of the relative merits of any of the feasible alternatives. Approval of
the project is subject to the review and approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The county may require independent verification of this analysis at
the applicant’s expense; the consultant will be chosen by the Planning and
Zoning Department from a list mutually agreed upon by the county and the
applicant;
      (12)   Plans indicating security measures (e.g., access, fencing,
lighting and the like);
      (13)   A tabular and map inventory of all of the applicant’s existing
telecommunications towers that are located within the county and including all
of the applicant’s existing towers within 1,500 feet of the county boundary;
this information need not be resubmitted if already on file with the county’s
Planning and Zoning Department. The inventory shall specify the location,
height, type and design of each of the applicant’s existing telecommunication
towers and the ability of the tower or antenna structure to accommodate
additional colocation antennas;
      (14)   A report prepared by an engineer licensed by the state certifying
the structural design of the tower and its ability to accommodate additional
antennas;
      (15)   Proof of liability coverage;
      (16)   Such other information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may
require;
      (17)   Proof of notification indicating that the airport operator and
airport property owner(s) within the areas limiting telecommunication facility
locations have been notified; and
      (18)   Speculative tower builders shall provide proof of a carrier to
locate on the proposed facility before consideration shall be given to the
application.
   (B)   Colocation. All tower owners shall make available unused space for
colocation of other telecommunication facilities, including space for those
entities providing similar, competing services. Colocation is not required if
the host facility can demonstrate that the addition of the new service or
facilities would impair existing service. All colocated and multiple user
telecommunication support facilities shall be designed for compatible joining
to facilitate site sharing.
   (C)   Technical review. The planning and zoning department, upon direction
of the county’s Planning and Zoning Commission, shall employ on behalf of the
county an independent technical expert to review materials submitted. The
consultant will be chosen from a list mutually agreed upon by the county and
the applicant. The applicant shall pay all the costs of said review. The
payment to the Planning and Zoning Department shall be due upon receipt of the
invoice. All fees and charges accumulated for the technical review must be paid
in full prior to the issuance of the conditional use permit.
   (D)   Submittals required following the conditional use approval. For each
conditional use permit approved by the county’s Planning and Zoning Commission,
the applicant shall submit the following before the conditional use permit will
be issued:
      (1)   Copies of the determination of no hazard from the federal aviation
administration (FAA) including any aeronautical study determination or other
findings and other agencies, if applicable;
      (2)   Copies of any environmental assessment (EA) reports on form 600 or
form 854 submitted to the Federal Communication Commission (FCC), if
applicable;
      (3)   Copies of any filings submitted to the Federal Communication
Commission (FCC) shall be submitted within 30 days of filing, subject to the
review of the Zoning Administrator; and
      (4)   Proof of bond as security for removal.
   (E)   Notices and hearing process.
      (1)   Application review. The applicant shall submit the application to
the Zoning Administrator for review; upon determination by the Zoning
Administrator that the application is complete, it will be scheduled for public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Hearing notice. Notice of time, place and purpose of the public
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
at least 15 days prior to such hearing. Notice shall also be posted on the
property not less than one week prior to the public hearing. The applicant
shall notify any property owner(s) within one mile of the proposed location by
first class mail at least 15 days prior to such hearing. The applicant shall
provide proof of mailing ten days prior to the public hearing. The proof of
mailing shall be either copies of registered mail receipts or an affidavit that
the notice was mailed. When notice is required to 200 or more property owners,
the applicant may request that the following alternate form of notice be
followed: The Board of County Commissioners may order that the notice be
published three times in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, the
last publication of such notice shall be at least ten days before the date set
for the public hearing. The notice shall give the date, time and place of
hearing, the name of the applicant, identification of the property and such
other facts as required by county ordinance(s).
   (F)   Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission
will hear the application in accordance with the provisions of county ordinance
(s) and may give consideration to all reasonable, technically feasible,
alternative locations and/or facilities which could provide the proposed
service. The Planning and Zoning Commission after hearing the application, will
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application after giving
consideration to the requirements of the ordinance and any such evidence that
may be presented at the hearing.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.38 ANNUAL INFORMATION REPORT.
   The purpose of the annual review report is to provide the county with
accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications tower owners
and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the
county, to assist the county in enforcement of this chapter and to assist the
county in monitoring compliance with the conditional use permit.
   (A)   Owner’s annual report. All telecommunications tower owners of any new
or existing telecommunication tower shall submit annually on or before January
31 of each year, to the Planning and Zoning Department a telecommunications
facility annual information report. The annual report shall include the tower
owner name(s), address(es), phone number(s), contact person(s), location(s) of
facilities, annual review fee and proof of bond as security for removal. The
tower owner shall supply the tower height and current occupancy (if
applicable). This information shall be submitted to the county and shall become
evidence of compliance.
   (B)   Provider’s annual report. All telecommunications providers shall
submit annually on or before January 31 of each year, to the Planning and
Zoning Department a telecommunications facility annual information report. The
annual report shall include the providers’ name(s), address(es), phone number
(s), contact person(s), location(s) of facilities and annual report fee.
   (C)   Annual report fee. Following the conditional use approval, every year
thereafter, the tower owner shall submit, on or before January 31 of each year,
to the Planning and Zoning Department an annual report fee of $150 for each
tower site. The fee submittal is the responsibility of each tower owner.
Failure to provide this information shall be a violation of this chapter and
shall be dealt in accordance with §
153.99(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.39 REMOVAL; SECURITY FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   Removal required. It is the express policy of the county that
telecommunications facilities be removed once they are no longer in use and not
a functional part of providing telecommunications service and that it is the
telecommunications tower owner’s responsibility to remove such facilities and
restore the site to its original condition or a condition approved by the
county’s Planning and Zoning Department. This restoration shall include removal
of any subsurface structure or foundation, including concrete, used to support
the telecommunications facility down to five feet below the surface. After a
telecommunications facility is no longer in operation, the tower owner shall
have 90 days to effect removal and restoration unless weather prohibits such
efforts.
   (B)   Security for removal. The telecommunications tower owner shall provide
to the county, prior to the issuance of the conditional use permit or the
issuance of a zoning permit, a performance bond in the amount of $20,000 or a
bond equal to a written estimate from a qualified tower removal contractor to
guarantee that the telecommunications facility will be removed when no longer
in operation. The county will be named as obligee in the bond and must approve
the bonding company.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.40 PREEXISTING TOWERS.
   (A)   Non-conforming and conforming. Telecommunication towers and facilities
may add to, move or replace the tower and facilities upon approval of the
county’s Planning and Zoning Department. An existing tower may be increased in
height a maximum of 50 feet, relocated or reconstructed within 50 feet of its
existing location to accommodate colocation subject to meeting all the other
sections of this chapter, except §§
153.36 and
153.37 of this chapter. Routine maintenance and repair on telecommunications
facilities is permitted.
   (B)   Existing use review.
      (1)   Existing use review for those towers structurally capable to
colocate. Beginning 7-1-2000, all telecommunications tower owners, applicable
to the requirements of this chapter operating in the county prior to the
adoption of this chapter, shall provide the information required under §
153.38 of this chapter (except proof of bond and proof of insurance), and pay
an annual fee of $150 per tower site on or before January 31 of each year.
Failure to provide this information shall be a violation of this subchapter and
shall be dealt in accordance with §
153.99 of this chapter.
      (2)   Existing use review for those towers structurally incapable for
colocation. Beginning 7-1-2000, all telecommunications tower owners, applicable
to the requirements of this subchapter operating in the county prior to the
adoption of this subchapter, shall provide the information required under §
153.38 of this chapter (except proof of bond and proof of insurance), and
submit documents that the tower is structurally incapable of colocation, and
pay a one time fee of $150 per tower site on or before January 31. Failure to
provide this information shall be a violation of this subchapter and shall be
dealt in accordance with §
153.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.41 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Revocation. Grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit shall
be limited to one of the following findings:
      (1)   The owner of such site, service provider and/or tower owner fails
to comply with the requirements of this subchapter;
      (2)   The permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of approval
imposed; and
      (3)   The facility has not been properly maintained.
   (B)   Revocation process.
      (1)   The owner of such site, service provider and/or tower owner shall
be notified by certified mail of non-compliance by the county’s Planning and
Zoning Department.
      (2)   The owner shall comply with such notice within 30 days to the
satisfaction of the county’s Planning and Zoning Department.
      (3)   If compliance is not obtained within 30 days, the county’s Planning
and Zoning Department shall notify the county’s prosecutor of the non-
compliance and proceed with the revocation process. (This time period may be
extended by staff to adjust for seasonal limitations.)
   (C)   Abandonment. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. Time may be
extended upon review and approval of the county’s Planning and Zoning
Department, if the tower owner demonstrates a good faith effort to secure new
tenants. In such circumstances, the following shall apply.
      (1)   The owner of such antenna or tower shall remove said antenna and/or
tower including all supporting equipment and building(s) within 90 days of
receipt of notice from the Planning and Zoning Department notifying the owner
of such abandonment. If removal to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning
Department does not occur within said 90 days, the County Board may order
removal utilizing the established bond and salvage said antenna or tower and
all supporting equipment and building(s). If there are two or more users of a
single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all
operations of the tower cease.
      (2)   The recipient of a conditional use permit for a telecommunications
facility under this subchapter shall notify the Planning and Zoning Department
when the facility is no longer in operation.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.42 STRUCTURAL, DESIGN AND ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Tower, antenna and facilities requirements. All telecommunication
facilities shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the
greatest extent feasible. To this end, all of the following measures shall be
implemented:
      (1)   All telecommunication facilities shall comply at all times with all
Federal Communication Commission (FCC) rules, regulations, and standards. To
that end no telecommunication facility or combination of facilities shall
produce at any time power densities in any inhabited area that exceed the
Federal Communication Commission (FCC) adopted standard for human exposure, as
amended, or any more restrictive standard subsequently adopted or promulgated
by the federal government. All telecommunication towers and antennas shall meet
or exceed the standards and regulations, in place at the time of the issuance
of the conditional use permit, of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
the Idaho State Bureau of Aeronautics, Occupational Safety And Health
Association (OSHA), the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and authority to
regulate towers and antennas.
      (2)   Telecommunication towers shall be constructed out of metal or other
nonflammable material, unless specifically permitted.
      (3)   All ground mounted telecommunication towers shall be self-
supporting monopoles or lattice towers except where satisfactory evidence is
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission that a guyed tower is required.
      (4)   Satellite dish and parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to
the ground as possible to reduce visual impact without compromising their
function.
      (5)   Telecommunication support facilities (such as, equipment rooms,
utilities, and equipment enclosures) shall be constructed out of nonreflective
materials (visible exterior surfaces only). Telecommunication support
facilities shall be no taller than one story, 15 feet in height, measured from
the original grade at the base of the facility to the top of the structure, and
shall be designed to blend with existing architecture in the area or shall be
screened from sight by mature landscaping, and shall be located or designed to
minimize their visibility.
      (6)   Telecommunications towers, facilities and antennas shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the international building code,
other applicable state and federal requirements.
      (7)   The maximum height of an antenna platform located on a rooftop
shall be 20 feet above the roof.
      (8)   Telecommunication facilities shall not interfere with or obstruct
existing or proposed public safety, fire protection or supervisory controlled
automated data acquisition (SCADA) operation telecommunication facilities. The
applicant at no cost to the county shall correct any actual interference and/or
obstruction.
   (B)   Height. The height of a telecommunication tower shall be measured from
the original grade at the base of said tower to the highest part of the tower
itself. In the case of building mounted towers the height of the tower includes
the height of the portion of the building on which it is mounted. In the case
of “crankup” or other similar towers whose height can be adjusted, the height
of the tower shall be the maximum height to which it is capable of being
raised.
   (C)   Lighting. Telecommunication towers shall not be artificially lighted
unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other
applicable regulatory authority.
   (D)   Site development, roads and parking.
      (1)   A leased parcel intended for the location of new telecommunication
tower(s) and equipment building(s) shall maintain a minimum parcel size of
2,500 square feet. The county’s Planning and Zoning Commission may modify the
leased parcel size requirement after public hearing and review.
      (2)   A parcel owned by the telecommunication carrier and/or provider and
intended for the location of new telecommunication tower(s) and equipment
building(s) shall meet the minimum size requirement of this subchapter.
      (3)   All sites must be served by a minimum 25-foot wide easement with a
turnaround. The county’s Planning and Zoning Commission may modify the easement
and turnaround requirement after public hearing and review. All sites shall use
existing access points and roads whenever possible. The respective county
highway district or the applicable road jurisdiction shall approve the access
point to the site.
   (E)   Vegetation protection and facility screening.
      (1)   All telecommunications facilities shall be installed in such a
manner so as to minimize disturbance to existing native vegetation and shall
include suitable mature landscaping to screen the facility, where necessary.
For purposes of this section, MATURE LANDSCAPING shall mean trees, shrubs or
other vegetation of a size that will provide the appropriate level of visual
screening immediately upon installation.
      (2)   Upon project completion, the owner(s)/operator(s) of the facility
shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement of all required
landscaping.
      (3)   Facility structures and equipment, including supporting structures,
shall be located, designed and screened to blend with the existing natural or
built surroundings, so as to reduce visual impacts.
   (F)   Fire prevention. All telecommunication facilities shall be designed
and operated in accordance with all applicable codes regarding fire prevention.
   (G)   Noise and traffic. All telecommunication facilities shall be
constructed and operated in such a manner as to minimize the amount of
disruption caused to nearby properties. To that end, all the following measures
shall be implemented for telecommunication facilities.
      (1)   Noise producing construction activities shall only take place
Monday through Saturday, (non-holidays) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., except in times of emergency repair.
      (2)   Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and
for testing and maintenance purposes.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.43 SEPARATIONS AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum separation. Minimum separation between telecommunication
towers (by tower type):
 
Proposed Tower Types         Lattice    Guyed      Monopole - 85 Feet in Height
                                                   or Greater
Guyed                        1,500 feet 1,500 feet 750 feet
Lattice                      1,500 feet 1,500 feet 750 feet
Monopole - 85 feet in height 750 feet   750 feet   750 feet
or greater
 
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Two towers may be permitted to be located within 100 feet of each
other subject to approval of the county’s Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Three towers may be located within 100 feet of each other permitted
subject to approval of the county’s Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Camouflaged towers are exempt from separation between tower
requirements listed above.
   (C)   Setbacks. All setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower or
structure.
      (1)   Setbacks from all habitable residential buildings, except buildings
located on the subject parcel. All new towers shall be set back a distance
equal to 125% of the height of the tower.
      (2)   Setbacks from all historic sites and districts. All new towers
shall be set back a distance equal to 125% of the height of the tower from
historic sites and districts.
      (3)   Setbacks from property lines. All new towers shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from all property lines. (This requirement does not apply to
the boundary of the leased parcel unless the leased parcel boundary is also a
property line.) The county’s Planning and Zoning Commission may modify this
setback requirement after public hearing and review.
      (4)   Setback from the ordinary high water mark (OHWM). All new towers
shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from the ordinary high water mark (OHWM)
of a navigable stream and a minimum 125% of the tower height from the ordinary
high water mark (OHWM) of a navigable lake.
      (5)   Guy wire anchor setback. All guy wire anchors shall be at least 25
feet from all property lines. The county’s Planning and Zoning Commission may
modify this setback requirement after public hearing and review.
      (6)   Power poles exempt. Power pole change outs are exempt from setback
requirements.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.44 PERMITS.
   A conditional use permit is required for the location of all
telecommunication facilities in the county. Proposed colocation on facilities
previously approved by the county’s Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
approved administratively by the county’s Planning and Zoning Department;
provided that, the applicant complies with the provisions of this chapter and
provides a completed application and permit fee.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of any of the provisions of §§
153.30 through
153.44 of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, may
be dealt with in the following manner. Each day such violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense and shall constitute a misdemeanor, as defined
by state law, and is punishable by up to six months in jail and up to a $300
fine, or both; the county may seek civil penalties and forfeitures to the
maximum extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 11-05-2009, passed 11-5-2009)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Idaho Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IDAHO CODE
Idaho Code Cites Code Sections
Idaho Code Cites Code Sections
18-111           10.12
Title 49, Ch. 15 70.99
Title 50, Ch. 9  10.03
50-1008          92.03
Title 50, Ch. 13 152.02;
                 152.28
50-1303          152.06
50-1313          152.50
Title 67         153.16
Title 67, Ch. 65 152.02;
                 153.02
67-6509          153.15
                 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
 
Res. No.   Date Passed Description
04-14-07   4-14-2007   91.01—
                       91.04 
11-05-2009 11-3-2009   151.02
11-25-2014 12-1-2014   70.03
08-17-15   8-17-2015   31.01—
                       31.05
09-04-18   9-4-2018    50.01—
                       50.03
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       90.01—
                       90.03;
-          - -         90.15—
                       90.22;
                       90.99
1451       12-13-1977  153.15
                       152.01—
                       152.10;
                       152.25—
                       152.28;
-          9-11-1995   152.40—
                       152.50;
                       152.65—
                       152.67;
                       152.99
-          8- -1996    150.01
96-9-4     9-16-1996   153.01—
                       153.17
96-10-1    10-1-1996   151.01;
                       151.99
                       92.01—
10-19-2015 10-19-2005  92.04;
                       92.99
06-27-12   12-27-2006  110.01
1/11/08    2-12-2008   110.01
9/16/08    10-14-2008  110.01
                       153.30—
11-05-2009 11-5-2009   153.44;
                       153.99
10-28-2014 11-3-2014   70.02;
                       70.99
02-11-2015 2-16-2015   70.01;
                       70.99
                       51.01—
05-18-15   5-18-2015   51.08;
                       51.99
10-19-15   10-19-2015  30.15—
                       30.18
09/04/2018 9-4-2018    30.01
                       90.02;
-          7-6-2020    90.15;
                       90.17
 
 
