CITY CODE
of
JEROME, IDAHO
Code current through:
Ord. 1239, passed 3-18-2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Jerome, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 1239, passed March 18, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1240
BILL NO. 725
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JEROME REVISING TITLE 8
AND TITLE 10 OF THE JEROME MUNICIPAL CODE; SPECIFICALLY, CHAPTER 8.08.010
CORRECTING FORMATTING; CHAPTER 8.08.030 AND 8.08.040 CLARIFYING FEES AND THE
NON-PAYMENT PROCEDURE; CHAPTER 10.04.060 UPDATING THE PAYMENT PROCESS;
10.20.040 CLARIFYING THE FEES AND PAYMENT LOCATION; AND PROVIDING FOR AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, Title 8 Chapter 08.08.010 needs re-formatting to prevent confusion on
the Definitions of the Chapter; and
WHEREAS, Title 8 Chapter 08.08.030 and 08.08.040 need to be amended to include
court fees and clarify the process the City of Jerome can take for non-payment
of an abatement; and
WHEREAS, Title 10 Chapter 10.04.060 needs to be amended to include court fees,
payment location, and update the process for appeal to the courts; and
WHEREAS, Title 10 Chapter 10.20.040 needs to be amended to include court fees
and the payment location.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDAINED by the Mayor and the City Council of Jerome, Idaho, as
follows:
SECTION 1. Jerome Municipal Code 08.08.010, 08.08.030, and 08.08.040 shall be
amended as follows:
8.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
   GRAFFITI: Any inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or design
that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any real or personal
property or improvement, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, gates,
pavement, buildings, rocks, trees, bridges, streets, sidewalks, and/or signs,
whether such property is public, private, temporary, or permanent, without the
consent of the owners of such property or the owner's authorized agent, and
which inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or design is visible
from any publicly accessible location.
   JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle, or parts thereof, which:
   A.   Cannot be safely operated under its own power;
   B.   Is parked in public right-of-way and is not registered or licensed;
   C.   Is missing any one of the following: foot brakes, hand brakes,
headlights, taillights, horn, muffler, rearview mirrors, windshield wipers or
adequate fenders;
   D.   Has been declared salvage, or has been physically damaged to the extent
that the costs of parts and labor minus the salvage value would make it
uneconomical to repair or rebuild such vehicle; or
   E.   Is otherwise in a wrecked, partially dismantled, inoperative, or
dilapidated condition.
This definition shall not include junk vehicles lawfully stored or parked and
screened from view from a public right-of-way pursuant to the operation of a
lawfully conducted business, industry or commercial enterprise.
 NUISANCE: Anything which unreasonably injures or offends the health or senses;
obstructs the free passage, comfortable enjoyment, or customary use of public
or private property; or creates an actual or potential safety, health, or fire
hazard. Nuisances shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
conditions designated as abatable nuisances and as general nuisances.
ABATABLE NUISANCE: Nuisance conditions that may be abated by the City in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, specifically including, without
limitation, the following nuisance conditions:
   A.   Nuisance weeds.
   B.   Graffiti, on any surface.
   C.   Snow or ice on any public sidewalk abutting or adjoining any privately
owned premises.
   D.   Vegetation, other than trees, that impedes or obstructs a public
sidewalk or roadway.
GENERAL NUISANCE: Nuisance conditions that may lead to criminal charges without
any prior attempt by the City to obtain abatement thereof, specifically
including, without limitation, the following nuisance conditions:
      A.   Bulky Waste: Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines,
furniture, appliances, and other waste materials other than construction
debris, dead animals, hazardous materials, or stable matter with weights or
volumes greater than those allowed for containers.
      B.   Construction Debris: Waste building materials resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations.
      C.   Dead Animal: Any animal, or portions thereof that has expired from
any cause.
      D.   Garbage: Every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or
matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in,
handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay, or decomposition of
meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter
(including, but not by any way of limitation, used tin cans, milk cartons, and
other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal
or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except in all
cases any matter included in the definitions of "bulky waste", "construction
debris", "dead animal", "hazardous materials", "rubbish", or "stable matter".
      E.   Hazardous Materials: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance, or
article designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
other governing authority of the State or Federal government to be hazardous as
that term is defined by or pursuant to Federal or State law. Except, however,
that this definition shall not include the incidental leakage of nuisance
materials from registered vehicles lawfully moving or lawfully parked upon a
public right-of-way; the lawful application of pesticides or herbicides for
purposes of controlling pests or weeds; or activity otherwise specifically
allowed by law or by written permit issued by the City or other governing
authority.
      F.   Rubbish: Waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings,
dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, cardboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded clothing, combustible waste pulp and other
products such as are used for packing, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes,
cinders, floor sweepings, grass, mineral and metallic substances and any and
all other waste materials not included in the definitions of "bulky waste",
"construction debris", "dead animal" , "garbage", "hazardous materials" or
"stable matter".
      G.   Stable Matter: All manure and other waste matter normally
accumulated in or about a stable or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure
and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock.
      H.   Waste Matter: Used or discarded matter having no substantial market
value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or
otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists (without limitation or
exclusion by enumeration) of such matter and material as:
         1.   Rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile;
         2.   Rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers; and
         3.   Vehicle bodies and parts.
   NUISANCE MATERIALS: Hazardous, noxious, dangerous, or offensive materials,
including, but not limited to, oil, gasolines, fuel, antifreeze, paint,
pesticides, or herbicides.
   NUISANCE WEEDS: Undesirable plant growth, whether living or dead, which:
   A.   Is over eight inches (8") in height;
   B.   By reason of size, manner of growth, location, or dryness, constitutes
a safety, health, or fire hazard to any person, building, improvement, crop, or
other real or personal property;
   C.   By reason of size, manner of growth, or location, impedes or obstructs
a sidewalk or roadway or any portion thereof; or
   D.   Is designated as a noxious weed by the State of Idaho.
This definition shall not include cultivated grasses and pastures, though such
vegetation may be declared a nuisance where otherwise appropriate. (Ord. 1176,
2019)
8.08.030: ABATABLE NUISANCES; PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
A.   Applicability: The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to
abatable nuisances.
B.   Abatable Nuisance Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant,
user, or person in charge or control of any property to create, cause, commit,
maintain, or allow the existence of any abatable nuisance on such property, or
upon any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way abutting such property
including the area behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and property to the
center of alleys and ditches. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
create, cause, allow, or commit any nuisance upon any public property, right-
of-way, or infrastructure, including sidewalks, streets, gutters, or storm
drains.
C.   Procedure: If it is determined by a Code Enforcement Officer that an
abatable nuisance exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a notice of
violation and order to abate to be issued to the owner, occupier, and/or person
in control of such property. Such notice and order shall contain the street
address and parcel number of the property, describe the nuisance existing
thereon, order the abatement of the nuisance, establish the time period for
abatement, specify the penalty for noncompliance, and describe the opportunity
and time for appeal. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue such notice and
order to the owner, occupier, or person in control of the property on which the
nuisance exists in one of the following ways:
   1.   By personal service upon such owner, occupier, or person in charge or
control of the property; or
   2.   By regular mail to such owner, occupier, or person in charge or control
of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or
as otherwise known; or
   3.   By posting such notice and order at a conspicuous place on the property
and publishing one notice in the official newspaper of the City that the
property has been posted in accordance with this chapter and ordering the
owner, occupier, or person in charge or control of the property.
D.   Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner, occupier, or
person in charge or control of any property where any abatable nuisance exists,
to abate such nuisance within five (5) calendar days from the date of personal
service, mailing, or publication, except that the Code Enforcement Officer may
require summary abatement of an abatable nuisance where such condition presents
an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human health or safety.
Abatement of graffiti shall meet the following standards:
   1.   The removal of such graffiti shall not follow the pattern of the
graffiti such that the inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or
design of such graffiti remains apparent.
   2.   The removal of such graffiti by painting over it shall be reasonably
similar or identical to the original color of the surface upon which such
graffiti is applied.
   3.   If the surface is heavily covered with graffiti, the entire surface
shall be repainted.
E.   Appeal: Within five (5) calendar days from the date of service, mailing,
or publication of the notice of violation and order to abate, the owner,
occupier, and/or person in charge or control of the subject property may appeal
to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk, which
appeal shall enumerate the grounds for appeal. The City Clerk may schedule such
appeal for hearing at the next regular meeting of the City Council. The City
Council shall consider written and oral testimony from the appellant and shall
affirm, withdraw, or modify the order to abate. The decision of the City
Council shall be final. If the City Council affirms the order, the appellant
shall have five (5) calendar days from the date of such affirmation to abate
the nuisance as ordered.
F.   Criminal Penalties: If, following notice of violation and order to abate,
any person allows the existence of an abatable nuisance, such person shall be
guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) plus court costs. A second violation within a calendar
year of the first violation shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. A third and any subsequent violation within
a calendar year of the first violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months'
imprisonment in the County Jail, and/or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each and every day in which any such violation continues may be deemed a
separate and subsequent violation. Upon conviction for a violation of this
section, the City shall request from the Criminal Court an order of restitution
for any and all costs of abatement and/or other related costs incurred by the
City. Peace officers and Code Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to
issue Idaho uniform citations to violators of this section.
G.   Civil Penalties: In addition to any other penalties described in this
section, the City may also take civil action to obtain an order enjoining the
ongoing maintenance of such property free from nuisance, and/or to recover any
and all costs of abatement, enforcement, litigation, and/or prosecution
including, but not limited to, attorney fees and court costs.
H.   Abatement; Administrative Penalties: In addition to pursuing criminal and/
or civil penalties, and notwithstanding the imposition of any civil or criminal
fine, penalty or imprisonment, the Code Enforcement Officer, after providing
notice and hearing as provided herein, may abate or cause the abatement of any
abatable nuisance; where the owner, occupant, agent or person in control of
property does not comply in all respects with an order to abate, the Code
Enforcement Officer may abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance. The
owner, occupier, and/or person in charge or control of the subject property
shall be billed, assessed, and/or held responsible for any and all actual
expenses of such work, and any related charges, including fees and fines that
may be imposed pursuant to this chapter and/or adopted by fee schedule,
pursuant to the following procedures:
   1.   Recovery Of Abatement Costs And Fees: Within thirty (30) days of
abatement of the nuisance, the City shall send the owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property, by regular mail, a billing
statement requiring payment to City the costs of abating the nuisance and
administrative fee as established by fee schedule.
   2.   Nonpayment Of Abatement Costs: If full payment is not made to the City
within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the billing statement requiring
payment of abatement costs and fees, the City may:
       a. .   Levy a special assessment against the subject property pursuant
to Idaho Code sections 50-1008 and 50-334 and/or any subsequently adopted or
otherwise applicable laws. Notice of the special assessment shall be sent by
regular mail to the owner of the subject property, and shall state the address
and parcel number of the subject property, date of abatement action taken, and
state the amount to be assessed, including any applicable administrative and/or
late fees, and shall state that if the assessment is not paid within thirty
(30) days, the assessment will be placed on the Real Property Tax rolls and
will become a lien against such property. If payment to the City Clerk is not
made within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of special assessment,
the assessment shall be declared delinquent and shall be certified, including a
ten percent (10%) late fee, to the Jerome County Assessor by the City Clerk,
not later than August 1 of each year. Upon such certification, the assessment
shall be placed upon the tax roll and shall thereafter become a lien against
the property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner
and subject to the same penalties as other City taxes. Upon payment of the
assessment, fees and penalties in full, the City Clerk shall file a release of
lien with the Jerome County Assessor.
I.   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Code
Enforcement Officer, Peace Officer, or Fire Marshal from requiring,
undertaking, or causing summary abatement of an abatable nuisance where such
condition presents an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human
health or safety.
J.   Noxious Weeds: In addition to other remedies set forth in this chapter,
the Code Enforcement Officer may notify Jerome County of the presence of
noxious weeds.
8.08.040: GENERAL NUISANCES; PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
A.   Applicability: The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to
general nuisances.
B.   General Nuisance Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant,
user, or person in charge or control of any property to create, cause, commit,
maintain, or allow the existence of any general nuisance on such property, or
upon any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way abutting such property
including the area behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and property to the
center of alleys and ditches. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
create, cause, allow, or commit any nuisance upon any public property, right-
of-way, or infrastructure, including sidewalks, streets, gutters, or storm
drains.
C.   Criminal Penalties: If, following notice of violation and order to abate,
any person allows the existence of an abatable nuisance, such person shall be
guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) plus court costs. A second violation within a calendar
year of the first violation shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. A third and any subsequent violation within
a calendar year of the first violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months'
imprisonment in the County Jail, and/or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each and every day in which any such violation continues may be deemed a
separate and subsequent violation. Upon conviction for a violation of this
section, the City shall request from the Criminal Court an order of restitution
for any and all costs of abatement and/or other related costs incurred by the
City. Peace officers and Code Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to
issue Idaho uniform citations to violators of this section.
D.   Civil Penalties: In addition to any other penalties described in this
section, the City may also take civil action to obtain an order mandating the
abatement of such general nuisance and ongoing maintenance of such property
free from nuisance, and/or to recover any and all costs of enforcement,
litigation, and/or prosecution including, but not limited to, attorney fees and
court costs.
    1.   Recovery Of Abatement Costs And Fees: Within thirty (30) days of
abatement of the nuisance, the City shall send the owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property, by regular mail, a billing
statement requiring payment to City the costs of abating the nuisance and
administrative fee as established by fee schedule.
    2.   Nonpayment Of Abatement Costs: If full payment is not made to the City
within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the billing statement requiring
payment of abatement costs and fees, the City may:
       a.   Levy a special assessment against the subject property pursuant to
Idaho Code sections 50-1008 and 50-334 and/or any subsequently adopted or
otherwise applicable laws. Notice of the special assessment shall be sent by
regular mail to the owner of the subject property, and shall state the address
and parcel number of the subject property, date of abatement action taken, and
state the amount to be assessed, including any applicable administrative and/or
late fees, and shall state that if the assessment is not paid within thirty
(30) days, the assessment will be placed on the Real Property Tax rolls and
will become a lien against such property. If payment to the City Clerk is not
made within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of special assessment,
the assessment shall be declared delinquent and shall be certified, including a
ten percent (10%) late fee, to the Jerome County Assessor by the City Clerk,
not later than August 1 of each year. Upon such certification, the assessment
shall be placed upon the tax roll and shall thereafter become a lien against
the property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner
and subject to the same penalties as other City taxes. Upon payment of the
assessment, fees and penalties in full, the City Clerk shall file a release of
lien with the Jerome County Assessor.
E.   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Code
Enforcement Officer, Peace Officer, or Fire Marshal from requiring,
undertaking, or causing summary abatement of a general nuisance where such
condition presents an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human
health or safety.
SECTION 2. Jerome Municipal Code 10.04.060 and 10.20.040 shall be amended as
follows:
10.04.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A.   Penalty Payment: A single violation of this chapter shall be punishable by
an infraction in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus court fees. A
person who has received a notice of violation under this chapter signed by a
law enforcement officer may pay the civil penalty within fifteen (15) calendar
days of its receipt at the Thomas H Borresen Judicial Complex or by mailing the
final amount to the Judicial Complex, as directed on the notice of violation. .
Alternatively, the person receiving the notice of violation may appeal the
violation by appearing before the court.
10.20.040: VIOLATION:
A. Penalty Payment: Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall pay a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court fees. Any person found guilty of a
subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period shall be subject to a
fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court fees. Any person found guilty
of a third violation in any twelve (12) month period shall be subject to a fine
of three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court fees. Any violations of this code
by a business shall be found guilty and pay the fines as stated above
regardless of the registered truck owner.
B. A person who has received a notice of violation under this chapter signed by
a law enforcement officer may pay the infraction within fifteen (15) calendar
days of its receipt at the Thomas H Borresen Judicial Complex or by mailing the
final amount to the Judicial Complex, as directed on the notice of violation.
Alternatively, the person receiving the notice of violation may appeal the
violation by appearing before the court.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL this 15 th day of April 2025.
SIGNED BY THE MAYOR this 15 th day of April 2025.
CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO
By:
/s/ David M. Davis   
David M. Davis, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Katie Elliott for      
Bernadette Coderniz, City Clerk
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1242
BILL NO. 727
 
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1229 THE
APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2024 AND
ENDING SEPTEMBER 30, 2025: APPROPRIATING ADDITIONAL MONEYS FROM EXISTING
RESERVES BY THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO, IN THE SUM OF $100,000 AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO:
 
   SECTION 1. That Ordinance No. 1229, the appropriation ordinance for the City
of Jerome, Idaho, for the fiscal year commencing October 1, 2024 and ending
September 30, 2025, be and the same is hereby amended as follows:
 
   That the additional sum of $100,000 be appropriated out of the existing
reserves in the Irrigation Fund to be used for authorized activities.
 
 
SECTION 2. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication.
 
PASSED by the City Council and approved by the Mayor of the City of Jerome,
Idaho this 19th day of August, 2025.
 
By:
/s/ David M. Davis   
David M. Davis, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Bernadette Coderniz     
Bernadette Coderniz, City Clerk
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1243
BILL NO. 728
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO, APPROPRIATING THE SUMS OF MONEY
NECESSARY TO DEFRAY ALL THE EXPENSES AND LIABILITIES OF THE SAID CITY FOR THE
FISCAL YEAR BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2025 AND ENDING SEPTEMBER 30, 2026; STATING
AND SETTING FORTH THE FUNDS FOR WHICH SUCH APPROPRIATIONS ARE MADE, THE OBJECT
AND PURPOSES THEREFORE, AND THE AMOUNTS APPROPRIATED FOR EACH FUND, OBJECT AND
PURPOSE.
 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO:
 
Section 1. That this ordinance shall be termed the Annual Appropriation
Ordinance for the City of Jerome, Idaho.
 
Section 2.  That there be and hereby are appropriated the sums of money
necessary to defray all the necessary expenses and liabilities of the City of
Jerome for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2025 and ending September 30,
2026.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/259792480e18815d89e0cc2132243e7b9c3628c3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5728_8577x4617.jpg]
 
 
Section 3. That this ordinance shall become effective upon its passage and
publication as required by law.
 
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL this 19th day of August, 2025.
 
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR this 19th day of August, 2025.
 
By:
/s/ David M. Davis   
David M. Davis, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Bernadette Coderniz     
Bernadette Coderniz, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1245
BILL NO. 730
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO, GRANTING TO INTERMOUNTAIN GAS
COMPANY A TWENTY (20) YEAR EXTENSION TO ITS FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN
AND OPERATE A GAS TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM; PROVIDING FOR THE USE
OF STREETS AND ALLEYS, AND RULES GOVERNING THE SAME, SUBJECTING THE GRANTEE TO
ALL POWERS OF THE CITY; SETTING FORTH THE RULES OF THE FRANCHISE AND GRANT;
PROVIDING FOR THE RIGHT OF INSPECTION BY THE CITY OF GRANTEE'S PLANS, ACCOUNTS,
AND BOOKS; REQUIRING GRANTEE TO FURNISH CERTAIN MAPS; SETTING FORTH THE ANNUAL
PAYMENT TO THE CITY, AND THE FILING OF ANNUAL REPORTS WITH THE CITY; REQUIRING
GRANTEE TO INDEMNIFY CITY, AND FILE EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE; REQUIRING COMPLIANCE
WITH SAFETY REGULATIONS; SETTING FORTH AN AGREEMENT NOT TO COMPETE, RESERVING
POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN; PROVIDING FOR SURRENDER OF FRANCHISE; GRANTING RIGHT
TO SALVAGE; REQUIRING WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE; PROVIDING FOR CONSENT TO SALE,
ASSIGNMENT OR LEASE; PROVIDING FOR PAYMENT OF PUBLICATION COST; SETTING FORTH
PENALTIES AND FORFEITURES, SEPARABILITY AND REPEAL.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF JEROME, IDAHO;
SECTION 1: Grant of Authority.
There is hereby granted to Intermountain Gas Company, a corporation, its
successors and assigns (hereinafter collectively referred to as "Grantee") a
twenty (20) year extension to the right and authority to construct, install,
maintain and operate a gas transmission and distribution system, including
mains, pipes, conduits, services and other necessary structures and appliances
appertaining in, under, upon, over, across and along the streets, alleys,
bridges and public places within the present and future corporate limits of the
City of Jerome, Idaho (hereinafter referred to as "City") for the furnishing,
transmission, distribution and sale of gas, whether artificial, natural, mixed
or otherwise, for heating, domestic, industrial and other purposes and for
transmitting gas into, through and beyond said City. The City represents that
it has the sole power and authority to make this grant of authority and agrees
to notify Grantee in writing if the City should cease to have this power.
SECTION 2: Use of Streets and Rules Governing the Same.
Grantee shall secure a permit for any opening it shall make in the streets,
alleys and public places in the City and shall be subject to all applicable
ordinances, but no fee shall be required of Grantee for any such permit.
Grantee may, however, open or disturb the streets, alleys, and public places
without a permit if an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of
facilities. The location or relocation of all facilities shall be made under
the supervision and with the approval of such representatives as the governing
body of the City may designate for such purpose, but not so as unreasonably to
interfere with the proper operating of Grantee's facilities and service.
Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or shall change the grade or
line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any
conduit, water main, sewer or water connection or other city public works or
city utility, it shall be the duty of the Grantee when so ordered by the City
to change its mains, services and other property in the streets or public
places at its own expense so as to conform to the established grade or line of
such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the conduits,
sewers and other mains of the City as constructed or reconstructed; however,
the Grantee shall not be required to relocate pipes, mains and appurtenances
when the street, alley or public ground in which they are located is vacated
for the convenience of abutting property owners and not as an incident to the
public improvement, unless the reasonable cost of such relocation and the loss
and expenses resulting therefrom is first paid to Grantee. The City will avoid
the need for such moving or changing whenever possible. In the event Federal,
State or other funds are available in whole or in part for utility relocating
purposes, the City shall apply for such funds and the Grantee will be
reimbursed to the extent any such funds are actually obtained.
SECTION 3: Grantee Subject to All Powers of City Rules Governing Repair and
Reconstruction of Streets.
The exercise of privileges herein granted shall be subject at all times to all
of the powers of the City and all regulatory ordinances adopted pursuant
thereto. The Grantee shall not unnecessarily or unreasonably obstruct the use
of or damage any street or alley and shall within a reasonable time and as
early as practicable upon completion of any construction or repair work,
restore all City streets and alleys to the same order and condition as they
were before the excavation was made insofar as reasonably possible. The Grantee
shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year all
portions of streets and alleys disturbed by it or its agents. The Grantee shall
be responsible for any obstruction in any street, alley or other public place
caused by it in the operation and maintenance of its properties occurring at
any time and shall promptly remove such obstruction. Any such obstruction
which, after proper notice to Grantee demanding removal is not promptly removed
by the Grantee may be taken care of by the City and the costs thereof shall be
charged against Grantee. For purposes of this Section, Grantee’s above-ground
facilities or temporary construction materials and equipment shall not be
considered an “obstruction”.
SECTION 4: Term of Franchise and Grant.
Such right and authority, permission and power are hereby granted for a term of
twenty (20) years from and after the date of the final acceptance of this
Ordinance by the Company, herein referred to as the primary term. This
franchise will automatically renew for successive periods of ten (10) years
unless cancelled at the end of a term by either party by written notice to the
other party no less than 180 calendar days prior to the end of the primary term
or the then current successive term.
SECTION 5: City Right to Inspection of Grantee’s Plans, Accounts and Books –
Grantee to Furnish Certain Maps.
Upon reasonable advance notice, the City shall have access to Grantee's records
to the extent necessary to verify the accuracy of the Franchise fee payments
required herein during the normal business hours of Grantee. The Grantee shall
furnish, upon request, the City with a complete set of maps, including plans
and profile of the distribution system of the Grantee and any future
extensions. The City shall make every reasonable effort to maintain the
confidentiality of any trade secrets or other proprietary information (such as
proprietary maps and other mapping information) provided pursuant to this
Section, including execution of a data sharing agreement with Grantee. Any map
supplied shall not be used for locating gas facilities with the intent of
excavating. Prior to excavating, the City shall request line locates per the
requirements of Idaho Statutes Title 55 Chapter 22 Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention.
SECTION 6: Payment to City And Filing of Annual Written Report With The City
As consideration for this franchise and grant said Grantee, its successors and
assigns, during the franchise period, shall pay to the City three percent (3%)
of the gross receipts received from all sales of gas by Grantee within the
corporate limits of the City through use, operation or possession of this
franchise and grant.
Such payments shall be made on a quarterly basis and shall be in lieu of any
and all other fees, charges, licenses or taxes (other than ad valorem taxes)
related to easements, franchises, rights-of way, utility lines and equipment
installation, maintenance and removal during the term of the public service
providers' franchise with the City which the City may impose for the rights and
privileges herein granted or for the privilege of doing business within the
City.
The Grantee shall file 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter with the
City a report for the preceding calendar quarter, which report shall contain a
statement of all the gross receipts arising from all sales of gas by said
Grantee within the City for the calendar quarter preceding such report, and at
the same time the Grantee shall pay to the City the stipulated percentage of
the gross quarterly receipts due for the calendar quarter which said report is
made and filed.
SECTION 7: Grantee Liability - Indemnification
It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the Grantee and the City
that the Grantee shall save the City harmless from all loss sustained by the
City on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever,
resulting from negligence on the part of the Grantee in the construction,
operation or maintenance of its gas system in the City. The City shall notify
the grantee's representative in the City within ten (10) days after the
presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against
the City on account of any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the Grantee.
Nothing herein shall require Grantee to save and hold the City harmless to the
extent any loss sustained by the City is caused by the acts, omissions, or
negligence of the City its agents, representatives, contractors, officers,
directors, employees, or other parties subject to its direction or control.
SECTION 8: Insurance
Upon acceptance of this franchise by Grantee and before Grantee shall have any
rights hereunder, Grantee shall file with the City Clerk a certificate
evidencing the insurance of the Grantee against property damage in an amount
not less than $500,000.00 and bodily injury with limits of not less than
$500,000.00 per person and $1,000,000.00 total for each occurrence. Provided,
however, the minimum limits of insurance as set forth herein shall be
automatically increased at any time the liability limits of the City are
increased pursuant to the Idaho Tort Claims Act (Idaho Code Section 6-901 et.
seq.) or any similar legislation.
SECTION 9: Safety Regulation Compliance
Grantee shall comply with and conform to all safety regulations promulgated by
the United States, State of Idaho, or any regulatory body having jurisdiction
thereof.
SECTION 10: Agreement Not to Compete – Reserve to City Power of Eminent Domain
In consideration of Grantee's undertaking hereunder as evidenced by its
acceptance hereof the City agrees not to engage in the business of distributing
and selling gas during the life of this franchise or any extension thereof in
competition with the Grantee, its successor and assigns; but nothing herein
contained shall be construed or deemed to prevent the City from exercising at
any time any power of eminent domain granted to it under the laws of the State
of Idaho.
SECTION 11: Surrender of Franchise
In the event natural gas at any time shall cease to be available to Grantee for
the distribution and sale hereunder, Grantee reserves the right to surrender
this franchise and in the event of such surrender prior to any expiration or
termination of this franchise, or in any of such events, Grantee reserves the
right to salvage all of its plant, works and facilities, and will restore
City's streets and alleys damaged by such salvage operation.
SECTION 12: Written Acceptance
The Grantee shall within thirty (30) days after the passage and publication of
this ordinance, file with the City Clerk its acceptance of this franchise in
writing signed by its proper officers and attested by its corporate seal.
SECTION 13: Publication Costs
The Grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise as such
publication is required by law.
SECTION 14: Forfeiture
Any material violation by the Grantee, its vendee, lessee or successors of the
provisions of this ordinance, franchise and grant or any material portions
thereof or the failure promptly to perform any of the provisions thereof shall
be cause for the forfeiture of this franchise and grant and all rights
hereunder should Grantee fail to cure such violation within sixty (60) calendar
days of City’s providing Grantee written notice, which shall be served upon
Grantee by registered mail on its Region Director at 555 South Cole Road,
Boise, ID 83709, or if not reasonably capable of being cured within sixty (60)
calendar days, within such other reasonable period of time as the parties may
agree. This provision shall not prevent the Grantee from submitting such
question of forfeiture to proper court determination.
SECTION 15: Separability
If any part or parts of this ordinance shall be adjudged by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of any
other part or parts hereof which can be given effect without the part or parts
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid. The City declares that it would
have passed the remaining parts of this ordinance if it had been known that
such other part or parts thereof would be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 16: Repeal
All ordinances and parts or ordinances of City in conflict herewith shall be,
and the same are hereby repealed.
SECTION 17: Notifications
Whenever this Franchise calls for notice to or notification by any party, the
same (unless otherwise specially provided) shall be in writing and directed to
the recipient at the address set forth in this Section, unless written notice
of change of address is provided to the other party. If the date for making any
payment or performing any act is a legal holiday, payment may be made, or the
act performed on the next succeeding business day which is not a legal holiday.
Notices shall be directed to the parties as follows:
To the City:      City Clerk
            City of Jerome
            152 East Avenue A
            Jerome, ID 83338
 
   To IGC:      Region Director
            Intermountain Gas Company
            555 S Cole Road
            Boise, Idaho 83709
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force on October 11, 2025 following
its passage, approval, and publication as required by law, and the execution of
the “Acceptance and Consent” by Grantee.
DATED this 7th day of October, 2025
CITY OF JEROME
/s/ David M. Davis   
David M. Davis, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
/s/ Bernadette Coderniz     
Bernadette Coderniz, City Clerk
 
ACCEPTANCE AND CONSENT
INTERMOUNTAIN GAS COMPANY, as the franchisee and ‘Grantee’ in the ordinance set
forth above, accepts the franchise set forth therein at the time of Grantee’s
execution, and agrees to abide by the terms and conditions thereof.
Specifically (and pursuant to I.C. § 50-329A), IGC consents to the three
percent (3%) franchise fee assessed by the City pursuant to this ordinance.
 
DATED this 8th day of October, 2025
/s/ Eric Martuscelli________________________
By: Eric Martuscelli
Its: VP, Field Operations & Customer Experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1246
BILL NO. 731
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO, REVISING
THE ZONING ORDINANCE BY REZONING CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY DESCRIBED HEREIN;
PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the City has heard and approved an application for rezoning of Real
Property described as follows:
That part of Block A-234, Jerome Townsite, Jerome County, Idaho, as the same is
platted in the official plat thereof, now of record in the office of the
Recorder of said County, described as follows:
Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Block A-234;
Thence Westerly along the Northerly boundary of said Block A-234, a distance of
408.95 feet;
Thence Southerly parallel with the Easterly boundary of said Block A-234, a
distance of 319.55 feet to the Southerly boundary of said Block A-234;
Thence Easterly along the Southerly boundary of said Block A-234, a distance of
408.95 feet to the Southeast corner of said Block A-234;
Thence Northerly along the Easterly boundary of said Block A-234, a distance of
319.55 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING.
(hereinafter collectively the “Real Property”); and,
WHEREAS, the Real Property is presently zoned Light Industrial (M-1); and
WHEREAS, the owner of the Real Property is requesting to re-zone that portion
of the Real Property described to Residential 3 (R-3); and
WHEREAS, the Jerome City Planning and Zoning Commission held a public hearing
on September 9, 2025, and recommended approval of the property owner’s rezoning
request; and
WHEREAS, a public hearing to discuss the recommended zoning designation was
held on September 16, 2025, before the Jerome City Council.
WHEREAS, adequate findings of fact and conclusions of law have been made and
the City Council is authorized to pass the following Ordinance amending the
zoning ordinance.
   BE IT THEREFORE ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL of the City of Jerome,
Idaho, as follows:
Section 1:   Rezone. The Real Property described above is hereby rezoned from
Light Industrial (M-1) to Residential 3 (C-3).
Section 2:   Amendment to City Maps and Comprehensive Plan. All applicable
sections of the Jerome Municipal Code and the City of Jerome’s Comprehensive
Land Use Plan shall be amended to reflect the amendment described in Section 1.
Section 3:    Severability. If a part of this ordinance is ruled invalid, all
valid parts that are severable from the invalid part remain in effect. If a
part of the ordinance is ruled invalid in one or more of its applications, the
part remains in effect for all valid applications that are severable from the
invalid applications.
Section 4:   Effective Date. This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage
and publication as required by law.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL this 7 th day of October 2025.
SIGNED BY THE MAYOR this 7 th day of October 2025.
By:
/s/ David M. Davis   
David M. Davis, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Bernadette Coderniz     
Bernadette Coderniz, City Clerk
 
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1.01
CODE ADOPTION 1
SECTION:
1.01.010: Adoption
1.01.020: Title; Citation; Reference
1.01.030: Codification Authority
1.01.040: Ordinances Passed Prior To Adoption Of The Code
1.01.050: Reference Applies To All Amendments
1.01.060: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1.01.070: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1.01.080: Repeal Of Existing Ordinances
1.01.090: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1.01.100: Effective Date
1.01.110: Constitutionality
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-903 et seq.
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code sections 50-903 to 50-906, there is
hereby adopted the "Jerome Municipal Code", as published by Book Publishing
Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 646 §1, 1981)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the JEROME MUNICIPAL CODE, and it shall be
sufficient to refer to said code as the "Jerome municipal code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof, or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting, or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Jerome municipal code".
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections, and subsections
of the "Jerome municipal code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered
title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 646 §2,
1981)
1.01.030: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the city of Jerome, Idaho, codified pursuant
to the provisions of sections 50-903 to 50-906 of the Idaho Code Annotated.
(Ord. 646 §3, 1981)
1.01.040: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance 628, passed February 19,
1980. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to ordinance 628, but prior
to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code:
ordinances 629, 630, 631, 632, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641,
642, 643, and 644. (Ord. 646 §4, 1981)
1.01.050: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Jerome municipal code", or to
any portion thereof, or to any ordinances of the city of Jerome, Idaho, the
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore,
now, or hereafter made. (Ord. 646 §5, 1981)
1.01.060: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter, or section hereof. (Ord. 646 §6, 1981)
1.01.070: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters or record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 646 §7, 1981)
1.01.080: REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
So far as the provisions of this code are the same in effect as those of
previously existing ordinances, they shall be construed as continuations
thereof; but subject to the above limitations and the provisions of the next
section, all ordinances, and resolutions of the city of Jerome, Idaho,
heretofore in force (except such as are of a private, local, or temporary
nature, including franchises, grants, dedications, and special levies for local
assessments), are hereby repealed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, chapter 28 of
the previous Jerome city code, entitled "Zoning", and appendix B of said code
entitled "Subdivision Of Land", and all ordinances amending or supplementing
them are retained, and are not repealed. (Ord. 646 §8, 1981)
1.01.090: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby or any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner
affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of
any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or
the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu required to be posted, filed, or
deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder
appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 646 §9, 1981)
1.01.100: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code
as the "Jerome municipal code" shall become effective. (Ord. 646 §10, 1981)
1.01.110: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby
declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared
invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be
in full force and effect. (Ord. 646 §11, 1981)
CHAPTER 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.04.010: Short Title
1.04.020: Definitions
1.04.030: Title Of Office
1.04.040: Joint Authority
1.04.050: Grammatical Interpretation
1.04.060: Computation Of Time
1.04.070: Provisions Considered As Continuations Of Existing Ordinances
1.04.080: Repeal Shall Not Revive Any Ordinances
1.04.090: Catchlines Of Sections
1.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated the CODE OF THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO, 1981 and may be so
cited. This code may also be cited as the "Jerome city code 1981". (Prior code
§1-1)
1.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
   CITY: Shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Jerome".
   CODE: The code of the city of Jerome, Idaho, 1981.
   COUNCIL: The city council of Jerome.
   COUNTY: The county of Jerome.
   DAY: The period of time between any twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and the
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight following.
   DAYTIME: The period of time between sunrise and sunset.
   HOLIDAYS: Every day declared to be a holiday by section 73-108, Idaho Code,
as amended, and as from time to time hereafter amended by appropriate act of
the state legislature.
   IN THE CITY: Means and includes all territory over which the city now has or
shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
other regulatory powers.
   MAY: Is permissive.
   MONTH: A calendar month, unless otherwise expressed.
   NIGHTTIME: The period of time between sunset and sunrise.
   OATH: Includes an affirmation.
   OFFICIAL TIME: Mountain Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in
current use in the city.
   OR; AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER: When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON: Includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business trust, corporation or company.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidences of debt.
   PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROCESS: Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial
proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
   PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY: Is coextensive with lands, tenements, hereditaments,
possessory rights and claims.
   SHALL: Is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK: Includes a mark when the signer or
subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near
the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's
name.
   STATE OR THIS STATE: The state of Idaho.
   TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
   WEEK: Consists of seven (7) consecutive days.
   WRITING: Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English
language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
   YEAR: A calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Prior code §§1-2,
1-2.1)
1.04.030: TITLE OF OFFICE:
Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this
code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the
city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Prior code §1-2)
1.04.040: JOINT AUTHORITY:
All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers
shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or
officers, unless otherwise specifically stated. (Prior code §1-2)
1.04.050: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the provisions of this code
unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:
A.   Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
B.   Tenses: The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
C.   Number: The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the
singular. (Prior code §1-2)
1.04.060: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a
holiday and then it is also excluded. (Prior code §1-2)
1.04.070: PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Prior code §1-
3)
1.04.080: REPEAL SHALL NOT REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES:
A.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before
or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the
ordinance repealed. (Prior code §1-4)
1.04.090: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code underlined are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Prior code §1-5)
CHAPTER 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY 1
SECTION:
1.08.010: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-302.
   
1.08.010: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Whenever in this code or any other ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a
misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of
any such provision of this code or any other ordinance of the city shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 627(A), 1980: prior code §1-7)
CHAPTER 1.12
CORPORATE SEAL 1
SECTION:
1.12.010: Described
1.12.020: Adopted
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-301.
   
1.12.010: DESCRIBED:
The corporate seal of the city shall be circular in form with inner and outer
circles. The outer circle shall be one and five-eighths inches (15/8") in
diameter, and the inner circle one inch (1") in diameter. It shall bear upon
the space between the two (2) circles, the words "CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO", and
upon the space within the inner circle the word "SEAL". (Prior code §1-8)
1.12.020: ADOPTED:
The seal described in section
1.12.010 of this chapter is adopted as the seal of the city. (Prior code §1-9)
CHAPTER 1.16
ORDINANCES 1
SECTION:
1.16.010: Written Presentation To Council
1.16.020: Manner Of Passing
1.16.030: Mayoral Endorsement As To Passage
1.16.040: Mayoral Veto; Manner Of Overriding
1.16.050: Certificate Of Passage Over Veto
1.16.060: Passage Without Mayor's Signature
1.16.070: Certificate Of Passage Upon Mayor's Failure To Sign Or Veto
1.16.080: When Ordinance Deemed Passed
1.16.090: Effective Date
1.16.100: Recordation And Preservation
 
Notes
1 1. IC ch. 50-9.
   
1.16.010: WRITTEN PRESENTATION TO COUNCIL:
All ordinances shall be written or printed and presented to the city council by
a member at a regular or special meeting. (Prior code §2-20)
1.16.020: MANNER OF PASSING:
A.   Every city ordinance shall be read on three (3) different days, two (2)
readings of which may be by title only and one reading of which shall be in
full.
B.   At each reading of an ordinance it shall be open to discussion and
amendment and may be referred to a committee and shall be passed to the next
reading, unless by a vote of the council some other disposition is made of it.
C.   On final passage the yeas and nays shall be called and recorded and a
concurrence of a majority of all the members elected to the council shall be
required for its passage; provided, however, that one-half (1/2) plus one of
the members of the full council may dispense with the three (3) readings and
pass the ordinance at any meeting. (Ord. 627(B), 1980: prior code §2-21)
1.16.030: MAYORAL ENDORSEMENT AS TO PASSAGE:
When any city ordinance is passed it shall be signed by the clerk, and the date
of its passage, by the council, shall be added thereto, and within three (3)
days thereafter it shall be presented to the mayor, or in case of his absence
from the city, to the president of the council for his consideration. If he
approves the same he shall attach his signature thereto, together with the date
of such approval. (Prior code §2-22)
1.16.040: MAYORAL VETO; MANNER OF OVERRIDING:
Should the mayor not approve an ordinance, he shall return the same to the
council with his objections to the same in writing on or before the date of the
next regular meeting after the same was presented to him. When an ordinance is
so returned by the mayor, the council shall proceed to reconsider the same. If,
on such reconsideration, one-half (1/2) plus one of the council elected vote in
the affirmative, the ordinance shall become law notwithstanding the mayor's
veto. (Ord. 627(C), 1980: prior code §2-23)
1.16.050: CERTIFICATE OF PASSAGE OVER VETO:
When an ordinance has been passed over the mayor's veto, as provided in section
1.16.040 of this chapter, the city clerk shall annex a certificate to the
ordinance stating that the same was vetoed by the mayor, giving the date of
such veto, and that on its reconsideration by the council it received the
required one-half (1/2) plus one vote of the members elected to the council,
together with the date of such action. (Ord. 627(D), 1980: prior code §2-24)
1.16.060: PASSAGE WITHOUT MAYOR'S SIGNATURE:
Should the mayor refuse or neglect to sign any city ordinance and return the
same with his objections in writing, on or before the date of the next regular
meeting after the same was submitted to him, it shall become a law without his
signature. (Prior code §2-25)
1.16.070: CERTIFICATE OF PASSAGE UPON MAYOR'S FAILURE TO SIGN OR VETO:
When any ordinance has become a law without the signature of the mayor, as
provided in section
1.16.050 of this chapter, the city clerk shall annex to such ordinance a
certificate to the effect that the mayor has failed to sign or veto the same,
and it has therefore become a law without his signature. (Prior code §2-26)
1.16.080: WHEN ORDINANCE DEEMED PASSED:
An ordinance of the city shall be considered passed on the date of its approval
by the mayor, and in case of his vetoing an ordinance, on the date of the
passage of such ordinance over his veto, and in the case of the failure of the
mayor to sign or veto an ordinance, on the date of the next regular meeting
after such ordinance was presented to him. (Prior code §2-27)
1.16.090: EFFECTIVE DATE:
All city ordinances, unless otherwise provided in such ordinance, shall take
effect and be in force from and after their passage, approval and publication.
Publication shall be made by being inserted in one issue of some newspaper
published in the city. If no paper be published within the city, then in some
paper having general circulation in the city. (Prior code §2-28)
1.16.100: RECORDATION AND PRESERVATION:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to safely preserve the original
ordinances of the city and when passed and approved to record the same in a
book provided for that purpose, such book to be designated as, "ORDINANCE BOOK
NO           , CITY OF JEROME". The city clerk shall attach a certificate to
each ordinance, so recorded, to the effect that the same is a true and correct
copy of the original ordinance as passed. (Prior code §2-29)
CHAPTER 1.17
CONSENT CALENDAR
SECTION:
1.17.010: Content Of Consent Calendar
1.17.020: Introduction Of Consent Calendar
1.17.030: Limitation Of Debate
1.17.040: Objection And Removal From Consent Calendar
1.17.050: Approval Of Motion
1.17.060: Minutes
1.17.010: CONTENT OF CONSENT CALENDAR:
The following items are declared to be part of the consent calendar: claims,
minutes of prior meetings, reading of building permits, requests for vacation
by any city officer or employee, reports of officers. In addition, the mayor
may place any other item on the consent calendar from time to time when the
mayor determines that any such item of business requires action by the city
council but is of a routine and noncontroversial nature. (Ord. 647, 1982)
1.17.020: INTRODUCTION OF CONSENT CALENDAR:
The consent calendar shall be introduced by a motion to approve the consent
calendar, and shall be considered by the council as a single item. (Ord. 647,
1982)
1.17.030: LIMITATION OF DEBATE:
There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the council regarding
any item on the consent calendar beyond asking a question for simple
clarification. (Ord. 647, 1982)
1.17.040: OBJECTION AND REMOVAL FROM CONSENT CALENDAR:
A.   On objection by any member of the city council to inclusion of any item on
the consent calendar, that item shall be removed from the consent calendar
forthwith. Such an objection may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of
a vote on the motion to approve the consent calendar.
B.   All such items shall be considered individually in the order in which they
were objected to, immediately following consideration of the motion to approve
the consent calendar. (Ord. 647, 1982)
1.17.050: APPROVAL OF MOTION:
Approval of the motion to approve the consent calendar shall be fully
equivalent to approval, adoption, or enactment of each motion, resolution,
ordinance, or other item of business contained thereon, exactly as if each had
been acted upon individually, as fully as if set forth at length. Approval of
the motion must be by roll call vote. (Ord. 647, 1982)
1.17.060: MINUTES:
The city clerk shall record in the council minutes each item passed under the
consent calendar individually and in full. (Ord. 647, 1982)
CHAPTER 1.18
PROCEDURE AT MEETINGS
SECTION:
1.18.010: Scope Of Rules
1.18.020: Special Meetings And Call Thereof
1.18.030: Presiding Officer
1.18.040: Call Of Roll Of Members
1.18.050: Order Of Business
1.18.060: Limitation On Remarks
1.18.070: Permission To Speak Required
1.18.080: Absence Of Council Members
1.18.090: Resolutions And Ordinances To Be In Writing
1.18.100: Motions To Reconsider
1.18.110: Motions To Lay Matters On The Table
1.18.120: Motion For Adjournment
1.18.130: Roll Call Vote
1.18.140: Questions Of Order
1.18.150: Alteration Of Rules
1.18.160: Submission Of Reports
1.18.170: Compulsion Of Attendance
1.18.180: Adoption Of Robert's Rules Of Order
1.18.010: SCOPE OF RULES:
The rules or order of procedure prescribed in this chapter shall govern
deliberations and meetings of the council. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.020: SPECIAL MEETINGS AND CALL THEREOF:
Special meetings of the council may be held at the call of the mayor by serving
notice on each member of the council in writing stating the object of the
meeting as provided in section 50-604 of the Idaho Code. One-half (1/2) plus
one of the members of the full council shall have the power to call special
meetings of the city council by serving notice in writing to all members of the
council, stating the object of the meeting as provided by section 50-706 of the
Idaho Code. Notice of special meetings shall be conspicuously placed in the
records of the city council, and shall be posted in such public places in the
city as may be best selected to give the public notice of the holding of such a
meeting. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.030: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The presiding officer of the council shall be the mayor, or in his absence, the
president of the council. In the absence of both the mayor and president of the
council, the city clerk shall call the council to order and call the roll. If
there is a quorum present, the council shall elect, by majority vote, a
chairman to act until the arrival of the mayor or president of the council. The
presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and
special meetings. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.040: CALL OF ROLL OF MEMBERS:
Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk shall call
the roll of the members and the names of those present shall be entered in the
minutes. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.050: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business of the council shall be as follows:
A.   Call to order
B.   Pledge Of Allegiance
C.   Invocation
D.   Public hearings
E.   Consent calendar
F.   Citizen correspondence, issues and reports
G.   Proclamations
H.   Resolutions
I.   Ordinances - old business
J.   Ordinances - new business
K.   Contracts/capital acquisitions
L.   City council discussion and possible action items
M.   Council reports
N.   City administrator reports
O.   Department head reports
P.   Executive session
Q.   Adjournment. (Ord. 1145, 2015)
1.18.060: LIMITATION ON REMARKS:
No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject at any one meeting
without permission of the presiding officer. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.070: PERMISSION TO SPEAK REQUIRED:
No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the council
while in session without permission of the presiding officer. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.080: ABSENCE OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Any council member whose duty it is to attend regular and special meetings of
the council who shall be absent without the excuse of the presiding officer,
may be fined in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting at the
discretion of the council. A majority of the members present, even in the
absence of a quorum, may compel the attendance of absent members and approve
the levy of such a fine. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.090: RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES TO BE IN WRITING:
All resolutions and ordinances of the city shall be in writing. (Ord. 648,
1982)
1.18.100: MOTIONS TO RECONSIDER:
Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with the prevailing side
and at the same or next succeeding meeting of the council. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.110: MOTIONS TO LAY MATTERS ON THE TABLE:
Motions to lay matters on the table shall be first in order, and on all
questions, the last amendment, the most distant day, and the largest sum shall
be put first. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.120: MOTION FOR ADJOURNMENT:
A motion for adjournment shall always be in order. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.130: ROLL CALL VOTE:
Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the yeas and nays shall
be recorded; any member may call for the recording of the yeas and nays. The
passage of an ordinance or resolution to enter into a contract shall be by roll
call of the council with the yea or nay of each being recorded. (Ord. 648,
1982)
1.18.140: QUESTIONS OF ORDER:
All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the council
with the right of appeal to the council by any member, which appeal shall be
decided by a majority of those present. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.150: ALTERATION OF RULES:
The rules of the council may be altered, amended, or temporarily suspended by a
vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members present. (Ord. 648, 1982)
1.18.160: SUBMISSION OF REPORTS:
The chairman of each committee established by the council, or a council member
acting in the place thereof, shall submit or make all reports to the council
when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the council. (Ord.
648, 1982)
1.18.170: COMPULSION OF ATTENDANCE:
The city clerk, city treasurer, city attorney, chief of police, fire chief,
building inspector, any other employee or officer of the city, shall, when
requested, attend all meetings of the city council, and shall remain in the
council room for such length of time as the council shall direct. (Ord. 648,
1982)
1.18.180: ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER:
"Robert's Rules Of Order", newly revised, a copy of which is on file at the
office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the parliamentary procedure for
the city council. (Ord. 648, 1982)
CHAPTER 1.20
INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS
SECTION:
1.20.010: Purpose
1.20.020: General Provisions
1.20.030: Referendum Petition Filing Time Limit
1.20.040: Special Election Date Set Upon Petition Certification
1.20.050: Statutory Requirements
1.20.010: PURPOSE:
The citizens of Jerome, Idaho shall have the right to enact ordinances by
initiative and repeal ordinances by referendum, in accordance with the
provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 601 §1, 1979)
1.20.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A.   An initiative to enact an ordinance or a referendum to repeal an ordinance
shall be commenced by filing a petition with the city clerk.
B.   The petition shall contain a full text of the proposed ordinance or
describe by ordinance number, or reference to the appropriate section of the
city code, the ordinance sought to be repealed, and shall be accompanied by the
signature of legal city voters in an amount not less than a number equal to
twenty percent (20%) of the total number of voters registered to vote at the
last city general election.
C.   Each petition shall contain, adjacent to each signature, the typed or
printed name and address of each signer thereof. (Ord. 601 §2, 1979)
1.20.030: REFERENDUM PETITION FILING TIME LIMIT:
Referendum petitions complying with the ordinance codified in this chapter
shall be filed with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days following the
final adoption of the ordinance subject to the referendum petition. (Ord. 601
§3, 1979)
1.20.040: SPECIAL ELECTION DATE SET UPON PETITION CERTIFICATION:
A special election for initiative or referendum shall be set within ninety (90)
days of certification of the petition by the city clerk, provided that such a
special election shall be combined with any municipal election set within the
time period. The initiative or referendum question shall be determined by a
majority vote of the lawful ballots cast. Voter qualifications and registration
requirements shall be the same as those in effect for general municipal
elections. (Ord. 601 §4, 1979)
1.20.050: STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, referendum and initiative
petitions shall conform with all requirements for signature, verification of
valid petitions, printing of petitions and time limits, except as expressly
modified to meet the requirements for initiative and referendum, expressed in
sections 34-1701 through 34-1705, Idaho Code. (Ord. 601 §5, 1979)
CHAPTER 1.24
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER 1
SECTION:
1.24.010: Official Newspaper Designated
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§50-213; 60-106.
   
1.24.010: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER DESIGNATED:
The "Times News", a legal newspaper of general circulation, printed and
published in Twin Falls, Idaho, is designated the official newspaper of the
city. (Ord. 1048 §1, 2008)
CHAPTER 1.28
CITY BOUNDARIES 1
SECTION:
1.28.010: Defined And Described
1.28.020: Identification References
1.28.030: Adoption And Recordation Of Map
 
Notes
1 1. IC §63-2215.
   
1.28.010: DEFINED AND DESCRIBED:
The boundaries of the city are defined and described as follows:
A.   Beginning at the southeast corner of Block A-176 of Jerome Townsite;
running thence north along the east boundary of Blocks A-176 and A-182 extended
northerly to the southeast corner of Lot 4 in Block 8, Bremer Subdivision to
Jerome Townsite; thence north along the east boundary of said Lot 4 to a point
which intersects with the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 8 South, Range 17 East, Boise
Meridian, or the southwest corner of Heiss Subdivision No. 1, Jerome Townsite;
thence east along the south boundary of said Heiss Subdivision No. 1 to the
southeast corner thereof; thence north along the east boundary of said Heiss
Subdivision No. 1 to the northeast corner thereof; thence west along the north
boundary of said Heiss Subdivision No. 1 to its intersection with the east
boundary of Bremer Subdivision, Jerome Townsite; thence north along the east
boundary of said Bremer Subdivision and its extension to the southeast corner
of Block A-197; thence north along the east boundaries of Blocks A-197 and A-
202 to the northeast corner of Block A-202; thence west along the north
boundary of Block A-202 to the northwest corner thereof; thence north along the
east line of Fillmore Street to the south boundary of Bryan Henry Subdivision
No. 1, Jerome Townsite; thence east along the south boundary of said Bryan
Henry Subdivision No. 1 to the southeast corner thereof; thence north along the
east boundary of said Bryan Henry Subdivision No. 1 and the east boundary of
Block A-218; continuing thence north along the east boundary of the northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 8 South, Range 17
East, Boise Meridian, a distance of 945 feet, to a point which is the northeast
corner of the Mountain View Subdivision, City of Jerome; running thence west
along the north boundary of said Mountain View Subdivision a distance of 356.66
feet; thence running north and parallel to the east boundary of said northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter a distance of 50 feet; thence running westerly
and parallel to the north boundary of said northwest quarter of the northeast
quarter a distance of 236.05 feet, more or less, to the west boundary of
Fillmore Street of the City of Jerome projected; running thence southerly along
said west boundary of Fillmore Street extended, a distance of 305 feet; thence
running westerly and parallel with the north boundary of said northwest quarter
of the northeast quarter a distance of 40 feet to a point of tangency of a
20°0' curve to the left (I=37°0'); thence along the arc of said curve to the
left a distance of 185.93 ft. the long chord of which bears S 71°39' W a
distance of 182.73 feet to a point of tangency of a 34°0' curve to the right
(I=60°0'); thence along the arc of said curve to the right a distance of 179.07
feet, the long chord of which bears South 83°09' West a distance of 171.0 feet;
thence north 66°51' west a distance of 372.9 feet, more or less, to the west
boundary of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 18,
which is 753.9 feet, more or less, north of the southwest corner of said
northwest quarter of the northeast quarter; running thence northerly along the
west boundary of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter a distance of
157.1 feet; running thence west parallel to the north boundary of the northeast
quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 18 a distance of 225.5 feet;
running thence north and parallel to the east boundary of the northeast quarter
of the northwest quarter a distance of 18.33 feet; running thence west,
parallel to the north boundary of said northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter a distance of 223 feet to a point 390.67 feet south of the north
boundary of said northeast quarter of the northwest quarter; running thence
south, parallel to the east boundary of said northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter to the south boundary thereof, at a point on the north boundary of
Block A-220, Jerome Townsite; running thence west along the north boundaries of
Block A-220 and A-227 to the northwest corner of said Block A-227; running
thence south along the west boundary of said Block A-227 to the southwest
corner thereof; running thence west along the extended south boundary of said
Block A-227 and the south boundary of Block A-228 to the southwest corner of
said Block A-228; running thence west a distance of 30 feet to the east line of
Block A-234 extended northerly; running thence south along the east line of
said extension of Block A-234 and the east line of Block A-234 to the southeast
corner thereof; running thence west along the south line of Block A-234, and
its extension westerly, to the southeast corner of Block A-237, and continuing
along the south boundary of Block A-237, and its extension westerly, to the
northeast corner of Block A-240; running thence south along the east boundary
of Block A-240 to the southeast corner thereof; running thence west along the
south boundary of Blocks A-240 and A-241 to the southwest corner of Block A-
241; running thence south along the West Line of Block A-247 extended north to
said corner and along the west boundaries of Blocks A-247, its extension south,
A-251 and A-253 and its extension south, to the northwest corner of Block A-
256; continuing south along the west boundary of Block A-256 and said boundary
extended south and along the west boundary of Block A-264, to the southwest
corner of said Block A-264; running thence east along the south boundary of
Block A-264 to a point of intersection with the west boundary of Block A-266
extended north; running thence south along said west boundary line of Block A-
266 extended and along the west boundary line of said Block to the southwest
corner of said Block; running thence east along the south boundary of said
Block A-266 to the west boundary of Fir Street and the southeast corner of said
Block A-266; running thence south along the west boundary of Fir Street to the
northeast corner of Block A-271; running thence west along the north boundary
of Blocks A-271 and A-272 to the northwest corner of Block A-272; running
thence south along the west boundary of Blocks A-272 and A-274 to the southwest
corner of Block A-274, running thence east along the south boundary of Blocks
A-274 and A-275 to the west boundary of Fir Street; running thence south along
the west side of Fir Street to the northeast corner of Block A-287; running
thence east along the south boundary of Avenue H to a point 255 feet west of
the Northeast corner of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
section 24, Township 8 South, Range 16 East, Boise Meridian; running thence
south at right angles 100 feet; running thence east at right angles 215 feet to
the west boundary of State Highway No. 79; running thence north along said west
boundary of said Highway 100 feet to the south line of Avenue H; running thence
east along the south line of Avenue H to the northwest corner of Block A-170;
running thence south along the west boundary of Block A-170 to the southwest
corner thereof; running thence east along the south boundary of Blocks A-170,
A-169, A-168, A-167 and extensions of the south boundaries of said Blocks, to
the southeast corner of Block A-167; running thence north along the east
boundary of Blocks A-167 and A-175 to the south boundary of Avenue H; running
thence east along the south boundary of Avenue H to the northwest corner of
Block A-166 and the east boundary of Fillmore Street; running thence north
along the east boundary of said Fillmore Street to the southwest corner of
Block A-176; running thence east along the south boundary of Block A-176 to the
southeast corner thereof and the point of beginning.
B.   Block A-207, Jerome Townsite, Jerome County, Idaho, as the same appears
and is platted on the official plat of Jerome Townsite on file and of record in
the office of the county recorder.
C.   Beginning at the southwest corner of Block A-264, Jerome Townsite; thence
running west to and along the south boundary of Block A-263, Jerome Townsite,
to the southwest corner of said Block A-263; thence running north along the
east boundaries of Blocks A-263, A-258, and A-252, Jerome Townsite, to a point
on the west line of said Block A-252 intersected by the center line of the "M"
or "Kinney" Coulee of the North Side Canal Co., Ltd.; thence running upstream
along the center line of said Coulee, in a generally northeasterly direction,
to the point of intersection of its said center line with the present west
boundary of said city; thence running south along said present west boundary of
the city to the said southwest corner of said Block A-264, the place of
beginning.
D.   Block A-163, Jerome Townsite, according to the official plat thereon on
file in the office of the county recorder, including that portion of said block
platted as "Kerri Subdivision", according to the official plat thereof filed as
Instrument No. 190177 in said office of said county recorder.
E.   A strip of land sixty feet in width lying between Blocks A-269 and A-270,
Jerome Townsite, on the north, and Blocks A-272 and A-271, Jerome Townsite, on
the south, being the west end of Avenue B;
A strip of land sixty feet in width lying between Blocks A-274 and A-275,
Jerome Townsite, on the north, and Blocks A-277 and A-276, Jerome Townsite, on
the south, being the west end of Avenue D;
A strip of land seventy feet in width lying between Blocks A-170, A-169, A-168
and A-167, Jerome Townsite, and the intervening intersecting streets, on the
north, and Blocks A-161, A-162, A-163 and A-164, Jerome Townsite, and the
intervening intersecting streets, on the south, being a part of what is
designated on the original plat of Jerome Townsite as South Boulevard, now
known as Avenue I;
A strip of land seventy feet in width lying between Blocks A-167 and A-175,
Jerome Townsite, on the west, and Block A-166, Jerome Townsite, on the east,
being the south end of what is designated on the original plat of Jerome
Townsite as Poplar Street, now known as Fillmore Street; and
A strip of land sixty feet in width lying between the east boundary of Block A-
175, Jerome Townsite, extended north, and the east boundary of Block A-166,
Jerome Townsite, extended north, and adjoining said Block A-166 on the north,
being the east end of Avenue H to the present east city limits.
F.   A parcel of land located in the North Half of the Northeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter (N 1/2 NE 1/4 SE 1/4) of Section Twenty-four (24), Township
Eight (8) South, Range Sixteen (16) East, Boise Meridian, more particularly
described as follows: Commencing at the East Quarter Corner of said section 24,
thence South 24.40 feet to the south right-of-way boundary of West Avenue H;
thence along said right-of-way boundary west 720.00 feet to the real point of
beginning; then south 471.00 feet; then east 242.00 feet; then south 124.20
feet; then west 812.30 feet; then north 595.20 feet; then east 570.30 feet, to
the real point of beginning; said parcel of land containing 8.48 acres.
G.   A portion of Lot One (1) and the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter (NE 1/4 NW 1/4) of Section Eighteen (18), Township Eight (8) South,
Range Seventeen (17) East, Boise Meridian, Jerome County, Idaho, described as
follows: Commencing at the northwest corner of said section 18; thence south
0°03'00" east for 799.64 feet along the westerly boundary of said Lot 1 of
Section 18; thence south 89°53'57" east for 40.00 feet to the easterly boundary
of a county road, said point being the real point of beginning; thence
continuing south 89°53'57" east for 1280.37 feet, more or less, to the westerly
boundary of the F. R. Mann Subdivision No. 2 as recorded in the book of plats
of the Jerome County records; thence south 0°04'00" east for 522.00 feet, more
or less, along the said westerly boundary of the F. R. Mann Subdivision No. 2
to the northerly boundary of Block A-220, Jerome Townsite; thence north
89°53'57" west for 957.52 feet along the northerly boundary of said Blocks A-
220 and A-227, Jerome Townsite; thence north 0°03'00" west for 240.00 feet on a
line parallel to the westerly boundary of said Lot 1; thence north 89°53'57"
west for 323.00 feet on a line parallel to the northerly boundary of said Block
A-227 to the easterly boundary of a county road; thence north 0°03'00" west for
282.00 feet along the easterly boundary of a county road to the real point of
beginning.
H.   A tract of land in the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter (NE 1/
4 NE 1/4) of Section Nineteen (19), Township Eight (8) South, Range Seventeen
(17) East, Boise Meridian, described as follows: Commencing at the southwest
corner of the NE 1/4 NE 1/4 of said Section 19; thence south 89°45' east, along
the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4 and the south line of Heiss Subdivision
No. 1, a distance of 170.00 feet to the southeast corner of said subdivision,
the true point of beginning; thence north 0°02' west, along the east line of
said subdivision a distance of 652.20 feet; thence south 80°45' east, parallel
with the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4, a distance of 267.16 feet; thence
south 0°02' east, parallel with the east line of said subdivision, a distance
of 652.20 feet to a point on the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4; thence north
89°45' west along the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4, a distance of 267.16
feet to the true point of beginning.
I.   Blocks (sometimes referred to as acreage tracts) A-288, A-289, A-290, A-
291, A-292, A-294 (except that portion of said block lying south and west of
the northeasterly boundary line of the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way) and
A-295, Jerome Townsite;
That certain strip of land, 60 feet in width, lying between Blocks A-288, A-292
and A-295, Jerome Townsite, on one side and Blocks A-287, A-293 and A-294,
Jerome Townsite, on the other side; that certain strip of land, 70 feet in
width, lying between Block A-292, Jerome Townsite, and A-295, Jerome Townsite;
that certain strip of land, 70 feet in width, lying between Blocks A-289 and A-
292, Jerome Townsite, on one side, and Blocks A-290 and A-291, Jerome Townsite,
on the other side; and that certain strip of land adjoining said Blocks A-290
and A-291 on the east; all of which said strips are shown as dedicated as
public streets on the official plat of said Jerome Townsite on file in the
office of the county recorder;
A tract of land described as follows: Commencing at the quarter corner common
to Section 24 and 25, Township 8 South, Range 16 East, B. M., from which point
the southwest corner of said Section 24 bears north 89°33'45" west a distance
of 2,640.28 feet; thence south 89°33'45" east 9.83 feet along the south
boundary of said section 24, said south boundary also being the center line of
a 50 foot county road right-of-way; thence north 0°26'15" east 25.00 feet to
the intersection of the northerly boundary of said county road and the easterly
boundary of the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way, said point being the real
point of beginning; thence along the said easterly boundary of the Union
Pacific Railroad right-of-way, north 34°01'17" west a distance of 1,571.55 feet
to a point on the northerly boundary of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 Section 24, said
northerly boundary of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 Section 24, said northerly boundary
also being the southerly boundary of the Jerome Townsite, Jerome County, Idaho,
as shown on the official plat thereof; thence along the said southerly boundary
of the Jerome Townsite a distance of 1,425.48 feet on a bearing of south
89°33'49" east; thence a distance of 1,296.81 feet on a bearing of south
1°46'48" east to the northerly boundary of said county road right-of-way;
thence along said northerly boundary of the county road right-of-way a distance
of 586.46 feet on a bearing north 89°33'45" west to the real point of
beginning.
J.   A strip of land being 40 feet right and 40 feet left of the following
described line:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 1 of Section 18, Township 8 South,
Range 17 East, Boise Meridian, also being the northerly city limits of the City
of Jerome; thence north 0°03'00" west for 522.00 feet along the westerly
boundary of said Lot 1 of Section 18 to a point that is south 0°03'00" east
799.64 feet, more or less, of the northwest corner of said Section 18, said
strip of land containing .96 acres, more or less, and being an extension of
Lincoln Avenue North.
K.   Tract 1: That part of Section 18, Township 8 South, Range 17 East, B. M.,
described as follows:
Commencing at the southwest corner of Lot 1 of said Section 18, thence running
north along the west line of said section a distance of 240 feet, thence
running east at right angles 363 feet, thence running south at right angles 240
feet to the south boundary of said Section 18, thence running west along the
south boundary of said section to the southwest corner of said Lot 1, the place
of beginning;
Tract 2: That part of Block A-162, Jerome Townsite, described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the north boundary of said Block which said point is
150 feet west of the northeast corner of said Block, thence running south along
a line parallel to the east boundary of said Block a distance of 150 feet,
thence running west along a line parallel to the north boundary of said Block a
distance of 160 feet, thence running north along a line parallel to said east
boundary of said Block a distance of 150 feet to the said north boundary of
said Block, thence running east along said north boundary a distance of 160
feet to the point of beginning.
L.   Block A-One Hundred Sixty Four (A-164), Jerome Townsite.
M.   That part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4 SE 1/
4) of section Eighteen (18), Township Eight (8) South, Range Seventeen (17)
East, Boise Meridian, described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the west boundary line of the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of said
section 18 which point lies north a distance of 40 feet from the center line of
State Highway No. 25 and which point is also a point on the north boundary line
of said Highway No. 25, thence south 88°37' East along the north boundary line
of State Highway No. 25 a distance of 325 feet, thence north parallel with the
west boundary line of said SE 1/4 SE 1/4 a distance of 516 feet, thence north
88°37' west a distance of 325 feet to a point on the west boundary line of the
SE 1/4 SE 1/4, thence south on said west boundary line a distance of 516 feet,
to the point of beginning.
N.   Tract 1: That certain strip of land (being a portion of North Lincoln
Avenue), 60 feet in width, bordered by Block A-227, Jerome Townsite, on the
east side, and by Block A-228, Jerome Townsite, on the west side;
Tract 2: That certain strip of land (being a portion of South Davis Street), 60
feet in width, bordered by Block A-164, Jerome Townsite, on the east side, and
by Block A-163, Jerome Townsite, on the west side.
O.   A tract of land in the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter (NE 1/
4 NE 1/4) of section Nineteen (19), Township Eight (8) South, Range Seventeen
(17) East, Boise Meridian, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the southwest corner of the NE 1/4 NE 1/4 of said Section 19;
thence South 89°45' East, along the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4 and the
south line of Heiss Subdivision No. 1, a distance of 437.16 feet, to the true
point of beginning; thence north 0°02' west, parallel with the east line of
said subdivision, a distance of 652.20 feet, thence south 89°45' east, parallel
with the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4, a distance of 133.58 feet; thence
south 0°02' east, parallel with the east line of said subdivision, a distance
of 652.20 feet, to a point on the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4, thence
north 89°45' west, along the south line of said NE 1/4 NE 1/4, a distance of
133.58 feet to the true point of beginning.
P.   That part of the south half of the southeast quarter (S 1/2 SE 1/4) of
Section Seven (7), and of the north half of the northeast quarter (N 1/2 NE 1/
4) of Section Eighteen (18), all in Township Eight (8) South, Range Seventeen
(17) East, Boise Meridian, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the southeast corner of Section 7, which is also the northeast
corner of Section 18; thence north 89°51' west, 400.00 feet (along section
line) to the true point of beginning; thence south 0°07' east, 25.00 feet;
thence north 89°51' west, 924.36 feet; thence south 0°04' east, 350.00 feet;
thence north 89°51' west, 356.66 feet; thence north 0°04' west 50.00 feet;
thence north 89°51' west, 236.05 feet; thence north 0°04' west, 300.00 feet
(along the west boundary of North Fillmore Street); thence north 89°51' west,
727.29 feet; thence north 0°03' west, 475.00 feet (along quarter section line);
thence south 89°51' east, 2,373.89 feet; thence south 0°07' east, 125.00 feet;
thence south 89°51' east, 270.00 feet; thence south 0°07' east, 50.00 feet
(along section line); thence north 80°51' west, 400.00 feet; thence south 0°07'
east, 275.00 feet to the true point of beginning.
(Prior code §1-13)
1.28.020: IDENTIFICATION REFERENCES:
The lots, blocks, acreage tracts, streets and avenues referred to in subsection
1.28.010A of this chapter refer to the designated lots, blocks, acreage tracts,
streets and avenues in Jerome Townsite and to the subdivisions and additions
thereof, as shown by the official plats thereof on file and of record in the
recorder's office of the county; the various subdivision and additions referred
to refer to the respective official plats thereof on file in the county
recorder's office; and the original plat of Jerome Townsite and such plats of
such subdivisions and additions are adopted and made a part of this section for
the necessary identification of the lots, blocks, acreage tracts, streets,
avenues, additions and subdivisions referred to in such subsection and that
ordinances 268 and 284 of the city, on file in the office of the city clerk,
are referred to and made a part hereof for the necessary identification of
certain streets and avenues names to which were changed by such ordinances.
(Prior code §1-14)
1.28.030: ADOPTION AND RECORDATION OF MAP:
The map and plat attached hereto showing the corporate limits of the city, on
file in the office of the city clerk, as altered and changed by section
1.28.010 of this chapter is made a part of this code, and shall be recorded,
along with a copy of this chapter, certified by the clerk, as provided by law.
(Prior code §1-15)
CHAPTER 1.32
ELECTIONS 1
SECTION:
1.32.010: Precincts Established
1.32.020: Election Officers; Appointment And Qualifications
1.32.030: Election Officers; Term Of Office
1.32.040: Election Officers; Representation Of All Political Parties
1.32.050: Election Officers; Notice Of Appointment
1.32.060: Election Officers; Filling Vacancies
1.32.070: Election Officers; Compensation
1.32.080: Polling Hours
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-401 et seq.
1.32.010: PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED:
There are established two (2) election precincts, numbered first and second,
the first precinct being the election precinct for those voters of the city
residing north of the center line of Main Street and the second precinct being
for the residents of the remainder of the city. The city council shall
designate a suitable polling place in each precinct and cause the same to be
provided with voting compartments, supplies, official stamps, ballot boxes and
such other supplies as county commissioners are required to provide for state
elections. (Prior code §2-30)
1.32.020: ELECTION OFFICERS; APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS:
The city council shall, at its first regular meeting in October, prior to each
biennial election, appoint five (5) capable and discreet persons, possessing
the qualifications of electors, for each polling place, as election officers.
Three (3) of such persons shall be designated as judges of election and two (2)
of such persons shall be designated as clerks of election. (Prior code §2-31)
1.32.030: ELECTION OFFICERS; TERM OF OFFICE:
Judges and clerks of election shall hold office for the period of two (2) years
and shall be the officials of all elections, both general and special, during
that period. (Prior code §2-32)
1.32.040: ELECTION OFFICERS; REPRESENTATION OF ALL POLITICAL PARTIES:
The selection of judges and clerks of election must, as nearly as practical,
represent all political parties of the city. (Prior code §2-33)
1.32.050: ELECTION OFFICERS; NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT:
The city clerk shall give the appointed judges and clerks of election notice of
their appointment and shall request each appointee to give notice of his
acceptance or declination of his appointment to the city clerk within ten (10)
days thereafter. (Prior code §2-34)
1.32.060: ELECTION OFFICERS; FILLING VACANCIES:
Any vacancies arising in the office of judges and clerks of elections shall be
filled by the city clerk. (Ord. 627(E), 1980: prior code §2-35)
1.32.070: ELECTION OFFICERS; COMPENSATION:
The compensation of judges and clerks of the election shall be determined by
the city council at the time of their appointment. (Ord. 627(F), 1980: prior
code §2-36)
1.32.080: POLLING HOURS:
At all general and special city elections, the polls shall be open between
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Provided, however,
that should a general election of the United States of America, state of Idaho,
or county of Jerome take place on the same date as a special or general city
election, polls shall be open between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 838 §1, 1997)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 2.04
CITY COUNCIL 1
SECTION:
2.04.010: Number And Election Of Councilmen
2.04.020: Time And Place Of Meetings
2.04.030: Reports Of City Officers To Council
 
Notes
1 1. IC ch. 50-7.
2.04.010: NUMBER AND ELECTION OF COUNCILMEN:
There shall be four (4) councilmen who shall be elected at the time and in the
manner as provided by the laws of the state. (Prior code §2-1)
2.04.020: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the council of the city shall be held at the Jerome city
council chambers on the first and third Tuesdays in each month at five thirty
o'clock (5:30) P.M.; provided, however, that should said regular meeting days
fall on a holiday, as defined elsewhere in this code, then such regular meeting
shall take place on the next business day following the holiday at five thirty
o'clock (5:30) P.M. in the Jerome city council chambers. (Ord. 1038 §2, 2007:
Ord. 743 §1, 1992: Ord. 678, 1984: prior code §2-2)
2.04.030: REPORTS OF CITY OFFICERS TO COUNCIL:
In all cases, not otherwise provided by laws of the state, the provisions of
this code and other ordinances of the city, all officers, elective and
appointive, shall make a written report to the city council of their activities
at the first regular meeting of the council in each month. Any of the above
officers charged with the collection of monies shall include with such report
an accounting and turnover of all monies collected. (Prior code §2-6)
CHAPTER 2.06
PERSONNEL POLICY
SECTION:
2.06.010: Appointive Officers
2.06.020: Term Of Office And Removal
2.06.030: Employees
2.06.035: Employee Discipline
2.06.040: Employment Not Guaranteed; Exception
2.06.045: City Administrator's Role In Discipline
2.06.050: Employment Actions
2.06.060: Department Head Discipline
2.06.070: City Administrator Discipline
2.06.080: Terms Of Employment
2.06.010: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
Appointive officers of the city shall hold office for the duration of their
appointment unless sooner removed, by appointment of the mayor and approval of
a majority of the city council shall be as follows:
A.   Clerk and treasurer/finance director;
B.   City attorney;
C.   City administrator.
These officers shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of a
majority of the members of the city council upon such terms and conditions as
the council shall establish in writing at the time of appointment. (Ord. 1129,
2014)
2.06.020: TERM OF OFFICE AND REMOVAL:
All appointive officers shall hold office for the term for which they were
appointed and qualified; provided, that any appointive officer may at any time
be removed by the action of the mayor with the concurrence of one-half (1/2)
plus one of the full city council or by the unanimous vote of the full city
council. (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.030: EMPLOYEES:
All persons hired by the city shall be considered employees of the city, except
for bona fide independent contractors of the city. Hiring of all employees of
the city, except for department heads, shall be by the department head of the
department to which the employee will be assigned, subject to the approval of
the city administrator. (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.035: EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE:
Discipline of employees shall be undertaken by the department heads over the
department to which an employee has been assigned. Provided, that no
termination of an employee shall be done without the consent of the city
administrator. (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.040: EMPLOYMENT NOT GUARANTEED; EXCEPTION:
Unless otherwise specified in writing, signed by the mayor and approved by the
city council, or specifically authorized by the city council by motion duly
adopted as reflected in the minutes of a regularly constituted meeting of the
city council, no employee of the city shall be guaranteed employment for any
specific length of time. (Ord. 679 §4, 1984)
2.06.045: CITY ADMINISTRATOR'S ROLE IN DISCIPLINE:
A.   Any other provision of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, the city
administrator may, upon the consent of the mayor and council, investigate
alleged misconduct of city employees. (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.050: EMPLOYMENT ACTIONS:
Employment actions shall be handled as provided by the "City Personnel Policy
Manual". (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.060: DEPARTMENT HEAD DISCIPLINE:
A department head shall be subject to all rules of the city of Jerome regarding
conduct of its other employees. Any job action with respect to a department
head shall be in writing, and delivered to the department head. Any discipline
of a department head, other than the city administrator, shall be by the city
administrator. (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.070: CITY ADMINISTRATOR DISCIPLINE:
Discipline of the city administrator shall be by the mayor, subject to the
approval of a majority of the council, or alternatively, by one-half (1/2) plus
one of the full council. (Ord. 1129, 2014)
2.06.080: TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT:
No appointive officer or employee of the city shall have authority to grant any
employee terms or conditions of employment which have not been officially
adopted by the city by ordinances, resolutions, or written agreements. No city
officer or employee shall have any guaranteed term of employment, conditional
or otherwise, unless done by the city by official action, through ordinance,
resolution or written agreement. (Ord. 1129, 2014: Ord. 679 §13, 1984)
CHAPTER 2.08
EMPLOYEES' BONDS
SECTION:
2.08.010: Bonds Of City Employees
2.08.020: Authority To Require Bond Of Other Employees
2.08.010: BONDS OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective office, any employee of the
city may be required to enter into, execute and file with the city clerk an
official fidelity bond. Each of such bonds shall be conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of each such employee, including therein the
duties of all offices of which such employees may be ex officio incumbent. All
of such bonds shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and council and,
when so approved, shall be filed with the city clerk, except the bond of the
city clerk which shall be filed with the mayor. The premiums of all of such
bonds shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 1130, 2014)
2.08.020: AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE BOND OF OTHER EMPLOYEES:
The mayor and council of the city may, whenever they deem it advisable, require
any employee of the city to furnish bonds in such amounts as may be set by the
mayor and council. (Ord. 1130, 2014)
CHAPTER 2.12
OFFICIAL SALARIES 1
SECTION:
2.12.010: Compensation Of Mayor And Council Members
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-203.
2.12.010: COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The salaries of the following named elective officers of the city shall be
fixed and paid as follows:
A.   Mayor: Effective January 1, 2006, the rate of compensation for the
position of mayor shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, or
twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) annually.
B.   Council Members: Each council member shall receive as full compensation
for his services as such officer the sum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00)
per annum, payable in equal monthly installments. (Ord. 971 §1, 2005: Ord. 729
§1, 1991: Ord. 683 §1, 1985: prior code §2-3)
CHAPTER 2.16
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
2.16.010: Appointment And Term
2.16.020: Duties
2.16.010: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, at the time of taking office,
shall appoint some competent and suitable licensed attorney as city attorney.
The incumbent shall hold office until removed by the mayor with the consent of
the council. (Ord. 1130, 2014)
2.16.020: DUTIES:
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council. He shall commence,
prosecute and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced,
prosecuted or defended on behalf of the city, or that be ordered by the
council. When requested he shall attend meetings of the council and give them
his opinion on any matter submitted to him either orally or in writing as may
be required. (Prior code §2-11)
CHAPTER 2.20
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2.20.010: Created; Purpose
2.20.020: Building Inspections; Records
2.20.030: Spectators To Remain At Least One Hundred Feet From Fire
2.20.040: Unauthorized Removal Or Use Of Fire Apparatus
2.20.050: Interference With Fire Department
2.20.060: False Alarms
2.20.070: Inspection Service Fees
2.20.010: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is organized and created a fire department of the city, for the purpose
of protecting property and the lives of citizens of the city. (Prior code §8-1)
2.20.020: BUILDING INSPECTIONS; RECORDS:
A.   The fire chief, or any member he may so designate, is authorized,
empowered and required to inspect from time to time, but not less frequently
than twice yearly, all buildings and premises where accumulations of
combustible materials or other hazardous conditions are liable to exist, and to
order such changes or removal as in his opinion are necessary for safety from
fire, principally in the business and industrial sections. For the purpose of
inspection, he is empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises at any
reasonable hour. In lieu of practices with the equipment, the department may
inspect buildings to familiarize themselves with interior arrangement and
contents.
B.   Records shall be kept of all inspections including notes and sketches.
These records shall be made a permanent part of the records of the fire
department. (Ord. 1130, 2014: prior code §8-9)
2.20.030: SPECTATORS TO REMAIN AT LEAST ONE HUNDRED FEET FROM FIRE:
All persons must remain at least one hundred feet (100') from the building in
which a fire is in progress or from a place to which firemen are called to
extinguish a fire, excepting the owner or occupants of buildings menaced by
fire. (Ord. 1130, 2014: prior code §8-10)
2.20.040: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OR USE OF FIRE APPARATUS:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully remove any part of the
fire apparatus or any property connected with the fire department, owned by the
city, from the firehouse or grounds, except in case of fire, fire alarm,
practice or for repairs; provided, that the chief of the fire department may
give his consent in writing to move such apparatus, and such consent may be
revoked by the city council, and if such consent is granted by the chief of the
fire department, a copy must be filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord.
1130, 2014: prior code §8-11)
2.20.050: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully interfere with any
person who may be engaged in fighting fire, within the city, to mutilate hose
or any other property connected with the fire department, to drive over any
hose or to remove any hydrant caps, except when being repaired or under the
authority of the proper officers of the city. A violation of this provision
shall be deemed a misdemeanor and anyone having been found guilty or having
pled guilty to same violation may be subject to six (6) months in county jail
and/or a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine. (Ord. 1130, 2014)
2.20.060: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and wilfully give
any false alarms of fire. A violation of this provision shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and anyone having been found guilty or having pled guilty to same
violation may be subject to six (6) months in county jail and/or a one thousand
dollar ($1,000.00) fine. (Ord. 1130, 2014)
2.20.070: INSPECTION SERVICE FEES:
A.   Fees Established For Inspection Service: A reasonable fee shall be charged
for the performance of the following inspection and related services performed
by the fire department:
   1.   Standpipe, range, hood and duct system inspections.
   2.   Natural and LPG gas inspections.
   3.   Fuel tanks and piping above and under ground.
   4.   Daycare and in-home care centers.
   5.   Hazardous materials.
   6.   Fireworks sales and public displays.
   7.   Fire department rescue calls:
      a.   Medical Aid (Outside The City): Events where special assistance from
the fire department are requested from the Jerome County ambulance service
outside the city limits. This request may include:
         (1)   Fire department EMTs.
         (2)   Assistance with patient stabilization and loading for transport.
      b.   Rescue And Vehicle Extrication: These are rescue services which are
requested by the Jerome County ambulance service for patient access and/or
removal from areas in which they are trapped. This service involves advanced
equipment and training which is beyond the general scope of normal firefighting
functions.
   8.   Fire department nonemergency services: This is a request for fire
department services not normally within the general scope of provided services
such as:
      a.   Request from a private individual or company for the fire department
to stand by while they conduct a procedure that may cause a fire or be a safety
hazard to the public.
      b.   Control burns requested by a property owner which they cannot
conduct by themselves.
   9.   Nonfire department hydrant use: The private use of fire equipment which
is used to gain water for private use from a city fire hydrant. Equipment may
include:
      a.   Fire hose.
      b.   Hydrant gate valve.
      c.   Hydrant wrench.
      d.   Other equipment as needed.
   10.   Fire alarm system.
   11.   Issuance of gas licenses and examinations for gas licenses.
B.   Exact Fee: The exact fee for each service rendered as above described may
be prescribed by resolution. (Ord. 1130, 2014: Ord. 826 §§1, 2, 1997)
CHAPTER 2.24
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2.24.010: Established
2.24.010: ESTABLISHED:
There is established a police department in the city. The department shall
consist of a chief position and other positions as authorized by the mayor and
council. (Ord. 1130, 2014)
CHAPTER 2.28
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
2.28.010: Office Created
2.28.010: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of city administrator for the city. The
rights, duties and obligations, including appointment and removal, of the city
administrator shall be fixed by resolution, a copy of which shall be kept on
file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1130, 2014: Ord. 738 §§1, 2, 1992)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 3.04
DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS 1
SECTION:
3.04.010: Generally
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-1013; §55-101 et seq.
3.04.010: GENERALLY:
A.   The First Security Bank of Idaho, N.A., the Bank of Idaho and the Idaho
First National Bank, are designated as official depositories of the city.
B.   Subject to the provisions of title 57, chapter 1, Idaho Code, the public
funds of the city shall be deposited and kept in such depositories; provided,
however, that the city treasurer may be directed and empowered from time to
time, by resolution, to invest in securities as provided in section 50-1013,
Idaho Code or section 57-127, Idaho Code.
C.   The treasurer of the city is directed and empowered to invest monies in
his hands in securities of the U.S. government, time certificates of deposit of
public depositories.
D.   The treasurer of the city is further directed and empowered to deposit
these funds which are needed for day to day operations in a passbook savings of
a public depository. (Prior code §2-6.1)
CHAPTER 3.08
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE FUND 1
SECTION:
3.08.010: Created
3.08.020: Purpose
3.08.030: Tax Levy To Provide Money For Fund Generally
3.08.040: When Warrants To Be Paid Out Of Fund; Interest On Unpaid Warrants
3.08.050: City's Right Of Subrogation When Warrants Paid Out Of Fund
3.08.060: Money Derived From Collection Of Delinquent Local Improvement
Assessments To Be Paid Into Fund; Use Of Fund To Redeem Certain Property
3.08.070: Tax Levy To Replenish Fund
3.08.080: Limitation Of Claim Of Persons Holding Local Improvement Bonds Or
Warrants
3.08.090: Termination Of Fund
3.08.100: Effectuation Of Chapter By City Officers
3.08.110: Chapter To Constitute A Contract With Persons Holding Local
Improvement Bonds Or Warrants
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-1762 et seq.; §50-1723.
3.08.010: CREATED:
There is created in the city, a special fund known and designated as the "local
improvement guarantee fund" of the city. (Prior code §12-1)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The local improvement guarantee fund is created for the purpose of
guaranteeing, to the extent of such fund the payment of local improvement
warrants and bonds, and the interest thereon, and the payment of other bonds or
warrants, or both, and interest thereon, which may hereafter be issued against
any local improvement district in the city for the payment of local
improvements therein. (Prior code §12-2)
3.08.030: TAX LEVY TO PROVIDE MONEY FOR FUND GENERALLY:
In order to provide money for the local improvement guarantee fund and for the
use and the purposes of such fund, the mayor and city council shall levy an
annual tax of one mill per year, beginning with the tax due and collectible in
the year 1958, on all of the taxable property in the city; provided, however,
that the city may reduce the amount of levy if the city appropriates from other
proper sources, as may be determined by the city, a sum approximately equal in
amount to the sum which it is estimated will not be collected but would have
been collected except for such reduction of the levy; and provided, further,
that the total sum so levied or appropriated, or both, in any year, shall not
be more than sufficient to pay the outstanding warrants on such fund and to
establish therein a balance, which combined levy and appropriations in any one
year shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding obligations thereby
guaranteed; and provided, further, that the city shall not levy and tax as
provided in this chapter when the amount of monies in the local improvement
guarantee fund equals ten percent (10%) of the total outstanding obligations to
be guaranteed. The tax levies authorized and directed in this chapter shall be
additional to, and if need be, in excess of any and all statutory and charter
limitations. (Prior code §12-3)
3.08.040: WHEN WARRANTS TO BE PAID OUT OF FUND; INTEREST ON UNPAID WARRANTS:
When any bond, warrant or coupon drawn against any local improvement fund is
presented to the city for payment and there is not sufficient amount in the
local improvement fund against which to draw to pay the same, unless otherwise
requested by the holder, payment therefor shall be made by warrant drawn
against the local improvement guarantee fund. Such warrants when presented to
the city treasurer for payment, if not paid, shall be registered and shall draw
interest at a rate of six percent (6%) per annum. Neither the holder nor the
owner of any bond or warrant issued in any local improvement district shall
have any claim therefor except for the payment from the special assessments
made for the improvement for which such bond or warrant was issued and except
against the local improvement guarantee fund provided for in this chapter. The
city shall not be liable to any holder or owner of such bond or warrant for any
loss to any guarantee fund occurring in the lawful operation thereof by the
city. (Prior code §12-4)
3.08.050: CITY'S RIGHT OF SUBROGATION WHEN WARRANTS PAID OUT OF FUND:
A.   Whenever there shall be paid out of the local improvement guarantee fund
any sum on account of principal or interest of a local improvement bond or
warrant, the city, as trustee for the fund, shall be subrogated to all of the
rights of the holders or owners of the bonds or interest, coupons or warrants
so paid, and the policies thereof, or the assessment underlying the same, shall
become part of the guarantee fund.
B.   There shall be paid into the guarantee fund any surplus remaining in any
local improvement fund after the payment of all outstanding bonds or warrants
so paid, and the policies thereof, or the assessment underlying the same, shall
become part of the guarantee fund.
C.   There shall be paid into the guarantee fund any surplus remaining in any
local improvement fund after the payment of all outstanding bonds or warrants,
payable out of such local improvement fund. Bonds or warrants guaranteed by
such fund shall have no preference except in the order of presentation for
payment. (Prior code §12-5)
3.08.060: MONEY DERIVED FROM COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT LOCAL IMPROVEMENT
ASSESSMENTS TO BE PAID INTO FUND; USE OF FUND TO REDEEM CERTAIN PROPERTY:
A.   All monies derived from the assignment of delinquent certificates,
redemptions, sale of property under foreclosure for delinquent local
improvement assessments or from the rent or sale of property, title to which
has been obtained by the city pursuant to sections 50-3001 to 50-3009 of the
Idaho Code, and the terms of this chapter, and all other laws amendatory
thereof and supplemental thereto, shall be paid into the local improvement
guarantee fund, and all delinquency certificates issued and any such property
acquired shall be held by the city for the benefit of such guarantee fund.
B.   Money from the guarantee fund may be used to redeem property subject to
local improvement assessments from general tax delinquencies underlying bonds
or warrants guaranteed by the fund, or to purchase such property at county tax
sales or otherwise, from the county for the purpose of protecting the guarantee
fund.
C.   After so acquiring title to real property, the city may lease or sell and
convey the same for such price and on such terms as may be determined by the
mayor and city council, and any provisions of law, charter or ordinance to the
contrary notwithstanding, and all proceeds resulting therefrom shall belong to
and be paid into the guarantee fund; provided, however, that in the event the
city purchases such property at tax sale, or otherwise, it shall not be sold
for a lesser sum than the city paid therefor. (Prior code §12-6)
3.08.070: TAX LEVY TO REPLENISH FUND:
Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash in the local improvement
guarantee fund at any time to pay any and all warrants, together with interest
thereon, drawn against such fund, the city council may replenish the local
improvement guarantee fund by transferring or appropriating to it, monies from
the general fund of the city, or other available sources as may be determined
by the city council subject, however, to the limitations prescribed in this
chapter. Warrants drawing interest as provided in this chapter may be issued
against the local improvement guarantee fund to meet any financial inability
against it; but, at the time of making its next annual tax levy the city shall
provide for the levy of a sum sufficient with other resources of the guarantee
fund, to pay warrants so issued and outstanding, the tax for this purpose not
to exceed one mill in any one year. (Prior code §12-7)
3.08.080: LIMITATION OF CLAIM OF PERSONS HOLDING LOCAL IMPROVEMENT BONDS OR
WARRANTS:
The holder or owner of any local improvement bond or warrant shall have no
claim thereon against the city, except to the extent of the funds created and
received by assessments against the property within any local improvement
district and to the extent of his pro rata share of the local improvement
guarantee fund, authorized and issued under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code §12-8)
3.08.090: TERMINATION OF FUND:
At such time, and not before, when all bonds and coupons of all existing local
improvement districts in the city shall have been paid in full, the mayor and
city council may provide by ordinance that the amount and all property rights
in the local improvement guarantee fund shall revert to the general fund of the
city, and the local improvement guarantee fund shall terminate and be
nonexistent thereafter. (Prior code §12-9)
3.08.100: EFFECTUATION OF CHAPTER BY CITY OFFICERS:
The officers of the city are authorized and directed to take all action
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. (Prior
code §12-10)
3.08.110: CHAPTER TO CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT WITH PERSONS HOLDING LOCAL
IMPROVEMENT BONDS OR WARRANTS:
After warrants or bonds of local improvement district 9 for curbs, gutters and
sidewalks for the city have been issued, this chapter shall constitute a
contract by the city and the holder or holders of such bonds, and shall be and
remain irrepealable until such warrants or bonds or both, and the interest
accruing thereon, shall have been fully paid, satisfied and discharged. (Prior
code §12-11)
CHAPTER 3.12
BAD CHECKS
SECTION:
3.12.010: Fee For Returned Check For Payment For City Services
3.12.010: FEE FOR RETURNED CHECK FOR PAYMENT FOR CITY SERVICES:
In all cases whereby the city receives checks for payment of city services
which are dishonored, nonaccepted or nonpaid by the drawee bank, the city shall
impose a fee to be established by resolution of the city council, said amount
being payable immediately upon return of the check to the city. (Ord. 753 §1,
1993: Ord. 585 §1, 1976)
CHAPTER 3.15
MASTER CITY-WIDE FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
3.15.010: Future Fee Modifications
3.15.020: Effective Date
3.15.010:  FUTURE FEE MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   A Master City-Wide Fee Schedule is hereby formally adopted (Exhibit A
attached to Ord. 1227) by the city. This schedule will be available to the
public at the city’s website as well as at city hall.
   B.   All rates and fees included in the Master City-Wide Fee Schedule may be
amended or revised in the future by a resolution passed by a majority of the
full city council. (Ord. 1227, 2024)
3.15.020:  EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city
prior to its effective date, and shall take effect and be in force from and
after October 1, 2024.
(Ord. 1227, 2024)
TITLE 4
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 4.04
COMMUNITY SPIRIT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
4.04.010: Creation; Purpose
4.04.020: Mission
4.04.030: Membership
4.04.040: Bylaws
4.04.010: CREATION; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created the community spirit committee as follows:
A.   The community along with strong partnerships have made great strides to
bring back community spirit with events like Christmas In The Park, City Wide
Cleanup Day, and continued support of the Joe Mama Car Show.
B.   To further encourage community spirit, the creation of this committee will
allow the city to:
   1.   Pursue opportunities to foster greater community participation and
involvement in Jerome community events.
   2.   Engage other commissions, entities, and businesses through outreach for
partnership opportunities.
   3.   Develop and support community events including, but not limited to, the
following:
      a.   Fourth Of July Celebration.
      b.   Community Block Party.
      c.   Mayor's Good Neighbor Award.
   4.   Continue support of current events. (Ord. 1156, 2016)
4.04.020: MISSION:
The mission of the community spirit committee is to increase citizen
participation and Jerome community spirit by ensuring the continuation of
established community events and creating more accessible, community minded
events. The committee will gather and listen to input from citizens and
businesses. (Ord. 1156, 2016)
4.04.030: MEMBERSHIP:
Members and officers shall be comprised of no greater than seven (7) members to
consist of residents and business owners. These members shall be appointed by
the mayor and will volunteer to serve on the committee for a period of two (2)
years. (Ord. 1156, 2016)
4.04.040: BYLAWS:
The bylaws dated August 22, 2016, are incorporated herein and are hereby
adopted by reference. (Ord. 1156, 2016)
CHAPTER 4.08
CITY DEVELOPER REIMBURSEMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
4.08.010: Establishment
4.08.020: Duties And Purposes
4.08.030: Membership
4.08.040: Vacancies
4.08.050: Removal Of Members
4.08.060: Nonpolitical; No Compensation
4.08.070: Chairman
4.08.080: Tenure
4.08.090: Meetings
4.08.100: Quorum
4.08.110: Rules
4.08.120: Conflict Of Interest
4.08.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
It is hereby established and created a Developer Reimbursement Commission to be
known as the Jerome Developer Reimbursement Commission. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.020: DUTIES AND PURPOSES:
The duties and purposes of the Developer Reimbursement Commission shall be as
follows:
A.   Administer the Council approved resolution for the amounts, methods and
procedures for reimbursement of costs to private initial developers who have
installed public works infrastructure improvements by any subsequent developers
or property owners that connect to those systems.
B.   The Office of the City Engineer shall prepare and maintain a system to
track all public works improvements by initial developers subject to
reimbursement.
C.   The commission shall accept requests for reimbursement, to include actual
receipted costs and plans, from the initial developer that has installed public
works infrastructure improvements to be paid back by any subsequent developers
or property owners who utilize same infrastructure improvements.
D.   With the assistance of the Office of the City Engineer, establish the
boundaries of properties that will be required to reimburse the initial
developer that installed the public works infrastructure improvements, and
notify owners of those properties of the requirement to reimburse the initial
developer when and if their properties eventually develop and utilize same
public works infrastructure improvements.
E.   Using cost information from the developer that installed the public works
improvements or other approved methods, determine the proper compensation that
any developer or property owner that connects the public works infrastructure
will be required to pay.
F.   Verify that the reimbursement has been made to the initial developer that
installed the public works infrastructure improvements by any subsequent
developer or property owner that connects to those systems. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.030: MEMBERSHIP:
There shall be three (3) voting members of the Developer Reimbursement
Commission to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the members of the
City Council. Members on the commission shall be actively engaged in the
profession of community development. Members are more specifically to be
appointed from the following organizations or professions: one member from the
development community; one member that is an engineer, surveyor or architect;
and one member at large. There shall also be two (2) nonvoting ex officio
members of the commission: City Administrator, and City Engineer, appointed by
the Mayor and Council. Members of the commission established under this section
should be residents of the City unless this residency requirement is
specifically waived by the Council. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.040: VACANCIES:
Any vacancies occurring in the membership of the Developer Reimbursement
Commission for any reason shall be filled by the Mayor, to be confirmed by the
City Council. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.050: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member of the Developer Reimbursement Commission may be removed by a
majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.060: NONPOLITICAL; NO COMPENSATION:
The members of the Developer Reimbursement Commission shall be selected without
regard to their political affiliations and shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.070: CHAIRMAN:
The Developer Reimbursement Commission shall elect its Chairman and Vice-
Chairman and fill such offices as it may determine necessary and expedient.
(Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.080: TENURE:
The following tenure of office shall be provided for the members of the
Developer Reimbursement Commission:
A.   The initial commission members shall be appointed for three (3) year
terms.
B.   The ex officio members of the commission shall hold membership
corresponding to their tenures of office or employment in the City of Jerome.
(Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.090: MEETINGS:
All meetings will take place at City Council chambers and shall be open to the
public. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.100: QUORUM:
At least two (2) of the appointed voting members of the Developer Reimbursement
Commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and conduct any business
at any meeting of the commission. Any decision of the commission will require
at least a quorum of commission members for acceptance of the reimbursement.
(Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.110: RULES:
The Developer Reimbursement Commission shall adopt general rules for the
transactions of its business and shall make a written record of the meetings,
City resolutions, findings and determinations which said written record be kept
as permanent public record. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
4.08.120: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A member of the commission shall not participate in any proceeding or action
when the member, his employer, or his employee, business partner or associate,
his business or any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within
the second degree has an interest in the procedure or action. Any action or
potential interest in any proceeding shall be disclosed at or before any
meeting, duly entered and recorded in the minutes, at which the action is being
heard or considered.
The commission shall function under the City resolution determining appropriate
standards and defined criteria for reimbursement standards. (Ord. 1164, 2017)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 1
CHAPTER 5.04
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 1007 §1, 2006)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-307.
CHAPTER 5.08
FOOD VEHICLES, VENDORS, SOLICITORS, AND TEMPORARY MERCHANTS
SECTION:
5.08.010: Regulations
5.08.010: REGULATIONS:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the City of Jerome and its residents by means of regulating food
vehicles, vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants.
B.   Definitions:
   FOOD VEHICLE: A food establishment that is located upon a vehicle, or which
is pulled by a vehicle, where food or beverage is prepared and served to the
public, including, but not limited to, food trucks, trailers, carts and vans.
   SOLICITOR: Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, who travels by
foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place within
the City while taking, or attempting to take, in person, orders for sale of
goods, wares, services or merchandise of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, whether or not advance payments are collected at the time of
solicitation. This definition shall include any person or entity who, for
himself or for another person or entity, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, tent, place, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room,
apartment, lot, or public street or right-of-way within the City for the
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
   SPECIAL EVENT: The temporary use, with a valid permit, of public property,
including streets, parks, and community centers, for the purpose of conducting
certain short term events such as art shows, music concerts, fundraising
events, amusement attractions, community events, circuses, carnival, rodeos,
including, but not limited to, street dances, tournaments, walkathons,
marathons, races, car shows, exhibitions or related activities.
   TEMPORARY MERCHANT: Any person whether owner or otherwise, whether a
resident of the City of Jerome or not, who engages in a temporary business of
selling and/or delivering food, beverages, goods, wares, merchandise or
services within the City limits, and who in furtherance of such purpose hires,
leases, uses or occupies any building, structure or motor vehicle within the
City, for the exhibition and sale of food, beverages, goods, merchandise or
services. Excluded from the term "temporary merchant" are the following
activities:
   1.   Public or private auctions for the disposal by an established business
of its assets or for an individual, for items of personal or household use.
   2.   Any person or entity described in this definition of "temporary
merchant" who sells goods or services exclusively to retail merchants within
the City limits.
   3.   Any religious or charitable entity, including nationally recognized
service clubs, engaging in any one or more of the otherwise prohibited
activities for beneficial, charitable or public benefit purposes.
   4.   Any show, exhibition or fair where goods or services for sale are
exhibited by the person manufacturing the goods or providing the services and
such exhibitor was invited by the person or entity sponsoring the event to
attend. Any person or entity sponsoring such an event shall make the names and
addresses of all exhibitors available to the City upon request.
   5.   Sales pursuant to court order.
   6.   The sale of farm or garden products by persons producing such products.
   7.   Sale of Christmas trees or wreaths in season, provided that any such
person engaged in such a business shall provide their name and address to the
City or a police officer of the City upon request.
   VENDOR: Any person, including an employee or agent of a group of
individuals, partnership, or corporation, who sells or offers to take orders to
sell food, beverages, wares, merchandise or services from a stand, cart, shack,
motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance or from his or her person,
including but not limited to, snow shacks. This definition shall include the
words "hauler", "huckster" and "peddler".
C.   Zoning Requirements: No temporary business license shall be granted to a
public or private location, building or structure in any residential zoning
district.
D.   Application: Any person seeking a license as a food vehicle, vendor,
solicitor, or temporary merchant within the City shall file with the City Clerk
a written, sworn application, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all
partners if a partnership, by all members if a limited liability company, by
the president and secretary of a corporation and by other similar authorized
officer or official of any other entity showing:
   1.   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed it
will be carried on in the City. Every address or location at which such
business will be carried on; permanent address or addresses of each person
signing the application, the capacity in which the person signing the
application will act; the name of the corporation or other entity on whose
account the business will be conducted; and, if a partnership, limited
liability company, corporation or other entity, the state in which the entity
was organized.
   2.   Idaho State Sales Tax license number.
   3.   A site plan showing the location of the temporary business, outdoor
seating arrangement and other information as required by the City Clerk.
   4.   The length of time during which it is proposed the business will be
conducted, together with signed lease, license or other permission from the
owner of the real property at which the business will be conducted evidencing
authority to operate at the location.
   5.   A description of the nature of the business and the goods, merchandise,
wares or services which will be dispensed or solicited.
   6.   A statement of whether or not the person or persons signing the
application have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or felony and the
date, place and nature of every such conviction.
   7.   A valid, government issued ID or driver's license for every person
signing the application or who will conduct the business of the applicant
whether as a food vehicle, vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant.
   8.   If the applicant proposes to sell any food or beverage for human
consumption, a current certificate from the South Central Idaho Health District
authorizing such activity as being in compliance with law shall be required
prior to the issuance of this license, unless otherwise exempt by the South
Central Idaho Health District.
   9.   A waste disposal plan outlining how waste and grease will be disposed.
The Wastewater Department shall review and approve such plan.
   10.   Certification that the temporary business has passed all necessary
inspection from any local, State or Federal agency, including, but not limited
to, South Central Health District, Jerome City Fire Department and Jerome City
building official.
   11.   If the application is determined to be complete and accurate, the City
Clerk shall forward the application and supporting materials to the various
City departments for review and recommendation for approval or denial prior to
the issuance of a temporary merchant license to each applicant upon the payment
of the fee hereafter required.
E.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, or any business
entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, or any other business entity, or any contractor, agent or employee
of the same to act as a food vehicle, vendor, solicitor, or temporary merchant
within the City limits of Jerome, Idaho, without obtaining a license to do so.
F.   License Fee: A license fee shall be payable to the City Clerk in the
initial amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a food vehicle, vendor,
solicitor or temporary merchant. Each license shall be for a period of six (6)
months. Licenses may be renewed for additional six (6) month terms. The renewal
fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
G.   Bond Required: Every food vehicle, vendor, solicitor, or temporary
merchant shall, prior to commencement of the conduct of business, post a bond
with the City Clerk in the form of a surety bond, upon a surety license to
conduct business in the State of Idaho, deemed appropriate by the City Clerk,
or a cashier's check made payable to the City of Jerome, in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00). The bond will be to ensure that garbage, paper,
litter or other debris associated with the conduct of the business does not
remain upon public or private property, including public rights-of-way within
the City. After expiration of a license, the City Clerk shall, upon application
of the licensee, return the bond or cashier's check within six (6) months of an
application for return being filed with the City Clerk, demonstrating that the
terms of the bond had been complied with. The bond shall be forfeited to the
City of Jerome upon the affidavit of the City Clerk or a police officer of the
City of Jerome to the effect that the food vehicle, vendor, solicitor or
temporary merchant has not complied with the provisions of this section.
H.   Exhibition Of License: Any license issued under this section shall be
conspicuously posted at any place of business at which the food vehicle, vendor
or temporary merchant is conducting business, or, if a solicitor, a copy of the
license shall be kept by every solicitor to be displayed upon the request of
any property owner being solicited or by a police officer of the City of
Jerome.
I.   Use Of Private Property Restricted: No owner or lessee of real property,
within the City of Jerome, nor any agent thereof, shall sublet, lease, or
otherwise license such real property to be used by a food vehicle, vendor,
temporary merchant or solicitor, unless such use is specifically excluded from
the duty of application and license under this section or unless the food
vehicle, vendor, temporary merchant or solicitor has obtained the license
required herein.
J.   Rules And Regulations For Food Vehicles, Vendors And Temporary Merchants:
   1.   Shall maintain a clean appearance, free of rust and decay.
   2.   Shall be located a minimum distance of five feet (5') from the edge of
any driveway or public sidewalk, utility boxes and vaults, handicapped ramp,
building entrance, exits, or emergency access/exit ways, or emergency call box
and shall not locate within any area of the lot that impedes, endangers, or
interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   3.   Shall be located a minimum distance of ten feet (10') in all directions
of a fire hydrant.
   4.   Food vehicles shall provide proof of mobility on a semi-annual basis.
Physically driving the food vehicle to City offices when renewing a temporary
merchant license shall constitute proof of mobility.
   5.   Drive-throughs shall be prohibited.
   6.   Temporary connections to potable water and other utilities are
prohibited.
   7.   Shall be responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash
associated with the operation. City trash receptacles shall not be used for
this purpose. Shall keep all areas within ten feet (10') of the business and
any associated seating area clean of grease, trash, paper, cups or cans
associated with the vending operation.
   8.   No liquid waste or grease may be disposed of in tree pits, storm drains
or onto the sidewalks, streets, or other public space. Under no circumstances
shall grease be released or disposed of in the City's sanitary sewer system.
   9.   With the exception of allowable outdoor seating areas, all equipment
required for the operation shall be contained within, attached to or within ten
feet (10') of the retail sales. Outdoor seating areas shall be placed in a safe
manner and to not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   10.   Canopies, carports, sheds, and other temporary structures associated
with a food vehicle, vendor, and temporary merchant shall be subject to
inspection, review and approval by the City Building and Fire Departments.
   11.   Shall be equipped with approved hand-held fire extinguishers. One 10-
pound ABC fire extinguisher is a minimum requirement. If grease laden vapors
are produced, a two and one-half (21/2) gallon Class K fire extinguisher shall
also be required. Additionally, food establishments and food vehicles producing
grease laden vapors shall have a UL 300 listed, Class I hood installed along
with an approved automatic fire suppression system. All Class I hoods shall be
serviced no less than every six (6) months by qualified, licensed inspector.
The fire suppression system shall be inspected and tested annually by a
licensed fire protection system inspector.
   12.   Shall be subject to the temporary sign regulations outlined in section
17.32.038 of this Code. Unsecured menu boards are prohibited. Signs and/or
lettering on the unit shall be produced using professional workmanship without
hand lettering or with a sloppy or garish paint job.
   13.   Issuance of a temporary business license shall not entitle the
licensee to conduct business on any street, sidewalk or other location within
any park, owned or maintained by the City, unless they are part of a special
event and have permission from the event sponsor.
   14.   Issuance of a temporary business license shall entitle the licensee to
conduct business on any privately owned property, excluding residential zones,
provided they satisfy the criteria noted herein and have obtained written
authorization from the property owner.
K.   Revocation: Any license issued under this section may be revoked by the
City Council, after notice and hearing duly given, for any of the following
reasons:
   1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application;
   2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the
selling or solicitation of any goods, wares, services or merchandise;
   3.   Any other violation of this section;
   4.   Conduct of business by a food vehicle, vendor, temporary merchant, or
solicitor in any other manner in violation of law.
The City Council shall give written notice to the food vehicle, vendor,
temporary merchant, or solicitor of the grounds upon which revocation of
license will be sought and the time, date and place of a hearing before the
City Council where the person or entity holding the license may appear and show
cause, if any they have, why the license should not be revoked.
L.   Enforcement And Penalty:
   1.   Civil Liability: At the direction of the City Council, the City
Attorney shall institute a civil suit in the name of the City of Jerome to
enforce compliance with any of the provisions of this section by suit for
injunction, declaratory relief or other suitable legal theory. The City shall
be entitled to recover attorney fees and costs if it prevails in such civil
action, and such requirement shall be noted on all licenses issued hereunder.
   2.   Misdemeanor: Any person who violates any provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject
to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for up to
a period of not more than six (6) months. Each day a violation of this section
occurs shall be deemed a separate misdemeanor. (Ord. 1161, 2017)
CHAPTER 5.10
SKATING RINKS
SECTION:
5.10.010: License Fee
5.10.010: LICENSE FEE:
The person owning or conducting a skating rink within the city shall pay a
license fee of forty dollars ($40.00) per annum, or twelve dollars fifty cents
($12.50) per quarter, payable in advance. (Prior code §11-12)
CHAPTER 5.12
ADVERTISING AND BILLPOSTING
(Rep. by Ord. 894 §1, 2000)
CHAPTER 5.16
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LIQUOR 1
SECTION:
5.16.010: Definitions
5.16.020: License; Required
5.16.060: License; Contents; Signature Of Licensee Required
5.16.070: License; Exclusive Use
5.16.080: License; Expiration; Posting Requirement
5.16.090: License; Transferability
5.16.100: License; Location Of Licensed Premises
5.16.110: License; Requirements Of Licensees
5.16.120: License; Qualifications For Obtaining License
5.16.130: License; Revocation And Cancellation
5.16.140: License; Designated For Specific Premises
5.16.150: Licensed Premises; Proper Conduct Required
5.16.160: Licensed Premises; Right Of Entry Of Officers
5.16.170: Hours Of Sale
5.16.180: Restrictions On Sales
5.16.190: Minors On Licensed Premises; Misdemeanor
5.16.200: Public Parks; Consumption Prohibited
 
Notes
1 1. IC title 23; IC §23-916.
5.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
A.   All words and phrases used in this chapter, the definition of which is not
given in this section shall be given the ordinary and commonly understood and
accepted meaning.
B.   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   BARTENDER: Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, licensee, or in any
other capacity, who pours, mixes, prepares, serves or delivers any liquor by
the drink upon any licensed premises.
   INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under
the laws of the state.
   LICENSE: A license issued by the city council.
   LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of
this chapter.
   LIQUOR: All kinds of liquor sold by and in a state liquor store of the
state.
   PREMISES: The room in which the sale of liquor by the drink at retail is
authorized under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code §4-1)
5.16.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
The city council at regular or special session shall issue licenses to
qualified applicants, as provided in this chapter whereby the licensee shall be
authorized and permitted to sell liquor by the drink at retail and, upon the
issuance of such license, the licensee therein named shall be authorized to
sell liquor at retail by the drink, but only in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful to sell liquor by the drink without
having first obtained such license. (Prior code §4-2)
5.16.060: LICENSE; CONTENTS; SIGNATURE OF LICENSEE REQUIRED:
Every license issued under this chapter shall set forth the name of the person
to whom issued, the location by street and number, or other definite
designation, of the premises. If issued to a partnership, the names of the
persons constituting the partnership shall be set forth. If issued to a
corporation or association, the names of the principal officers and the
governing board shall be set forth. Such license shall be signed by the
licensee. (Prior code §4-6)
5.16.070: LICENSE; EXCLUSIVE USE:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter is separate and
distinct and no person except the licensee therein named or his or its assignee
shall exercise any of the privileges granted thereunder and all licenses are
applicable only to the premises in respect to which issued. (Prior code §4-7)
5.16.080: LICENSE; EXPIRATION; POSTING REQUIREMENT:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. on August 1, of the year following the issuance of the license. No person
shall be granted more than one license in any one year. Every licensee shall at
all times keep posted, in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, the
license issued by the city. (Ord. 1199, 4-6-2021: Ord. 627(R), 1980: prior code
§4-8)
5.16.090: LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY:
A.   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be transferred
to another qualified person in conformance with the requirements contained
elsewhere in this code. Application for the transfer of any such license shall
be made to the mayor and council and upon receipt of such application the mayor
and council shall make the same investigations and determinations with respect
to the transferee as required elsewhere in this code.
B.   No charge shall be made for the transfer of such license, but, in the
event the city incurs any expense in the course of its investigation of the
proposed transferee, such proposed transferee shall pay the cost incurred in
such investigation. (Ord. 672 §2, 1983: prior code §4-9)
5.16.100: LICENSE; LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for any premises in any neighborhood which is
predominantly residential or within three hundred feet (300') of any public
school, church, or any other place of worship, measured in a straight line to
the nearest entrance to the licensed premises; provided, that this limitation
shall not apply to any duly licensed premises that at the time of licensing did
not come within the restricted area but subsequent to licensing came therein.
(Prior code §4-10)
5.16.110: LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEES:
Any person seeking a license pursuant to this chapter shall meet all the
requirements for a license as set forth in section 23-910 of the Idaho Code.
Additionally, any applicant for a license under this chapter shall demonstrate
adequately to the city council that if they, at a prior time, held a license
similar to the one authorized by this chapter in any other city, county or
state, that during the period of holding such license, their business was run
in an orderly fashion. The city further reserves the right to make its own
independent evaluation and determination of whether or not the qualifications
for license are met by the applicant, and that any determination by the state,
county or other jurisdiction shall not be binding upon the city. The city
council may, in its discretion, require a licensee to segregate areas within a
licensed premises wherein no alcoholic beverage of any sort may be served,
brought in or possessed. (Ord. 627(S), 1980: prior code §4-11)
5.16.120: LICENSE; QUALIFICATIONS FOR OBTAINING LICENSE:
No person less than nineteen (19) years of age may make application for a
license pursuant to this chapter. Knowing or intentional misrepresentation of
any portion of the application for license under this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 627(T), 1980: prior code §4-12)
5.16.130: LICENSE; REVOCATION AND CANCELLATION:
The city council may at any time, in compliance with the standards and
procedures as set forth in section 23-933, 23-933A and 23-933B, of the Idaho
Code, and other requirements of this code, revoke, suspend or permanently
cancel any license granted to an applicant under the provisions of this
chapter. A violation of any other section or portion of this code shall be
further grounds for cancellation, suspension or revocation of a license granted
by this chapter, in addition to those grounds set forth in the sections of the
Idaho Code above cited. (Ord. 672 §3, 1983: Ord. 627(U), 1980: prior code §4-
13)
5.16.140: LICENSE; DESIGNATED FOR SPECIFIC PREMISES:
Retailer's licenses, issued pursuant to this chapter shall be granted only for
a certain room or building designated in the license, and the place of business
shall not be changed or moved without the consent of the city council. (Prior
code §4-19)
5.16.150: LICENSED PREMISES; PROPER CONDUCT REQUIRED:
Every licensee, licensed under the terms of this chapter, shall at all times
conduct the licensed premises in a quiet and orderly manner and shall not
permit or allow any boisterous or disorderly conduct in such premises. (Prior
code §4-20)
5.16.160: LICENSED PREMISES; RIGHT OF ENTRY OF OFFICERS:
Any duly authorized police officer of the city shall have the right at any time
to make an examination of the premises of any licensee as to whether the laws
of the state and the provisions of this code and other ordinances of this city
are being complied with. (Prior code §4-21)
5.16.170: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed
premises during the following hours:
A.   Memorial Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day from one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day.
B.   On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M.
C.   On any day of a general or primary election until after the time when the
polls are closed. (Ord. 1022 §1, 2006: Ord. 902 §1, 2000: prior code §4-22)
5.16.180: RESTRICTIONS ON SALES:
No licensee or his or its employees, agents, servants or bartenders shall sell,
deliver or give away or cause to be sold, delivered or given away any liquor
to:
A.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
B.   Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated. (Ord. 902 §2,
2000: Ord. 627(V), 1980: prior code §4-23)
5.16.190: MINORS ON LICENSED PREMISES; MISDEMEANOR:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be admitted to premises
licensed under the provisions of this chapter, unless that person is a bona
fide, lawful employee of the business and it shall be a misdemeanor for any
such person to be admitted to or gain admittance to such premises. (Ord. 902
§3, 2000: Ord. 627(W), 1980: prior code §4-24)
5.16.200: PUBLIC PARKS; CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, possess, or allow to be
consumed or possessed, any alcoholic beverages within the confines of any
public park within the city limits without prior approval from the city
council.
B.   1. For purposes of this section "alcoholic beverage(s)" shall mean beer,
wine or alcohol as those terms are defined in Idaho Code sections 23-15 and 23-
1001 as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended.
   2.   The term "city park" shall refer to any public park owned by the city
located within the city limits of the city and shall include, but not be
limited to, those parks commonly referred to as North park, South park, Seasons
park, Camozzi park and Sheppard's park.
   3.   The term "Jerome recreation district park" shall refer to any public
park owned by the Jerome recreation district located within the city limits of
the city and shall include, but not be limited to, Rotary park and Gayle
Forsythe park.
C.   Any person or organization desiring to consume alcoholic beverages within
a city park may do so only from a licensed vendor in valid possession of a
catering permit issued pursuant to the laws of the state of Idaho and the city,
and upon application and permit granted by the city council as follows:
   1.   The application shall contain the following information:
      a.   The name of applicant;
      b.   Place of proposed consumption of alcoholic beverages;
      c.   Day of consumption of alcoholic beverages;
      d.   Hours between which alcoholic beverages will be consumed;
      e.   Name of responsible party for procurement of the alcoholic beverages
to be consumed;
      f.   Written statement that the applicant will permit no one under the
age of twenty one (21) years to consume alcoholic beverages in connection with
the application and that all containers and other refuse will be properly
discarded and the park left clean after the activity.
Every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable twenty five dollar
($25.00) fee. The full application shall be submitted to the city clerk and
acted on by the council at the next regular council meeting following the
application submittal. The council may reject an application, approve the same,
or impose reasonable conditions on an application including, but not limited
to, the number of persons involved, hours of consumption, crowd control
measures, and the posting of bond for security and other reasons.
D.   Any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor punished by
fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or six (6) months'
incarceration in the county jail, or both. (Ord. 981 §1, 2005: Ord. 721 §§1–4,
1990)
CHAPTER 5.20
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; BEER 1
SECTION:
5.20.010: Purpose And Interpretation
5.20.020: Definitions
5.20.030: License; Required; State License Prerequisite To Sale
5.20.050: License; Qualifications Of Applicant
5.20.060: License; Issuance To Specific Qualified Location
5.20.070: License; Transferability
5.20.080: License; Expiration
5.20.090: License; Revocation
5.20.100: License; Procedure For Revocation
5.20.110: Regulation Of Sales
5.20.120: Sale, Gift Or Delivery To Minors
5.20.130: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §23-1001 et seq.
5.20.010: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city, for
the protection of the public health, peace and morals and all of its provisions
shall be liberally construed for the attainment of that purpose. (Prior code
§4-25)
5.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   BEER: Shall conform to the definition of the term as it is defined in Idaho
Code sections 23-1001(a) and 23-1002 as those sections now exist or as they may
hereinafter be amended.
   RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the
consumer. (Ord. 1098, 2012: prior code §4-26)
5.20.030: LICENSE; REQUIRED; STATE LICENSE PREREQUISITE TO SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to sell or distribute beer within the
city without first having obtained a license as a retailer from the city
council under the provisions of this chapter, and who, before engaging in the
sale or distribution of beer to the consumer, has not first obtained a license
as a retailer under the laws of the state from the commission of the department
of law enforcement of the state. (Prior code §4-27)
5.20.050: LICENSE; QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
The city council may reject any application for a license pursuant to this
chapter, but in no event shall any license for the retail sale or distribution
of beer within the city be granted to the following persons:
A.   Any person not then a bona fide resident of the state and county;
B.   Any person convicted for the violation of any law regulating, governing or
prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor during the
last five (5) years;
C.   Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age;
D.   Any person having been previously convicted of a felony or any other crime
involving moral turpitude;
E.   Any person whose room, building or place, for which application for
license is made, has a portion thereof set aside, partitioned or enclosed, made
available or used for the entertainment or amusement of the patrons or
customers of such person, not also open to the public during business hours.
(Ord. 1098, 2012: Ord. 627(Y), 1980: prior code §4-29)
5.20.060: LICENSE; ISSUANCE TO SPECIFIC QUALIFIED LOCATION:
A retailer's license shall be granted only for a certain room, building, or
place designated in the license, which room, building, or place and every
portion thereof shall be well lighted and the view thereof, or any portion
thereof, not obstructed by any curtain, blind, or partition, and the place of
business shall not be changed or moved without the consent of the city council
in regular session. (Prior code §4-30)
5.20.070: LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY:
A.   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be sold, transferred or
assigned to any person having all the qualifications of the original licensee
in compliance with the procedural and substantiative requirements contained
elsewhere in this code. Application to transfer any license issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be made to the mayor and council. Upon receipt of such an
application the mayor and council shall make the same investigation and
determinations with respect to the transferee as are required in the case of
the issuance of the original license, and if the mayor and council shall
determine that all of the conditions required of an original licensee under the
terms of this article have been met by the proposed transferee, then the
license shall be transferred and endorsed over to the proposed transferee by
the licensee for the remainder of the period for which such license has been
issued, and the mayor and council shall endorse their approval of and consent
to such transfer upon such original license and thereafter such transferee
shall have all the rights of the original licensee under the license.
B.   No charge shall be made for the transfer of such license, but, in the
event the city incurs any expense in the course of its investigation of the
proposed transferee, such proposed transferee shall pay the costs incurred in
such investigation.
C.   In case of the receivership, assignment, bankruptcy, or incompetency of
the licensee, the business of the licensee may be carried on under the license
by the duly appointed, qualified and acting receiver, assignee, trustee in
bankruptcy, guardian, executor, or administrator of the licensee; provided,
that such receiver, assignee, trustee, guardian, executor or administrator
shall file with the city clerk a certified copy of his appointment and secure
the written consent of the city council. (Ord. 672 §4, 1983: prior code §4-31)
5.20.080: LICENSE; EXPIRATION:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall terminate at one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. on August 1 of the year following issuance of the license. (Ord. 1199, 4-
6-2021: Ord. 672 §5, 1983: Ord. 627(Z), 1980: prior code §4-32)
5.20.090: LICENSE; REVOCATION:
The license of any person who was eligible for a license under the provisions
of section
5.20.050 of this chapter at the time of the issuance thereof, and during the
period for which such license was issued becomes ineligible therefor under any
provisions of such section, shall be subject to revocation or cancellation
under the provisions of section
5.20.100 of this chapter. (Prior code §4-33)
5.20.100: LICENSE; PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION:
The right shall be and at all times remain vested in the city council to
revoke, cancel, or suspend the license of any person licensed under this
chapter for any violation of this chapter or violation of any provision of the
Idaho Code title 23. (Ord. 672 §6, 1983: Ord. 627(AA), 1980: prior code §4-34)
5.20.110: REGULATION OF SALES:
A.   Every person to whom a license shall be granted under the terms and
provisions of this chapter:
   1.   Shall at all times conduct a quiet and orderly place of business;
   2.   Shall keep the room, building or site designated in the license, and
all portions thereof open at all times for the inspection of any peace officer
of the city, county, state or United States Of America, and shall give to such
officers or any of them, the right at any and all times to make an inspection
of the licensed premises or any portion thereof, to ascertain whether the
licensee is conforming to the provisions of this chapter, or the laws of the
state or the United States Of America, applicable thereto, and to check the
alcoholic content of any beer being kept for the purpose of sale or
distribution on the premises;
   3.   Shall not conduct on the licensed premises any games, device or table
in violation of the gambling laws of the state;
   4.   Shall not set aside, partition or enclose any portion of the licensed
premises, made available or to the use for the entertainment or amusement of
the patrons or customers of the licensee, not also open to the general public
during business hours;
   5.   Shall not sell any beer to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years;
   6.   Shall not permit any person under the age of nineteen (19) years to
frequent, loiter in or about, or to patronize any beer dispensary, or to
frequent, loiter in or be employed in such beer dispensary;
   7.   Shall at all times keep posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises all permits or licenses, and shall keep the same so posted for the
full period of which licenses are issued;
   8.   Shall not sell or distribute beer within the city limits between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
B.   The grounds enumerated in this chapter shall constitute bases for the
revocation, suspension, or cancellation of a license issued under this chapter,
in addition to any other grounds appearing elsewhere in this chapter or in the
laws of the state. (Ord. 1098, 2012: Ord. 627(BB), 1980: prior code §4-35)
5.20.120: SALE, GIFT OR DELIVERY TO MINORS:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city of Jerome to sell,
furnish, deliver or give away beer to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years.
B.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of nineteen (19) years to
enter or be present in any business establishment which is licensed to sell
beer for consumption on the premises, and it is unlawful for any person to
permit a person under nineteen (19) years of age to enter or be present in the
business establishment licensed to sell beer. Provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful for a person under nineteen (19) years of age to enter or be
present in a business establishment which is licensed to sell beer for
consumption on the premises, but whose primary business purpose is the sale of
prepared food. (Ord. 1098, 2012: Ord. 627(CC), 1980: prior code §4-36)
5.20.130: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable by up to
three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6) months in jail. (Ord. 1098,
2012)
CHAPTER 5.25
RETAIL SALE OF LIQUOR, WINE AND BEER 1
SECTION:
5.25.010: Scope
5.25.020: License Categories
5.25.030: License; Fixing Of Fees
5.25.040: License; Application
5.25.050: License; Application For Renewal
5.25.060: Application; Time For Decision
5.25.070: Application; Evaluation
5.25.080: Application; Decision Of Council
5.25.090: Appeal; Procedure
5.25.100: Appeal; Requirements
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§23-1318, 23-1315.
5.25.010: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to any original application, renewal or transfer of a
city license for the retail sale of liquor, wine or beer within the city
limits. (Ord. 672 §7(A), 1983)
5.25.020: LICENSE CATEGORIES:
Licenses shall be issued in the following categories:
A.   Sale of draught, bottles or cans of beer for consumption on premises;
B.   Bottled or canned beer for consumption off premises;
C.   Sale of wine for consumption on premises;
D.   Sale of wine for consumption off premises;
E.   Sale of liquor by the drink on premises. (Ord. 672 §7(B), 1983)
5.25.030: LICENSE; FIXING OF FEES:
The city council shall from time to time by resolution fix a fee for the
original issuance or renewal for each category of license above specified and
shall further fix by resolution a fee for the transfer of any beer, wine or
liquor license. (Ord. 672 §7(C), 1983)
5.25.040: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
Any person or entity seeking an original license under this chapter or seeking
the transfer of such a license must complete an application on a form to be
prescribed by the city council. The application shall be in substantially the
form required by Idaho Code sections 23-1010, 23-905 and 23-1303. Any person
seeking a transfer of a license under this chapter must also complete an
application as though he were the original applicant. (Ord. 672 §7(D), 1983)
5.25.050: LICENSE; APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL:
Any application for renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be
made by written request for renewal and a statement that all information
provided on the original application of the licensee remains the same. If any
changes have occurred, a full written description of such changes shall
accompany the request for renewal. (Ord. 672 §7(E), 1983)
5.25.060: APPLICATION; TIME FOR DECISION:
Every application for a license or transfer or renewal of the same under this
chapter shall be acted upon by the city council within thirty (30) days of the
submission of a complete application to the clerk of the city. (Ord. 672 §7(F),
1983)
5.25.070: APPLICATION; EVALUATION:
The city council shall evaluate each application made under this chapter.
Standards for evaluation shall be those expressed by any portion of this code
and any relevant portion of the Idaho state code, particularly those portions
in title 23 of the Idaho Code which in any way touch or concern the licensing
and subsequent conduct of establishments for the retail sale of liquor, wine or
beer. (Ord. 672 §7(G), 1983)
5.25.080: APPLICATION; DECISION OF COUNCIL:
The decision of the city council on any application made under this chapter
shall be in writing, and shall specify in addition to what other information
the city may deem proper, and when a denial of the application has been made,
the following:
A.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
B.   The reasons for denial;
C.   The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the license,
transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 672 §7(H), 1983)
5.25.090: APPEAL; PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved by official decision of the city council under this
chapter may appeal the decision to the city council by filing within fifteen
(15) days of the receipt of written decision of the city council a notice in
writing signed by the aggrieved person and stating in detail the reasons for
which the aggrieved person disputes the original decision of the council.
Thereupon, the written notice shall be filed with the city clerk. Within thirty
(30) days of the receipt of such notice, the city council shall set the matter
for hearing, and advise the aggrieved person of his right to be present at the
hearing. (Ord. 672 §7(I), 1983)
5.25.100: APPEAL; REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Presentation of Evidence: Presentation of evidence on appeal before the
city council under this chapter shall be as follows:
   1.   Petitioner, together with any witnesses supporting his position;
   2.   All persons opposing application or petition;
   3.   Any employee or officer on behalf of the city;
   4.   Rebuttal evidence by petitioner;
   5.   Summation of evidence by petitioner followed by information by no more
than one opponent to the petition;
   6.   Opposing parties shall have the right to cross examine any witness.
B.   Contents Of Evidence: Evidence presented on appeal may consist of
testimonial evidence or any writing, document, exhibit or physical evidence
relevant to the proceeding. All rulings as to relevance shall be made by the
presiding officer at the hearing as hereinafter defined.
C.   Presiding Officer And Duties: The presiding officer at any hearing held
pursuant to this chapter shall be the mayor or in his absence the person
lawfully succeeding to the duties of an absent mayor. All matters presented at
the hearing shall be addressed to the presiding officer. All rules as to
admissibility of evidence shall be made to the presiding officer with the sole
ground of inadmissibility being relevant to the proceedings. Relevance for
purposes of this chapter shall be defined as any matter which tends to prove or
disprove, or immaterial or germane to, any issue lawfully presented to the city
council for its consideration under this chapter.
D.   Witnesses: Any witness presented to the hearing shall first be sworn to
tell the truth upon oath by the city clerk or a deputy city clerk duly
authorized to administer oaths.
E.   Recording: All hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be
recorded by electronic means so as to constitute a transcribable verbatim
record of the proceeding. The record shall be kept by the city clerk
indefinitely. Any person seeking a transcribable record of the proceedings may
receive the same upon request at his expense.
F.   Burden Of Proof: The burden of establishing any matter which is the
substance of petition under this chapter shall at all times be upon the
petitioner. (Ord. 672 §7(J), 1983)
CHAPTER 5.28
TAXICABS
SECTION:
5.28.010: "Taxicab" Defined
5.28.020: License; Required
5.28.030: License; Application; Contents
5.28.040: License; Application; Issuance
5.28.050: License; Fee
5.28.060: License; Revocation And Cancellation
5.28.070: Liability Insurance Requirements
5.28.080: Stands; Designated
5.28.090: Stands; Exclusive Use
5.28.100: Unlawful Acts
5.28.010: "TAXICAB" DEFINED:
The term "taxicab" as used in this chapter means and includes any vehicle held
for public hire using the streets and alleys of the city, carrying passengers
to destinations designated by such passengers without following any fixed
routes and charging therefor upon a time or distance basis. (Prior code §25-1)
5.28.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
No person shall carry on, engage in, or pursue the business of operating a
taxicab within the city, without first obtaining a license therefor as provided
in this chapter. (Prior code §25-2)
5.28.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
A.   No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab before
applying to the city clerk for the license therefor to engage in and carry on
such a business. Such application shall be verified by the applicant upon forms
to be furnished and provided by the city and shall contain the following:
   1.   The name and address of the applicant; the place of residence of the
applicant;
   2.   The period during which the applicant has resided within the state;
   3.   The intended place of business of the person seeking the license;
   4.   The number of cabs to be operated; the vehicle serial numbers and make
and year of manufacture of each vehicle sought to be operated as a cab;
   5.   If the applicant is a corporation the names and addresses of the
president and secretary thereof, and the date of incorporation shall be given
in addition thereto.
B.   Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee as
provided elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 627(KK), 1980: prior code §25-3)
5.28.040: LICENSE; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE:
Each application for a license under this chapter shall be presented to the
city council and the clerk of the city shall not issue any license therefor
until the same shall have been approved and authorized by the city council. The
license shall be in such a form as may from time to time be determined by the
city council and shall state the date of issuance, the name of the owner and
such other information as may from time to time be required by the city
council. (Ord. 627(JJ), 1980: prior code §25-4)
5.28.050: LICENSE; FEE:
The license fee for each licensee shall be the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) per year. Such license shall expire on December 31 following the date
of issuance and must be renewed by January 1 for each following year; provided,
however, that if any license is issued after July 1 in any year, the fee for
such year shall be one-half (1/2) the amount above provided. (Prior code §25-5)
5.28.060: LICENSE; REVOCATION AND CANCELLATION:
The city council shall have the right to revoke and cancel the licenses of any
person licensed pursuant to this chapter for any violation of this chapter, and
upon verified complaint filed with the city council, the city council shall
cause any licensed person to appear before the council and be heard upon such
complaint. A copy of such complaint shall be served with a notice specifying
the date and hour of the hearing, which shall be not less than five (5) days,
nor more than twenty (20) days following the service of such notice. Such
hearing shall be before the city council at its room in the city hall unless a
different place be fixed for such hearing. After such hearing upon the taking
of evidence on behalf of the city and the alleged offender it shall appear to
the city council that cause exists for the cancellation or revocation of such
license. The same may be cancelled and revoked without other or further process
of law, and upon such cancellation or revocation no refund of any unexpired
portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. Following such
revocation it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for such person to thereafter
operate a taxicab in the city until a new license shall have been issued, and
it shall be discretionary with the city council whether or not any person whose
license has been revoked shall be again licensed hereunder. (Prior code §25-6)
5.28.070: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Before a license shall be issued to any taxicab under the provisions of
this chapter, the owner shall obtain and file with the city clerk either the
original or a certified copy of a policy of insurance executed by an insurance
agency authorized to do business in this state, insuring the public and any
passenger using such taxicab against any loss or damage that may result to any
person from the operation of such taxicab to the following amounts:
   1.   Property damage, not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) per
occurrence;
   2.   Public liability, not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for one person; and
   3.   Not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per
occurrence.
B.   Such policy of insurance with certified copies thereof shall be kept on
file in the office of the city clerk, and as such policies are permitted to
lapse for any reason whatsoever, or are cancelled by the insurance company, the
rights theretofore granted shall be forthwith terminated and shall not again
reissue until the owner has obtained and filed with the city clerk an effective
policy of insurance as required. Such policy of insurance shall be available
for public inspection and any person who may have any claim for damages against
any licensed taxicab driver shall be entitled to any information pertaining to
such insurance as disclosed by the files in the office of the city clerk. (Ord.
627(LL), 1980: prior code §25-7)
5.28.080: STANDS; DESIGNATED:
The city council shall designate places on the streets of the city where
taxistands may be located and where taxicabs may be parked, and it shall be the
duty of the chief of police to see that such designated places are properly
marked and it shall be unlawful for any taxicab to park in any other place
except to load or unload passengers. (Prior code §25-8)
5.28.090: STANDS; EXCLUSIVE USE:
Any space designated for the use of taxicabs shall not be used by any other
person for parking any other vehicle, and any person who shall park a vehicle
in a designated taxi space shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code §25-9)
5.28.100: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any operator, owner or employee of an owner or
operator to:
A.   Sell, give away or furnish intoxicating liquors to any other person;
B.   Permit such taxicab to be driven by any person who is not a skilled and
efficient chauffeur thoroughly familiar with the laws of the road of the city
and of the state;
C.   Drive or permit such taxicab to be driven by anyone not holding a valid
chauffeur's license issued by the state;
D.   Employ as an operator or driver any person who has been convicted of
either reckless driving or driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor;
E.   Drive or permit any taxicab to be driven by any person under the influence
of intoxicating liquors;
F.   Operate any taxicab without having insurance coverage as provided in this
chapter;
G.   Use or permit any taxicab to be used for any unlawful or immoral purposes.
(Prior code §25-10)
CHAPTER 5.30
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.30.010: Intent And Purpose
5.30.020: Application Of Provisions
5.30.030: Definitions
5.30.040: Location And Zoning Restrictions
5.30.043: Intensification Of Nonconforming Use
5.30.050: Business License Required
5.30.051: Application For License
5.30.052: Issuance Of License
5.30.055: Regulation Of Business
5.30.058: Exemption To Business License Requirement
5.30.010: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A.   Intent: In adopting this chapter, the city of Jerome recognizes that
sexually oriented businesses have some inherently serious and objectionable
operational characteristics, particularly when located near residential
neighborhoods and other sensitive properties and enterprises, or when readily
accessible to minors and other vulnerable adults. Sexually oriented businesses
can have deleterious impact on property values and the quality of life in
surrounding areas.
B.   Purpose: It is the purpose and object of this chapter that the city
establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time, place and
manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses and their employees in the
city. The primary purpose of these regulations is to preserve the integrity and
character of residential neighborhoods and other sensitive properties and
enterprises, as well as to protect minor children and other vulnerable adults
from objectionable, operational characteristics of sexually oriented
businesses. This chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental
interests recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional
protections provided by the United States and Idaho constitutions.
C.   Intention Not To Create Nuisance: This section is not intended and should
not be construed to create a contemporary community standard nor to allow the
sale, loan, distribution, dissemination, presentation, or exhibition of
material or live conduct which is obscene or which is in violation of any other
law, nor to permit the creation or maintenance of any public, private or moral
nuisance. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.020: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities, which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances,
including, but not limited to, those codified in
chapter 9.50 of this code. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.030: DEFINITIONS:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment that sells
or rents adult material; however, any establishment meeting all the following
criteria shall not be considered an adult video or book store:
   A.   The adult material is accessible only by patrons over twenty one (21)
years of age only after access has been granted or provided by an employee of
the establishment to said patron.
   B.   The individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental
comprise less than ten percent (10%) of the individual items publicly displayed
at the establishment as stock in trade in the following categories: videos,
books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, slides, other visual
representations, recordings, and other audio matter.
   C.   The establishment does not use the following terms in advertisements or
other promotional activities relating to the adult materials: "XXX", "XX", "X",
or any series of the letter "X" whether or not interspersed with other letters,
figures, or characters; "erotic" or deviations of that word; "adult
entertainment" or similar phrases; "sex" or "sexual acts" or similar phrases;
"nude" or "nudies" or similar phrases; or any other letters, words, or phrases
that promote the purchase or rental of adult material.
   ADULT BOOTH: A separate enclosure within a structure featuring adult
entertainment or adult material. The term adult booth does not include a
restroom or a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the
establishment.
   ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or adult
video store.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any modeling, posing, exhibition, display, or exposure,
of any type, whether through book, pictures, film, displays, live performance,
dance, or modeling, that has as its dominant theme, or is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on, any one or more of the following: a) any
actual or simulated specified sexual activities, b) specified anatomical areas,
c) the removal of articles of clothing, or d) appearing nude or seminude.
   ADULT MATERIAL: One or more of the following materials that have as their
primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or
relating to adult entertainment, regardless of whether it is new or used: a)
books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter; b) photographs, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations; c)
recordings or other audio matter. The term adult material shall also include
instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with adult entertainment.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions;
repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition; or
   B.   As its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which:
   A.   Holds itself out as such a business; or
   B.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions;
repeated performance of the same presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition; or
   C.   As its principal business, features persons who appear in live
performances in a state of nudity or which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer, as
an independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of employment
relationship.
   ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes,
visits, consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize,
visit or accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment
or places of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any
business or commercial establishment or any private quarters. "Escort" shall
not be construed to include persons who provide business or personal services
such as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron
is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of
more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally
characterized as dating or socializing. "Escort" shall also not be construed to
include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday
greetings or similar activities characterized by appearances in a public place,
contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the service is being
performed and of a duration not longer than one hour.
   ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
   ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
   NUDE AND SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation,
partnership, or any other entity or individual which furnishes, books or
otherwise engages or offers to furnish, book or otherwise engage the service of
a professional dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or
appearance at a business licensed for nude entertainment, seminude dancing
bars, or adult theaters.
   NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of nudity or seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a nude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple; the exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal
region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over
the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and
gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
   OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented
business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented
business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other
similar employees.
   PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or
escort or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.
   PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
   PROTECTED ZONING DISTRICTS: Shall include areas zoned as R-1, R-2, R-3, NS,
CBD, as defined in chapter 17.12 of this code.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general
public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs,
theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific
members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not
an admission charge is required.
   SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
nipple and areola of the female breast, and the male or female genitals, pubic
region and anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than
four inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back which
shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest point.
   SEMINUDE DANCING BARS: Any business which permits dancing, modeling, or
other performance or appearance however characterized, in a state of
seminudity.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Nude entertainment businesses, sexually oriented
outcall services, adult businesses, "seminude dancing bars" and seminude
dancing agencies, or any business providing or purporting to provide "adult
entertainment" as defined by this chapter.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the
premises of the sexually oriented business in activities related to the
sexually oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing
employees, dancers, escorts, models, and other similar employees whether or not
hired as employees, agents or as independent contractors.
Employees shall not include individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually
oriented portion of the business, such as janitors, bookkeepers and similar
employees. Sexually oriented business employees shall not include cooks,
serving persons, bartenders and similar employees, except where they may be
managers or supervisors of the business. All persons making outcall meetings
under this chapter, including escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers,
chauffeurs and other similar employees, shall be considered sexually oriented
business employees.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with
less than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast from the beginning
of the areola, papilla or nipple to the end thereof with less than full opaque
covering.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Acts of:
      1.   Masturbation,
      2.   Human sexual intercourse,
      3.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast,
      4.   Fellatio,
      5.   Cunnilingus,
      6.   Bestiality,
      7.   Pederasty,
      8.   Buggery, or
      9.   Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male,
human female, or beast;
   B.   Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
      1.   The genitals of a human,
      2.   The pubic area of a human,
      3.   The uncovered female nipple and areola;
   C.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
   WALKING DISTANCE: One mile, or any such distance that can be traversed at a
normal walking pace within a period of thirty (30) minutes or less.
   ZONING DISTRICTS: Shall include areas zoned as R-1, R-2, R-3, NS, CBD, AB,
M-1, residential overlay zone, RT, and any overlay district as defined in
chapter 17.12 of this code. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.040: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
A.   Prohibited Business Locations: It shall be unlawful for any sexually
oriented business to do business at any location within an area zoned R-1, R-2,
R-3, NS, CBD, or RT. Sexually oriented businesses licensed as adult businesses,
nude entertainment businesses, or seminude dancing bars pursuant to this
chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use.
B.   Special Use Permit: Any sexually oriented business may be located in an
area of the city zoned AB or M-1, but only with a special use permit approved
and issued pursuant to title 17 of this code.
C.   Separation: In recognition of Idaho Code section 67-6533, the following
distance separations shall be required:
   1.   No sexually oriented business shall be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000') of another existing adult entertainment establishment.
   2.   No sexually oriented business shall be located within two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500') of any of the following:
      a.   Any public or private school;
      b.   Any public library, park, or recreation facility;
      c.   Any licensed daycare, childcare, after school program facility,
whether public or privately operated;
      d.   Any hospital, or any facility used for the treatment or care of the
aging, the physically disabled, the mentally ill, or those addicted to or
dependent on alcohol or other drugs;
      e.   Any correctional or detention facility used by any agency of
government to house those charged with or convicted of any crime;
      f.   Any public or private business that sells alcoholic liquor, beer,
wine, or any spirits;
      g.   Any government owned building or facility open to the general
public;
      h.   Any existing movie theater; or
      i.   Any place generally known to be frequented by minors.
   3.   No sexually oriented business shall be located within five hundred feet
(500') of any existing open space zoning district or zoning district, as
defined herein, within the city of Jerome, Idaho, or the area of city impact.
D.   Prohibitions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it shall
be unlawful for any person, business, association, or enterprise to host,
provide, present, display, sponsor, or promote at any location within the city
limits, any live, adult entertainment, where such entertainment is located
within walking distance of any of the following:
   1.   Any public or private school;
   2.   Any public library, park, or recreation facility;
   3.   Any licensed daycare, childcare, after school program facility, whether
public or privately operated;
   4.   Any hospital, or any facility used for the treatment or care of the
aging, the physically disabled, the mentally ill, or those addicted to or
dependent on alcohol or other drugs;
   5.   Any correctional or detention facility used by any agency of government
to house those charged with or convicted of any crime;
   6.   Any public or private business that sells alcoholic liquor, beer, wine,
or any spirits;
   7.   Any government owned building or facility open to the general public;
or
   8.   Any public place generally known to be frequented by minors.
E.   Evidence Required: The applicant shall provide evidence certified by a
professional land surveyor licensed in the state of Idaho that the proposed
sexually oriented business conforms to the separation requirements of
subsections C and D of this section.
F.   Exterior Display:
   1.   Except as provided in this chapter, all sexually oriented businesses
shall comply with the zoning regulations of title 17 of this code, including,
but not limited to,
chapter 17.32 of this code.
   2.   Any business providing adult entertainment or adult material shall have
in place at each entrance to such business a legible door sign (as defined
herein) stating "Persons under 19 years of age not permitted". The sign shall
be no less than 0.5 square foot and no greater than one square foot in area.
   3.   Sexually oriented business shall have no more than one business or
advertising sign, which sign shall only be permitted on the front facade. Such
sign shall have a surface area of no larger than five percent (5%) of the front
building facade of the first floor elevation (first 10 feet) of the premises
occupied by the licensee, or twenty (20) square feet, whichever is less.
   4.   Any sign or advertisement for any sexually oriented businesses shall
not be posted on any property not designated by the sexually oriented business
license issued under this chapter.
   5.   Signs may be illuminated, but such illumination shall not be by way of
exposed neon, exterior lighting such as spot or flood lights, or any flashing
or animated lights, whether interior to the sign, exterior to the sign, or as a
border to the sign.
   6.   Such advertisements may not contain any graphic words, phrases, or
images describing or showing any specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   7.   No sexually oriented business shall, in any manner, advertise, or
permit the observation of any live entertainment, or other adult materials,
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening
viewable from any public street, alley, sidewalk or other right of way. Such
businesses shall ensure that any window, entrances or other exterior opening be
completely covered so as to be opaque. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.043: INTENSIFICATION OF NONCONFORMING USE:
A.   If a sexually oriented business is or becomes a nonconforming use,
intensification of the use shall be prohibited as follows, and no permit,
approval or other authorization related to such intensification of use shall be
granted:
   1.   For an adult bookstore or adult video store, an increase in the retail
floor or shelf space from which minors are excluded;
   2.   For a nude entertainment business, an adult theater or an adult motion
picture theater, an increase in the occupant load set by the fire department
for the related space or an increase in the number of stages or viewing
screens; and
   3.   For seminude dancing bars, an increase in the occupant load set by the
fire department for the related space or an increase in the number of stages.
B.   A valid, existing sexually oriented business shall not be deemed
nonconforming for purposes of this section as the result of a subsequent
location of a use specified in section
5.30.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.050: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business, as
specified below, without first obtaining a sexually oriented business license.
The business license shall specify the type of business for which it is
obtained. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.051: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A.   No person less than nineteen (19) years of age may make application for a
license pursuant to this chapter. Knowing or intentional misrepresentation of
any portion of the application for license, or any subsequent report, the
applicant, or applicants, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days or
fined by not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or both.
B.   Prior to the issuance of a sexually oriented business license, the
applicant shall file with the city clerk an application, in writing, signed by
the applicant and containing information and statements relative to the
applicant and the premises (in existence or to be constructed in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the city) where the sexually oriented
business is to be conducted. The application shall be verified by the affidavit
of the applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths. In addition to
setting forth the qualifications required by other provisions of this chapter,
the applicant must show:
   1.   A detailed description of the premises for which a license is sought,
its location and street address.
   2.   The names and addresses of all persons who will have any financial
interest in any business to be carried on, in or upon the licensed premises,
whether such interest results from open loans, mortgages, conditional sales
contracts, trusts or any other basis other than open trade accounts incurred in
the ordinary course of business, and the amounts of such interest.
   3.   If the premises to be licensed are not owned by the applicant, then a
certified copy of the lease by which he will occupy the premises showing that
the owner consents to existence of a sexually oriented business on such
premises.
   4.   The name and address of the applicant which shall include all members
of a partnership or association, or the officers and members of the governing
board and the principal stockholders of a corporation.
   5.   Proof that the applicant has applied for and been issued a special use
permit from the city to locate the sexually oriented business on the property.
   6.   If, during the period of any license issued hereunder, any change shall
take place in any of the requirements of this section, the licensee shall
forthwith make a verified report of such change to the city clerk.
   7.   Each application shall be accompanied by the required license fee which
shall be returned to the applicant if for any reason the city refuses to issue
the license. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.052: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A.   The city council shall duly consider and evaluate all new applications and
renewal applications for a license to conduct a sexually oriented business, and
after so evaluating shall determine to grant or deny each application in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   Prior to said determination, new applications shall be submitted to the
Jerome city chief of police for review, and his/her assessment of each
application shall be considered by the city council prior to its decision.
C.   If the city council so orders, the city clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant, which license shall at all times be prominently displayed in the
place of business of the licensee and shall be issued only for the particular
premises therein described.
D.   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. on January 1, of the year following the issuance of the license. No
person, partnership, association, enterprise or corporation, shall be granted
more than one license in any one year. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.055: REGULATION OF BUSINESS:
A.   Every person to whom a license shall be granted under the terms and
provisions of this chapter:
   1.   Shall at all times conduct a quiet and orderly place of business;
   2.   Shall keep the room, building or site designated in the license, and
all portions thereof open at all times for the inspection of any peace officer
of the city, county, state or United States of America, and shall give to such
officers or any of them, the right at any and all times to make an inspection
of the licensed premises or any portion thereof, to ascertain whether the
licensee is conforming to the provisions of this chapter, or the laws of the
state or the United States of America, applicable thereto;
   3.   Shall not conduct, allow, sponsor, or promote prostitution, as defined
in Idaho Code sections 18-5601–18-5614;
   4.   Shall not conduct on the licensed premises any games, device or table
in violation of Idaho Code sections 18-3801–18-3810;
   5.   Shall not have any adult booths, or set aside, partition or enclose any
portion of the licensed premises, made available or to the use for the
entertainment or amusement of the patrons or customers of the licensee, not
also open to the general public during business hours;
   6.   Shall not admit any person under the age of nineteen (19) years to any
premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter, a violation of which
shall be a misdemeanor;
   7.   Shall not permit any person under the age of nineteen (19) years to
frequent, loiter in or about, or to patronize any sexually oriented business,
or to frequent, loiter in or be employed in such business;
   8.   Shall, at the licensee's expense, ensure that any person considered for
employment as a sexually oriented business employee is given a physical
examination by a medical doctor currently licensed by the state of Idaho before
employment and that such employee(s) is tested for the presence of sexually
transmitted diseases; and that every sexually oriented business employee, as
defined in this chapter, is similarly examined and tested by a licensed medical
doctor no less than once every six (6) months;
   9.   Shall at all times keep posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises all permits or licenses, and shall keep the same so posted for the
full period of which licenses are issued;
   10.   Shall not authorize, permit, or allow the sale, purchase, possession,
or consumption of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance in or on the
premises;
   11.   Shall not allow any person actually, apparently or obviously
intoxicated to enter, remain present, or loiter in or on the premises;
   12.   Shall not permit any live, nude or seminude entertainment, nor present
any other adult entertainment within the city limits between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., nor during any period
beginning two (2) hours before and ending two (2) hours after regular public
school hours, regardless of whether school is in session.
B.   The grounds enumerated in this chapter shall constitute bases for the
revocation, suspension, or cancellation of a license issued under this chapter,
in addition to any other grounds appearing elsewhere in this code or in the
laws of the state. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
5.30.058: EXEMPTION TO BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any medical doctor or other
healthcare provider licensed by the state to provide bona fide healthcare
diagnosis and treatment. (Ord. 1005 §1, 2006)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS 1
CHAPTER 6.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
6.04.010: Keeping Swine In City Prohibited
6.04.020: Animals At Large Or Grazing Near Residence Of Another
6.04.030: Hitching Animals To Trees
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-319.
1 1. IC §18-2101 et seq.
6.04.010: KEEPING SWINE IN CITY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep swine within the city, either on his own
premises or on the premises of another. (Prior code §5-1)
6.04.020: ANIMALS AT LARGE OR GRAZING NEAR RESIDENCE OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to allow, suffer or permit any cattle, hog,
horse, mule, sheep, turkey, geese, chicken or goat owned by him or under his
control to run at large at any time, in the streets and alleys or public parks
in the city or to stake out such animal in front of or within fifty feet (50')
of the residence of another person for the purpose of grazing such animal.
(Prior code §5-2)
6.04.030: HITCHING ANIMALS TO TREES:
It is unlawful for any person at any time to hitch or to tie any animal to any
tree on any of the streets or alleys within the city. (Prior code §5-3)
CHAPTER 6.08
DOGS
SECTION:
6.08.010: Definitions
6.08.020: Running At Large Prohibited; Penalty
6.08.030: Vicious And Dangerous Dogs
6.08.035: Limitation On The Number Of Dogs
6.08.040: Licensing And Registration; Generally
6.08.050: Tag; Issuance And Duration
6.08.060: Tag; Issuance Of Duplicate; Nontransferable
6.08.070: Impoundment; Generally
6.08.080: Impoundment; Owner Notification; Redemption Procedure And Fees
6.08.090: Impoundment; Disposition Of Unredeemed, Unlicensed Or Infected Dogs
6.08.095: Redemption While Placing Of Dogs From The City Animal Shelter, And
Retrieval Of Unlicensed Dogs
6.08.100: Rabies Control; Muzzling Requirement; Impoundment Of Unmuzzled Dogs
(Rep. by Ord. 885 §11, 2000)
6.08.110: Rabies Control; Duty Of Owner Of Suspected Rabid Dog Or Dog Believed
To Have Been Bitten By Rabid Dog
6.08.120: Expiration Of Dog Licenses
6.08.130: Unleashed Dogs On School Grounds (Rep. by Ord. 885 §11, 2000)
6.08.140: Confinement Of Female Dogs In Heat (Rep. by Ord. 885 §11, 2000)
6.08.150: Barking, Howling Dogs
6.08.160: Right Of Entry Of Police Or Animal Enforcement Officer
6.08.165: Adoption
6.08.170: Violation; Penalty
6.08.180: Euthanasia Fees
6.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, and the definition of the term "kennel"
presently found in section 17.08.330 of this code, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section
as follows:
   AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or a member of his immediate family or other authorized agent or employee
either by leash, cord, chain, electronic device or other means. Other means
shall not include voice or verbal commands issued by the dog's handler and/or
owner.
   CONFINED: A dog is "confined" if such dog is securely confined indoors or
confined in a "secure enclosure", as defined in this section.
   DOG: Any member of the animal species Canis familiaris.
   OWNER: Any person owning, keeping, harboring, possessing, exercising control
over, transporting, or selling a dog, whether on a permanent or temporary
basis.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE: One that: a) has secure sides at least eight feet (8')
high, or if all sides are not eight feet (8') high, one that has a secure top;
b) the sides are embedded or buried in the ground not less than one foot (1')
or if not embedded, the enclosure has a bottom permanently attached to the
sides; and c) is constructed of such material and secured in such a manner that
the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own.
   SECURE TEMPORARY ENCLOSURE: For purposes of this chapter, is a secure
enclosure used for purposes of transporting a dog and which includes a top and
bottom permanently attached to the sides except for a "door" for removal of the
dog. Such enclosure must be of such material, and such door closed and secured
in such a manner, that the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own.
   SERVICE ANIMAL: A service animal is any dog that is individually trained to
do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental
disability. Other species of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or
untrained, are not considered service animals. A service animal in training is
not a service animal. Any service animal that is found running at large,
barking or howling, or that otherwise disturbs the peace of any person or
neighborhood shall not be considered a service animal, but shall be considered
a dog and shall be dealt with accordingly. A Vicious Dog, as defined by this
code, shall not be considered a service animal.
   VICIOUS DOG: A dog that has bitten, clawed or otherwise harmed, or
constitutes a physical threat, or a dog whose temperament or habits endanger or
menace any person or other animal without provocation by such person or animal.
This term shall not include a dog that bites, attacks or menaces a person or
other animal that has tormented or injured the dog. (Ord. 1197 §1, 2020: Ord.
1016 §1, 2006: Ord. 970 §1, 2005: Ord. 966 §1, 2005: Ord. 885 §1, 2000: prior
code §5-4)
6.08.020: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED; PENALTY:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog or service animal,
whether or not the same has been licensed, to permit such dog or service
animal, at any time, to run at large within the city.
B.   Any person violating this section shall be served with a uniform citation
signed by an animal control officer, police officer or citizen who has actually
witnessed the occurrence of such violation. Any such violation shall be
punishable pursuant to section
6.08.170 of this chapter.
C.   All dogs or service animals on city rights of way must be on a leash,
cord, chain, electronic device or other means. Other means shall not include
voice or verbal commands issued by the dog's handler and/or owner.
D.   If two (2) or more dogs, belonging to the same "owner", as defined in
section
6.08.010 of this chapter, are found to be running at large in violation of this
section, each dog running at large shall constitute a separate offense, subject
to the enhanced penalties of section
6.08.170 of this chapter. Any service animal running at large shall be
considered a dog and not a service animal. (Ord. 1197 §2, 2020: Ord. 1016 §2,
2006: Ord. 970 §2, 2005: Ord. 841 §1, 1997: Ord. 757 §1, 1993: Ord. 607, 1978:
prior code §5-5)
6.08.030: VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS:
A.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to own, keep,
harbor, possess, exercise control over, transport or sell any dog or service
animal whose behavior comes within the definition of a vicious dog, as that
term is defined by section
6.08.010, Jerome Municipal Code. Violations of this section shall be punishable
pursuant to section
6.08.170 of this chapter.
B.   Any dog or service animal whose behavior falls within the definition of a
vicious dog as defined by section
6.08.010, whether found running at large or not, may be impounded for a period
not to exceed fourteen (14) days, the exact length of which time shall be
determined by the chief of police. Any such dog or service animal, found at
large, which cannot be safely taken up or impounded, may be killed by any
police officer or animal control officer of the city.
C.   In any case where a person has been charged or cited with the offense of
owning or having custody of a vicious or dangerous dog or other animal pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the city attorney may file a motion
requesting the dog, service animal or other animal be impounded if not already
impounded and may move for the destruction of the animal prior to a final
adjudication of the criminal charges. The animal shall remain confined at the
animal shelter or pound pending a final decision on the motion. The court may
order the destruction of the animal upon making a finding that the animal is
vicious as defined in this chapter, and that it poses a danger to the public if
allowed to be released from confinement.
D.   Any person keeping or owning a dog or service animal taken up or impounded
under this section shall pay to the clerk of the city or any animal control
employee on behalf of the city a sum to be fixed by resolution of the city
council from time to time for confinement after the day the dog or service
animal is taken up. (Ord. 1197 §3, 2020: Ord. 1016 §3, 2006: Ord. 966 §2, 2005:
Ord. 841 §2, 1997: Ord. 757 §2, 1993: Ord. 607, 1978: prior code §5-6)
6.08.035: LIMITATION ON THE NUMBER OF DOGS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person or group of
persons, whether related or unrelated, who occupy as their residence the same
parcel or group of parcels, to collectively or individually own, keep, harbor,
possess, exercise control over, transport, or sell more than three (3) dogs at
a time, whether on a permanent or temporary basis. For purposes of this section
service animals as defined herein, owned by a person with a bona-fide
disability and used by said person to perform specific tasks for which the
service animal is trained, shall not count as a dog.
Puppies are an exception to the limitation expressed in this section during the
first six (6) months of the life of the puppy provided said puppies are the
offspring of a dog residing on the same premises as the puppies.
Violations of this section shall be punished pursuant to section
6.08.170 of this chapter. (Ord. 1197 §4, 2020: Ord. 1016 §5, 2006)
6.08.040: LICENSING AND REGISTRATION; GENERALLY:
A.   All dogs, including service animals, harbored or maintained in the city
shall be licensed and registered by their owner. Licenses shall be issued by
the police department, animal shelter or other authorized agent upon payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the city council. Upon a showing by the
applicant for a dog license that the owner is disabled and the dog is specially
trained to perform specific tasks for the owner, the authorized agent issuing
the license shall indicate in the records of the City of Jerome that the dog is
a service animal.
B.   Every person applying for a dog license shall provide the owner's name,
address, together with the dog's name, breed, color and sex, and shall further
indicate whether the dog has been spayed or neutered. Proof of rabies
vaccination inoculation shall also be provided. (Ord. 1197 §5, 2020: Ord. 885
§3, 2000: Ord. 841 §3, 1997: Ord. 757 §3, 1993: Ord. 607, 1978: prior code §5-
7)
6.08.050: TAG; ISSUANCE AND DURATION:
Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall issue to the owner a license
certificate and a metallic tag for each dog licensed. The licenses shall be
issued in four (4) categories as follows:
A.   A one year license for neutered or spayed animals;
B.   A three (3) year license for neutered or spayed animals;
C.   A one year license for unneutered or unspayed animals;
D.   A three (3) year license for unneutered or unspayed animals. (Ord. 885 §4,
2000: Ord. 841 §4, 1997: Ord. 757 §4, 1993: prior code §5-8)
6.08.060: TAG; ISSUANCE OF DUPLICATE; NONTRANSFERABLE:
Every owner of a dog shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to
which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag
are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will
be issued by the city upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the
license fee for the current year and an additional payment of fifty cents
($0.50) for a duplicate. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to
another and no refunds shall be made for any dog license due to death of the
dog or the owner of the animal moving from the city before the expiration of
the license period. (Ord. 885 §5, 2000: Ord. 841 §5, 1997: prior code §5-9)
6.08.070: IMPOUNDMENT; GENERALLY:
A.   There is established a city pound for the impounding and care of stray
dogs, which pound shall be under the jurisdiction of the police department for
the purpose of impounding, keeping and disposing of any dog impounded according
to the provisions of this code.
B.   It is unlawful for any person to hinder or molest any person who may be
lawfully engaged in seizing, keeping or removing any dog in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
C.   It shall be the duty of every police officer and animal control officer,
or other designated official to apprehend any dog found running at large within
the city limits and to impound such dog in the city pound or other suitable
place. The city shall cause a registry to be made regarding the breed, color
and sex of any dog impounded and whether or not the animal is licensed. If the
animal is licensed, the name and address of the owner and the number of the
license tag shall be entered. (Ord. 885 §6, 2000: prior code §5-10)
6.08.080: IMPOUNDMENT; OWNER NOTIFICATION; REDEMPTION PROCEDURE AND FEES:
Not later than one day after the impounding of any dog, the owner thereof, if
known, shall be notified by written notice posted for five (5) days at the main
entrance of the Jerome city hall describing the dog and the place and time of
taking. The owner of any dog so impounded may, within five (5) days of the
posting of such notice, reclaim such dog upon payment of the license fees, if
any are unpaid, and of all costs and charges incurred for impounding and
maintenance of the dog. The fees for impounding for dogs shall be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1091, 2011)
6.08.090: IMPOUNDMENT; DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED, UNLICENSED OR INFECTED DOGS:
All dogs impounded under this chapter shall be impounded for a period of at
least five (5) days. If at the expiration of five (5) days from the date of the
posting of notice such dog shall not have been redeemed, it may be destroyed.
Any unlicensed dog required by law to be licensed or any dog which appears to
be suffering from rabies, or mange or other infection or dangerous disease
shall not be released but may be forthwith destroyed by humane means. (Ord.
1021 §1, 2006: Ord. 885 §8, 2000: prior code §5-12)
6.08.095: REDEMPTION WHILE PLACING OF DOGS FROM THE CITY ANIMAL SHELTER, AND
RETRIEVAL OF UNLICENSED DOGS:
The owner of a dog that has been impounded and is not currently licensed, shall
have the dog returned to the owner upon payment of all outstanding shelter
charges and the payment of amounts for rabies immunization and licensing. The
amount of the deposit shall be fixed by a resolution of the mayor and council
of the city. (Ord. 885 §9, 2000)
6.08.100: RABIES CONTROL; MUZZLING REQUIREMENT; IMPOUNDMENT OF UNMUZZLED DOGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 885 §11, 2000)
6.08.110: RABIES CONTROL; DUTY OF OWNER OF SUSPECTED RABID DOG OR DOG BELIEVED
TO HAVE BEEN BITTEN BY RABID DOG:
A.   If a dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a dog suspected
of having rabies, such dog shall be confined by a leash or chain on the owner's
premises and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the
expense of the owner for a period of two (2) weeks. The owner shall notify the
poundmaster of the fact that his dog has been exposed to rabies and at his
discretion the poundmaster is empowered to have such dog removed from the
owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed under observation
for a period of two (2) weeks at the expense of the owner.
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog has rabies
to allow such dog to be taken off his premises or beyond the city without the
written permission of the poundmaster or chief of police. Every owner, or other
person, upon ascertaining a dog is rabid shall immediately notify the
poundmaster or a policeman who shall either remove the dog to the pound or
summarily destroy it.
C.   Any person who owns or keeps a dog six (6) months or older shall cause the
dog to be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of
vaccination shall consist of a "rabies vaccination and license certificate"
signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccination. A tag must be
attached at all times. A license certificate and license tag for one animal is
not valid for any other animal.
D.   Any nonresident who brings a dog six (6) months of age or older into the
city of Jerome with the intent to reside within the city permanently or
temporarily for a minimum of six (6) months shall obtain the license
certificate and license tag for the dog.
E.   Vaccination is excused only if the owner or keeper can prove that the dog
has been vaccinated against rabies within the past six (6) months by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in any state or if a licensed veterinarian
certifies in writing that a vaccination would be injurious to the animal's
health. In the latter case, the animal shall be kept in an enclosed building or
kennel until the veterinarian can safely vaccinate the animal. (Ord. 970 §3,
2005: prior code §5-14)
6.08.120: EXPIRATION OF DOG LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any dog within the city
from and after March 1 of any year, unless such dog is licensed under the
provisions of this chapter for that year. Any violation of this section shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed an
amount set by the mayor and city council by resolution. (Ord. 841 §7, 1997:
prior code §5-15)
6.08.130: UNLEASHED DOGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 885 §11, 2000)
6.08.140: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
(Rep. by Ord. 885 §11, 2000)
6.08.150: BARKING, HOWLING DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog which by loud, continued
and/or frequent barking, or howling shall annoy or disturb any person or
neighborhood. This chapter shall not apply to a dog confined in a dog pound or
veterinary hospital. (Ord. 627(OO), 1980: prior code §5-18)
6.08.160: RIGHT OF ENTRY OF POLICE OR ANIMAL ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
Any police officer or animal enforcement officer duly authorized by the city to
act as such, is authorized to enter the premises of any person when in pursuit
of a dog running at large within the meaning of this chapter. It is unlawful
for any person to refuse access to property to such an officer lawfully engaged
in pursuit of a dog pursuant to this section. (Ord. 627(PP), 1980: prior code
§5-19)
6.08.165: ADOPTION:
Dogs that have not been retrieved by their owners within five (5) days of their
original confinement may be subject to adoption. To qualify for adoption,
animals must be:
A.   In good health;
B.   Not vicious;
C.   Immunized against rabies;
D.   Licensed if the adoptive owner plans on residing in the city of Jerome;
E.   Spayed or neutered.
One adoption fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which fee may be adjusted from time
to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid for each animal
adopted. The fee shall pay for spaying or neutering, appropriate vaccinations,
worming, a collar, and a license if the animal is to be kept in the city. (Ord.
1123, 2014)
6.08.170: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A.   Violations of provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
constitute a violation punishable as follows:
   1.   Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of
Section
6.08.030 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court
costs and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or by
a combination of such fine and imprisonment.
   2.   Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter, other than a violation of Section
6.08.030, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an infraction and shall be
subject to a fine in the amount of $72.00, including court costs.
   3.   A second violation of any provision of this chapter, other than a
violation of Section
6.08.030, in a period of twenty four (24) consecutive months shall, upon
conviction, be a misdemeanor subject to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court
costs and/or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both.
   4.   A third or subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter, other
than a violation of Section
6.08.030, in a period of thirty six (36) consecutive months shall, upon
conviction, be a misdemeanor subject to a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) and not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00) plus court
costs and imprisonment for not less than one day and not exceeding ninety (90)
days. (Ord. 1197 §6, 2020: Ord. 1016 §6, 2006: Ord. 966 §3, 2005: Ord. 885 §12,
2000: Ord. 841 §9, 1997: Ord. 627(QQ), 1980: prior code §5-20)
6.08.180: EUTHANASIA FEES:
A.   The owner of any dog given to the city animal control officer to be
destroyed by euthanasia shall be assessed a fee for such services in accordance
with resolution of the mayor and council prior to those services being
performed. (Ord. 841 §10, 1997)
CHAPTER 6.12
PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ANIMALS
SECTION:
6.12.010: Permit; Required
6.12.020: Permit; Application
6.12.030: Permit; Fees
6.12.040: Permit; Grounds For Denial
6.12.050: Exclusions
6.12.060: Violation; Penalty
6.12.010: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
No person, without a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall own,
possess or maintain under his control within the city limits, any live animal
falling within any of the following groups:
A.   Poisonous reptiles;
B.   Any snake of the constrictor genus exceeding five feet (5') in length;
C.   Any carnivorous mammal, except for domestic dogs and cats. (Ord. 651 §1,
1982)
6.12.020: PERMIT; APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to own, possess or maintain control over one or more of the
animals described in section
 6.12.010 of this chapter shall first make application to the clerk of the city
which application shall clearly state:
A.   The name, address and occupation of the applicant;
B.   Specific description of the animal(s) to be kept;
C.   The location at which the animal(s) will be kept;
D.   The purpose for which the animal(s) will be kept;
E.   The duration for which the animal(s) will be kept;
F.   The type of enclosure or confinement which will be provided for the
protection of the public. (Ord. 651 §2, 1982)
6.12.030: PERMIT; FEES:
A permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per animal shall accompany each
application. An animal renewal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per animal shall be
paid to the city clerk on January 10 of each year following the issuance of the
original permit. (Ord. 651 §2, 1982)
6.12.040: PERMIT; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
The city clerk may deny any application made pursuant to this chapter, or
revoke a permit once issued, for any of the following reasons:
A.   Failure to provide all information required by the application, or to
maintain the animal(s) in accordance with the information contained in the
application;
B.   Inadequate provision for the protection of the public;
C.   Keeping of the animal(s) in violation of any other ordinance of this city
or Jerome County, or a law of the state or the United States of America;
D.   Failure to pay the original or renewal permit fee. (Ord. 651 §3, 1982)
6.12.050: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to any bona fide educational or scientific
institution keeping said animal(s) for purposes in keeping with educational or
scientific pursuits. (Ord. 651 §4, 1982)
6.12.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 651 §5, 1982)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY 1
CHAPTER 8.04
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LITTER 1
SECTION:
8.04.010: Construction Of Chapter
8.04.020: Definitions (Rep. by Ord. 982 §2, 2005)
8.04.030: Promulgation Of Rules And Regulations
8.04.040: Unlawful Accumulations (Rep. by Ord. 982 §2, 2005)
8.04.050: Exclusive Garbage Collection Right Of City
8.04.060: Unauthorized Collection
8.04.070: Receptacles; General Requirements
8.04.080: Receptacles; Placement In Front Of Premises
8.04.090: Receptacles; Placement In Street
8.04.100: Receptacles; Preparation Of Contents; Schedule Of Collection
8.04.110: Receptacles; Unauthorized Interference
8.04.120: Vehicle Requirements
8.04.130: Hauling By City Or By Contractor
8.04.140: Unlawful Placement Of Garbage, Rubbish Or Refuse
8.04.145: Requirements For Issuance Of A Permit
8.04.146: Grounds For Refusal Of Issuance Of Permit Or Revocation Thereof
8.04.150: Distribution Of Advertising Matter
8.04.160: Sweeping Dirt Or Trash Into Street (Rep. by Ord. 781 §5, 1994)
8.04.170: Violations
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-34.
1 1. IC §50-317.
8.04.010: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city,
acting in its governmental capacity, for the protection and preservation of the
health, welfare, morals, safety and cleanliness of the city and all of its
provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(Prior code §9-1)
8.04.020: DEFINITIONS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 982 §2, 2005)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  8.08.010 of this title.
8.04.030: PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have power to make such further rules or regulations,
including the designation of districts for pick up schedules, as may be
necessary to effectuate and facilitate the provisions of this chapter. (Prior
code §9-3)
8.04.040: UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 982 §2, 2005)
8.04.050: EXCLUSIVE GARBAGE COLLECTION RIGHT OF CITY:
A.   The city, its duly authorized agents, contractors, employees, or licensees
shall have the exclusive right to collect and gather garbage and rubbish within
the city, and it is unlawful for any person, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, to collect or gather garbage or rubbish within the city.
B.   Every householder, head of a family, tenant, proprietor, or operator of
any residence or place of business, within the city, who is in possession
thereof or in charge of any premises within the city upon which rubbish or
garbage accumulates or may accumulate, must use the city's collection service
whether the system is operated by the city, its agents, employees, contractors
or licensees.
C.   The current set of fees and charges for collection shall be retained in
the office of the city clerk, and shall be subject to inspection by any citizen
of the city during regular office hours.
D.   Except as to commercial and industrial establishments, the fees and
charges, whether for operation of the system by the city, or its contractor or
licensee, shall be billed and collected monthly together with charges for the
use of the city's municipal water and sewer systems. All bills are to be
directed to the owner of the real property, who bears all responsibility for
payment of same. Failure to pay such fees and charges within forty (40) days of
the date of billing shall result in discontinuance of the garbage collection
service. (Ord. 1101, 2012)
8.04.060: UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION:
It is unlawful for any person, other than the city, its agents or employees, or
a person holding a permit or license issued by the city, or having a contract
with the city, for such purpose, to collect or convey, through, over, or upon
any street or alley within the city, any "garbage", night soil, or "rubbish" as
defined in section
8.08.010 of this title. (Prior code §9-6)
8.04.070: RECEPTACLES; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Each householder, head of a family, tenant, proprietor or operator of a
place of business within the city, who is in possession of, or in charge of,
any premises within the city upon which garbage or rubbish accumulates or may
accumulate, shall provide and maintain upon such premises at a place not
exceeding five feet (5') from the alley line of such premises where such
premises are adjacent to an alley, and where the same may be conveniently
picked up and emptied by the garbage and rubbish collector of the city, a metal
or plastic watertight regulation garbage can, rodentproof, with two (2) handles
that can be grasped when the can is upside down in the dumping process, a
capacity of not less than five (5) gallons and not to exceed thirty (30)
gallons, with a flytight cover which shall be in place at all times except when
garbage or rubbish is being deposited therein or removed therefrom, and kept
free from offensive odors and in such condition that all garbage and rubbish
will readily pour therefrom. Each such householder, head of a family, tenant,
proprietor or operator, shall deposit all "garbage" and "rubbish", as defined
in section
8.08.010 of this title, accumulating upon such premises, in such receptacles as
fast as the same accumulates. No fire shall be lighted in such receptacle in
violation of state law or state health department regulation.
B.   Boxes, paper, tree cuttings and all odd articles shall be crushed or
bundled in lengths not to exceed five feet (5') and not to exceed fifty (50)
pounds in weight; except, that articles may be taken in special hauls by
special arrangements with the garbage and rubbish collector. Dirt and debris
from construction or lawn renovation, and other refuse are not acceptable for
collection. Nevertheless, no property owner or occupant of real property within
the city shall permit the presence or accumulation of refuse on real property
owned or occupied by that person. (Ord. 781 §3, 1994: prior code §9-7)
8.04.080: RECEPTACLES; PLACEMENT IN FRONT OF PREMISES:
As to premises not adjacent to an alley, receptacles as provided in section
8.04.070 of this chapter shall be placed by the person responsible therefor in
front of the premises, adjacent to the public street or avenue, on the morning
of the day scheduled for collection, and the empty receptacles shall be
withdrawn from the front of such premises on the same day and as soon after
collection as possible. (Prior code §9-7.1)
8.04.090: RECEPTACLES; PLACEMENT IN STREET:
It is unlawful for any person to place any receptacle containing, or designed
or used for garbage or rubbish upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public place,
or open lot in the city, except only where premises are not situated adjacent
to an alley, the owner or occupant of such premises may place receptacles
containing garbage or rubbish upon the sidewalk or street adjacent to such
premises in such manner as not to interfere with the free use of such sidewalk
or street, for a period of time not exceeding two (2) hours immediately
preceding the scheduled time of collection of such garbage or rubbish, and
immediately upon the removal of the contents of the receptacles they shall be
placed on the premises in the rear of the house owned or occupied by such
person. (Prior code §9-8)
8.04.100: RECEPTACLES; PREPARATION OF CONTENTS; SCHEDULE OF COLLECTION:
All garbage before being deposited in the receptacles required by section
8.04.070 of this chapter shall be drained of surplus liquids and water. For all
premises included in the business and wholesale district as defined by title 17
of this code, garbage and rubbish shall be picked up daily. In the residence
district, as defined by title 17 of this code, garbage and rubbish shall be
picked up weekly. (Prior code §9-9)
8.04.110: RECEPTACLES; UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE:
It is unlawful for any person, other than the city, its agents or employees, or
a person holding a permit or license for such purpose, or having a contract
with the city for such purpose, to interfere in any manner with any receptacle
containing garbage or rubbish, or any form of refuse, or to remove any such
receptacle from the location where the same was placed by the owner thereof, or
to remove any of the contents of such receptacle. (Prior code §9-10)
8.04.120: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Every cart or vehicle used to cart or haul garbage or rubbish in, about, along,
over or upon any street, alley, highway or thoroughfare of the city, shall be
fitted with a good substantial box thereon, the sides and ends of which shall
be not less than twenty four inches (24") high, so tightly fitted and closely
covered with sufficient covering as to prevent the escape of any of the
contents or effluvia therefrom and so as to prevent such garbage or rubbish to
be scattered, thrown from, or dropped onto or upon such street, alley, highway
or thoroughfare. (Prior code §9-11)
8.04.130: HAULING BY CITY OR BY CONTRACTOR:
All garbage or rubbish may be hauled by the city in its own vehicles by its own
employees, or the city may enter into a contract for the hauling of the same
with any person or persons with adequate equipment to properly haul such
garbage and rubbish as required by this chapter or the city may issue a permit
or license to any person to haul such garbage or rubbish. (Prior code §9-12)
8.04.140: UNLAWFUL PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH OR REFUSE:
Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
place any garbage, rubbish or refuse upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public property within the city. (Ord. 781 §4, 1994: prior code §9-13)
8.04.145: REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT:
A.   The proprietor of any commercial or industrial establishment within the
city limits may apply to the clerk of the city for a permit to haul garbage and
rubbish as defined by this title from their place of business. Any such person
desiring the issuance of a permit shall make application for the same, which
should contain at a minimum the following information:
   1.   Name and address of proprietor;
   2.   Type of vehicle to be used for hauling of garbage and rubbish;
   3.   Affirmation that the applicant has read relevant portions of this code
establishing requirements for garbage and rubbish receptacles, placement and
removal of the same, and an expression of the willingness of the applicant to
abide by all such regulations existing at the present time or as they may
hereafter be amended;
   4.   An expression by the applicant that all garbage and refuse collected on
the premises required by this chapter shall be removed therefrom to an
appropriate sanitary landfill at least weekly.
B.   All applications shall be accompanied by a five dollar ($5.00) application
fee. Every proprietor obtaining such a permit shall be required to renew the
same annually on anniversary of their issuance dates thereof and to pay a five
dollar ($5.00) renewal permit fee per year. (Ord. 658 §1, 1982)
8.04.146: GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL OF ISSUANCE OF PERMIT OR REVOCATION THEREOF:
A.   Any application for a permit pursuant to this chapter may be rejected upon
there appearing to be satisfactory proof that:
   1.   Information required by the application is incomplete or nonexistent;
   2.   The proprietor proposes to collect or remove garbage and rubbish
contrary to the existing provisions of this code.
B.   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any time upon
satisfactory proof of the permittee failing to abide by any term or condition
contained on the permit, or the violation of any relevant portion of this code.
(Ord. 658 §2, 1982)
8.04.150: DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATTER:
A.   It is unlawful for any person to distribute, hand out or discard, or cause
to be distributed, handed out or discarded, any handbill, circular, poster,
card or other advertising material or matter, or wastepaper, garbage or
rubbish, in, upon or about, any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, avenues or
other public places, or in or upon any motor vehicle, or in open spaces or in
vacant lots, or in yards or stoop of privately owned premises, within the
boundaries of the city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful to
distribute newspapers capable of being entered in the mail as second class mail
matter or to distribute in the above prescribed manner any matter having as its
primary content and purpose a noncommercial message; provided further, that the
presence of any handbill, circular, poster, card or other advertising material
or matter upon or in any of the here and before designated prohibited places
shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that the same was caused to be
distributed, handed out or discarded by the person, whose name appears thereon
as a sponsor thereof.
B.   The foregoing provisions, however, shall not be construed as making it
unlawful to hand out personally to owners or occupants of private premises,
parts of private premises, any advertising material or matters. (Ord. 714 §1,
1989: Ord. 627(SS), 1980: prior code §9-14)
8.04.160: SWEEPING DIRT OR TRASH INTO STREET:
(Rep. by Ord. 781 §5, 1994)
8.04.170: VIOLATIONS:
Every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 781 §6, 1994: prior code §9-16)
CHAPTER 8.08
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8.08.010: Definitions
8.08.020: Responsible Party
8.08.030: Abatable Nuisances; Procedures And Penalties
8.08.040: General Nuisances; Procedures And Penalties
8.08.050: Hindering Authorized Person
8.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
   GRAFFITI: Any inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or design
that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any real or personal
property or improvement, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, gates,
pavement, buildings, rocks, trees, bridges, streets, sidewalks, and/or signs,
whether such property is public, private, temporary, or permanent, without the
consent of the owners of such property or the owner's authorized agent, and
which inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or design is visible
from any publicly accessible location.
   JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle, or parts thereof, which:
   A.   Cannot be safely operated under its own power;
   B.   Is parked in public right-of-way and is not registered or licensed;
   C.   Is missing any one of the following: foot brakes, hand brakes,
headlights, taillights, horn, muffler, rearview mirrors, windshield wipers or
adequate fenders;
   D.   Has been declared salvage, or has been physically damaged to the extent
that the costs of parts and labor minus the salvage value would make it
uneconomical to repair or rebuild such vehicle; or
   E.   Is otherwise in a wrecked, partially dismantled, inoperative, or
dilapidated condition.
This definition shall not include junk vehicles lawfully stored or parked and
screened from view from a public right-of-way pursuant to the operation of a
lawfully conducted business, industry or commercial enterprise.
   NUISANCE: Anything which unreasonably injures or offends the health or
senses; obstructs the free passage, comfortable enjoyment, or customary use of
public or private property; or creates an actual or potential safety, health,
or fire hazard. Nuisances shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following conditions designated as abatable nuisances and as general
nuisances.Abatable Nuisance: Nuisance conditions that may be abated by the City
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, specifically including,
without limitation, the following nuisance conditions:
   A.   Nuisance weeds.
   B.   Graffiti, on any surface.
   C.   Snow or ice on any public sidewalk abutting or adjoining any privately
owned premises.
   D.   Vegetation, other than trees, that impedes or obstructs a public
sidewalk or roadway.General Nuisance: Nuisance conditions that may lead to
criminal charges without any prior attempt by the City to obtain abatement
thereof, specifically including, without limitation, the following nuisance
conditions:
      A.   Bulky Waste: Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines,
furniture, appliances and other waste materials other than construction debris,
dead animals, hazardous materials or stable matter with weights or volumes
greater than those allowed for containers.
      B.   Construction Debris: As waste building materials resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations.
      C.   Dead Animal: Any animal, or portions thereof that has expired from
any cause.
      D.   Garbage: Every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or
matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in,
handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of
meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter
(including, but not by any way of limitation, used tin cans, milk cartons, and
other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal
or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except in all
cases any matter included in the definitions of "bulky waste", "construction
debris", "dead animal" , "hazardous materials", "rubbish", or "stable matter".
      E.   Hazardous Materials: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or
article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or other governing authority of the State or Federal government to be
hazardous as that term is defined by or pursuant to Federal or State law.
Except, however, that this definition shall not include the incidental leakage
of nuisance materials from registered vehicles lawfully moving or lawfully
parked upon a public right-of-way; the lawful application of pesticides or
herbicides for purposes of controlling pests or weeds; or activity otherwise
specifically allowed by law or by written permit issued by the City or other
governing authority.
      F.   Rubbish: Waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings,
dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, cardboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded clothing, combustible waste pulp and other
products such as are used for packing, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes,
cinders, floor sweepings, grass, mineral and metallic substances and any and
all other waste materials not included in the definitions of "bulky waste",
"construction debris", "dead animal" , "garbage", "hazardous materials" or
"stable matter".
      G.   Stable Matter: All manure and other waste matter normally
accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock, or poultry
enclosure and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
      H.   Waste Matter: Used or discarded matter having no substantial market
value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or
otherwise concealed from public view, and which consists (without limitation or
exclusion by enumeration) of such matter and material as:
         1.   Rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile;
         2.   Rubbish, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers; and
         3.   Vehicle bodies and parts.
   NUISANCE MATERIALS: Hazardous, noxious, dangerous, or offensive materials,
including, but not limited to, oil, gasolines, fuel, antifreeze, paint,
pesticides, or herbicides.
   NUISANCE WEEDS: Undesirable plant growth, whether living or dead, which:
   A.   Is over eight inches (8") in height;
   B.   By reason of size, manner of growth, location, or dryness, constitutes
a safety, health, or fire hazard to any person, building, improvement, crop, or
other real or personal property;
   C.   By reason of size, manner of growth, or location, impedes or obstructs
a sidewalk or roadway or any portion thereof; or
   D.   Is designated as a noxious weed by the State of Idaho.
This definition shall not include cultivated grasses and pastures, though such
vegetation may be declared a nuisance where otherwise appropriate. (Ord. 1176,
2019)
8.08.020: RESPONSIBLE PARTY:
Where a nuisance exists upon property that is vacant, abandoned, and/or
uninhabited, the owner of record, as reflected on the most recent assessment
roll, shall be presumed to be responsible for creating, causing, committing,
maintaining, and/or allowing such nuisance. Such owner of record shall be
subject to any and all penalties imposed as set forth herein, and shall be
responsible for payment of any and all costs incurred in abating the nuisance.
The owner of record shall bear the burden of rebutting this presumption. (Ord.
1176, 2019)
8.08.030: ABATABLE NUISANCES; PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
A.   Applicability: The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to
abatable nuisances.
B.   Abatable Nuisance Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant,
user, or person in charge or control of any property to create, cause, commit,
maintain, or allow the existence of any abatable nuisance on such property, or
upon any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way abutting such property
including the area behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and property to the
center of alleys and ditches. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
create, cause, allow, or commit any nuisance upon any public property, right-
of-way, or infrastructure, including sidewalks, streets, gutters, or storm
drains.
C.   Procedure: If it is determined by a Code Enforcement Officer that an
abatable nuisance exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a notice of
violation and order to abate to be issued to the owner, occupier, and/or person
in control of such property. Such notice and order shall contain the street
address and parcel number of the property, describe the nuisance existing
thereon, order the abatement of the nuisance, establish the time period for
abatement, specify the penalty for noncompliance, and describe the opportunity
and time for appeal. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue such notice and
order to the owner, occupier, or person in control of the property on which the
nuisance exists in one of the following ways:
   1.   By personal service upon such owner, occupier, or person in charge or
control of the property; or
   2.   By regular mail to such owner, occupier, or person in charge or control
of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or
as otherwise known; or
   3.   By posting such notice and order at a conspicuous place on the property
and publishing one notice in the official newspaper of the City that the
property has been posted in accordance with this chapter and ordering the
owner, occupier, or person in charge or control of the property.
D.   Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner, occupier, or
person in charge or control of any property where any abatable nuisance exists,
to abate such nuisance within five (5) calendar days from the date of personal
service, mailing, or publication, except that the Code Enforcement Officer may
require summary abatement of an abatable nuisance where such condition presents
an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human health or safety.
Abatement of graffiti shall meet the following standards:
   1.   The removal of such graffiti shall not follow the pattern of the
graffiti such that the inscription, work, figure, symbol, drawing, mark, or
design of such graffiti remains apparent.
   2.   The removal of such graffiti by painting over it shall be reasonably
similar or identical to the original color of the surface upon which such
graffiti is applied.
   3.   If the surface is heavily covered with graffiti, the entire surface
shall be repainted.
E.   Appeal: Within five (5) calendar days from the date of service, mailing,
or publication of the notice of violation and order to abate, the owner,
occupier, and/or person in charge or control of the subject property may appeal
to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk, which
appeal shall enumerate the grounds for appeal. The City Clerk may schedule such
appeal for hearing at the next regular meeting of City Council. City Council
shall consider written and oral testimony from the appellant and shall affirm,
withdraw, or modify the order to abate. The decision of the City Council shall
be final. If City Council affirms the order, the appellant shall have five (5)
calendar days from the date of such affirmation to abate the nuisance as
ordered.
F.   Criminal Penalties: If, following notice of violation and order to abate,
any person allows the existence of an abatable nuisance, such person shall be
guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). A second violation within a calendar year of the first
violation shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). A
third and any subsequent violation within a calendar year of the first
violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months' imprisonment in the County
Jail, and/or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day in which
any such violation continues may be deemed a separate and subsequent violation.
Upon conviction for a violation of this section, the City shall request from
the Criminal Court an order of restitution for any and all costs of abatement
and/or other related costs incurred by the City. Peace officers and Code
Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to issue Idaho uniform citations
to violators of this section.
G.   Civil Penalties: In addition to any other penalties described in this
section, the City may also take civil action to obtain an order enjoining the
ongoing maintenance of such property free from nuisance, and/or to recover any
and all costs of abatement, enforcement, litigation, and/or prosecution
including, but not limited to, attorney fees and court costs.
H.   Abatement; Administrative Penalties: In addition to pursuing criminal and/
or civil penalties, and notwithstanding the imposition of any civil or criminal
fine, penalty or imprisonment, the Code Enforcement Officer, after providing
notice and hearing as provided herein, may abate or cause the abatement of any
abatable nuisance; where the owner, occupant, agent or person in control of
property does not comply in all respects with an order to abate, the Code
Enforcement Officer may abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance. The
owner, occupier, and/or person in charge or control of the subject property
shall be billed, assessed, and/or held responsible for any and all actual
expenses of such work, and any related charges, including fees and fines that
may be imposed pursuant to this chapter and/or adopted by fee schedule,
pursuant to the following procedures:
   1.   Recovery Of Abatement Costs And Fees: Within thirty (30) days of
abatement of the nuisance, the City shall send the owner, occupier, and/or
person in charge or control of the subject property, by regular mail, a billing
statement requiring payment to City the costs of abating the nuisance and
administrative fee as established by fee schedule.
   2.   Nonpayment Of Abatement Costs: If full payment is not made to City
within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the billing statement requiring
payment of abatement costs and fees, the City may:
      a.   Attempt to recover such amount through the City bill collection
procedures;
      b.   Add the amount due and owing to the Municipal utility service
account related to the property on which the nuisance was abated and collect
such amount in accordance with utility bill collection procedures; and/or
      c.   Levy a special assessment against the subject property pursuant to
Idaho Code sections 50-1008 and 50-334 and/or any subsequently adopted or
otherwise applicable laws. Notice of the special assessment shall be sent by
regular mail to the owner of the subject property, and shall state the address
and parcel number of the subject property, date of abatement action taken, and
state the amount to be assessed, including any applicable administrative and/or
late fees, and shall state that if the assessment is not paid within thirty
(30) days, the assessment will be placed on the Real Property Tax rolls and
will become a lien against such property. If payment to the City Clerk is not
made within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of special assessment,
the assessment shall be declared delinquent and shall be certified, including a
ten percent (10%) late fee, to the Jerome County Assessor by the City Clerk,
not later than August 1 of each year. Upon such certification, the assessment
shall be placed upon the tax roll and shall thereafter become a lien against
the property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner
and subject to the same penalties as other City taxes. Upon payment of the
assessment, fees and penalties in full, the City Clerk shall file a release of
lien with the Jerome County Assessor.
I.   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Code
Enforcement Officer, Peace Officer or Fire Marshal from requiring, undertaking,
or causing summary abatement of an abatable nuisance where such condition
presents an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human health or
safety.
J.   Noxious Weeds: In addition to other remedies set forth in this chapter,
the Code Enforcement Officer may notify Jerome County of the presence of
noxious weeds. (Ord. 1176, 2019)
8.08.040: GENERAL NUISANCES; PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
A.   Applicability: The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to
general nuisances.
B.   General Nuisance Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant,
user, or person in charge or control of any property to create, cause, commit,
maintain, or allow the existence of any general nuisance on such property, or
upon any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way abutting such property
including the area behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and property to the
center of alleys and ditches. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
create, cause, allow, or commit any nuisance upon any public property, right-
of-way, or infrastructure, including sidewalks, streets, gutters, or storm
drains.
C.   Criminal Penalties: If, following notice of violation and order to abate,
any person allows the existence of an abatable nuisance, such person shall be
guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). A second violation within a calendar year of the first
violation shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). A
third and any subsequent violation within a calendar year of the first
violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months' imprisonment in the County
Jail, and/or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day in which
any such violation continues may be deemed a separate and subsequent violation.
Upon conviction for a violation of this section, the City shall request from
the Criminal Court an order of restitution for any and all costs of abatement
and/or other related costs incurred by the City. Peace officers and Code
Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to issue Idaho uniform citations
to violators of this section.
D.   Civil Penalties: In addition to any other penalties described in this
section, the City may also take civil action to obtain an order mandating the
abatement of such general nuisance and ongoing maintenance of such property
free from nuisance, and/or to recover any and all costs of enforcement,
litigation, and/or prosecution including, but not limited to, attorney fees and
court costs.
E.   Summary Abatement: Nothing contained herein shall prevent a Code
Enforcement Officer, Peace Officer or Fire Marshal from requiring, undertaking,
or causing summary abatement of a general nuisance where such condition
presents an imminent or ongoing threat to or impairment of human health or
safety. (Ord. 1176, 2019)
8.08.050: HINDERING AUTHORIZED PERSON:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to interfere with, hinder or refuse to
allow any authorized City official or employee to enter upon private or public
property to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1176, 2019)
CHAPTER 8.10
UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE
SECTION:
8.10.010: Definitions
8.10.020: Unlawful Property Nuisance Defined
8.10.030: Nuisance Properties Prohibited
8.10.040: Written Notice Of Unlawful Property Nuisance
8.10.050: Nuisance Abatement Conference
8.10.055: Nuisance Abatement Agreement
8.10.060: Commencement Of Prosecution
8.10.063: Action To Abate Penalties
8.10.070: Judgment
8.10.080: Penalties
8.10.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABATE: To permanently eliminate.
   CITY OFFICIAL: The mayor and the mayor's designees including, but not
limited to, the city attorney, the police department, the city administrator,
and the city council.
   DWELLING: A room, house, duplex, condominium unit, apartment building,
mobile home, manufactured home, trailer, building, or any other structure(s) or
place(s), including common areas within the structure when buildings or
structures are used for more than one dwelling, and accessory buildings such as
garages, barns, or sheds located on the same premises.
IN OR ON THE PREMISES: Either within a dwelling or the area within the boundary
lines of any real property of the same ownership on which such dwelling or
place of business is located, or on public or private property within one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the dwelling or place of business, by an
interested party or their permittee(s).
   INTERESTED PARTY: A property owner, occupant, resident, tenant, or person in
possession or control of a property.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the
exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic
hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples
and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the
realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
   OCCUPANT: Any person who lives in or has possession of, or holds an
occupancy interest in, a dwelling; or any person residing in or frequenting the
premises of the dwelling with the actual or implied permission of the owner or
lessee.
   OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, manager, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the dwelling or place of business; or recorded
in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title
to the dwelling or place of business; or otherwise having a control of the
dwelling or place of business, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of such property by a court.
   PERMITTEE: A licensee, invitee, or any person whose presence on the property
was permitted, invited, suffered, allowed, consented to, by the owner or
occupant of the dwelling or place of business, or whose presence was acquiesced
to by failing to remove or prevent his/her presence.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any business, including, but not limited to, cafes,
restaurants, public dining rooms, cafeterias, convenience stores, bars,
taverns, dance halls, clubs, cabarets and any other place where the general
public is invited or admitted for business or social purposes, and shall also
be deemed to include private clubs, corporations and associations operating
under charter or otherwise wherein only the members and their guests are
invited.
   PROPERTY: A dwelling or place of business, unless otherwise indicated. (Ord.
1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.020: UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE DEFINED:
   UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE: Any dwelling or place of business where:
   A.   A public or private nuisance is maintained, in violation of Idaho Code
sections 18-5901 through 18-5906, or this title; or
   B.   Intoxicated persons are frequently permitted to loiter about in such a
way as to annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of
another person or persons, or which loitering in any way renders another person
or persons insecure in life or use of property; or
   C.   The property is abandoned, vacant, or unsecured for a period exceeding
one hundred eighty (180) days, and is determined by city officials to be a
health hazard, to be dangerous to neighbors and passersby, or to be a haven for
stray domestic or wild animals; or
   D.   The property attracts, is associated with, or is the source or haven of
frequent criminal activity, or injury to person or property; or
   E.   In or on the premises, any combination of two (2) or more of the
following acts is committed within a period of three hundred sixty five (365)
consecutive days upon a property by an interested party or their permittee(s):
      1.   Any violation of title 37, Idaho Code, relating to the manufacture,
distribution, possession, or use of a controlled substance;
      2.   Any act committed by or against a child or vulnerable adult in
violation of title 18, chapter 15, Idaho Code;
      3.   Any act constituting malicious harassment, as defined in title 18,
chapter 79, Idaho Code;
      4.   Sale, distribution, possession, or use of a dangerous weapon,
explosives, or ammunition in violation of title 18, chapter 33, Idaho Code;
      5.   Any violation of the Idaho criminal gang enforcement act, Idaho Code
sections 18-8501 through 18-8506, including recruiting criminal gang members
and supplying firearms to a criminal gang;
      6.   Any act relating to prostitution as prohibited by Idaho Code
sections 18-5601 through 18-5614;
      7.   Riot, as defined in Idaho Code section 18-6401 or 18-6402;
      8.   Arson, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-801 through 18-805;
      9.   Malicious injury to property, as defined in Idaho Code section 18-
7001;
      10.   Aggravated assault or battery, as defined in Idaho Code sections
18-905 through 18-908;
      11.   Assault or battery with intent to commit a serious felony, as
defined in Idaho Code sections 18-909 through 18-912;
      12.   Robbery, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-6501 through 18-6503;
      13.   Grand theft, as defined in Idaho Code section 18-2407;
      14.   Homicide, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-4001 through 18-
4016;
      15.   Mayhem, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-5001 through 18-5003;
      16.   Rape, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-6101 through 18-6108;
      17.   Any sex crime, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-6601 through
18-6609;
      18.   Any act of indecency or obscenity, as prohibited by Idaho Code
sections 18-4101 through 18-4116;
      19.   Misdemeanor gambling, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-3801
through 18-3810;
      20.   False imprisonment, as defined in Idaho Code sections 18-2901
through 18-2902;
      21.   Kidnapping, as defined in title 18, chapter 45, Idaho Code;
      22.   Encouraging the drunkenness of another for criminal purposes, as
defined in Idaho Code section 18-204;
      23.   A social gathering involving underage consumption or possession of
alcohol in violation of Idaho Code section 23-604;
      24.   Any violation of the Idaho liquor act, title 23, Idaho Code,
relating to alcoholic beverages;
      25.   Any violation of Idaho Code section 39-5703 or 39-5705, relating to
the sale, distribution, possession, or use of tobacco products to or by a
minor;
      26.   Any violation of title 5, chapter 16, 20, or 25 of this code,
relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages;
      27.   Any violation of title 6 of this code which involves a pit bull; or
   F.   In or on the premises, when three (3) or more of the following acts are
committed within a period of three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days
upon a property, by an interested party or their permittee(s):
      1.   Disturbing the peace, as defined in Idaho Code section 18-6409 or
18-6410;
      2.   Any violation of this title;
      3.   Any violation of
chapter 9.04 of this code, relating to public drunkenness;
      4.   Any violation of
chapter 9.12 of this code, relating to the obstruction of public sidewalks or
streets;
      5.   Any violation of
chapter 9.16 of this code, relating to the unlawful possession of prescription
drugs;
      6.   Any violation of
chapter 9.20 of this code, relating to curfew violations;
      7.   Any violation of
chapter 9.24 of this code, relating to the use of weapons within city limits;
      8.   Any violation of
 chapter 9.28 of this code, relating to open containers of alcoholic beverages;
      9.   Any violation of section
9.32.010 of this code, relating to disorderly conduct;
      10.   Any violation of
chapter 9.44 of this code, relating to graffiti;
      11.   Any violation of title 15 of this code, relating to violations of
the building code;
      12.   Any display of public nudity.
   G.   In or on the premises, when three (3) or more of the following acts are
committed within a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days upon a
property by an interested party or their permittee(s):
      1.   Any violation of the Idaho clean indoor air act, title 39, chapter
55, Idaho Code;
      2.   Littering, as defined by Idaho Code section 18-7031;
      3.   Environmental or solid waste violations; or
      4.   Violations of title 6 of this code relating to animals;
      5.   Violation of section
9.32.020 of this code relating to noise;
      6.   Any violation of
 chapter 12.20 of this code, relating to the obstruction of streets and
sidewalks; or
   H.   In or on the premises, any combination of four (4) or more of any of
the acts listed in subsection E, F or G of this definition are committed within
a period of three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days upon a property, by
an interested party or their permittee(s).
The above references to provisions of the Idaho Code or this code should not be
interpreted to mean that a prosecution of the specific charge is a necessary
prerequisite to an action under this chapter nor shall it be interpreted to
mean that proof of the action beyond a reasonable doubt is required. (Ord. 1010
§1, 2006)
8.10.030: NUISANCE PROPERTIES PROHIBITED:
A.   No owner or occupant of any dwelling or place of business shall allow or
permit such property to be, or become, an unlawful property nuisance.
B.   An owner and/or occupant shall be deemed to have allowed or permitted a
dwelling or place of business to be, or become, an unlawful property nuisance,
if:
   1.   The owner or occupant has personally committed the acts set forth in
section
8.10.020 of this chapter; or
   2.   Such acts were committed by permittees of the occupant or owner; or
   3.   Such acts were committed by persons attending events, or functions,
sponsored, permitted or allowed by the occupant or owner; or
   4.   Such acts were committed by a combination of subsection B1, B2 or B3 of
this section; or
   5.   The owner or occupant has been provided with the written notice of an
unlawful property nuisance pursuant to section
8.10.040 of this chapter, the facts alleged therein are true, and the owner or
occupant fails or refuses to enter into a nuisance abatement agreement, or
after entering into such agreement, fails to comply with its terms.
C.   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by no more
than ninety (90) days in jail or by a fine of no more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or both.
D.   Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from pursuing any other
civil or criminal remedy, including abatement of a nuisance under section
8.08.040 of this title. (Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.040: WRITTEN NOTICE OF UNLAWFUL PROPERTY NUISANCE:
A.   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of section
8.10.030 of this chapter until the city attorney, or his/her designee, shall
serve such person with the notice provided herein, and the person has either
failed, or refused, to enter into the nuisance abatement agreement provided for
hereinafter, or after entering into such agreement, the person fails to comply
with its provisions.
B.   Such notice may be served on any interested party by personal service, or
in the case of an occupant, by certified mail addressed to the address of the
dwelling or place of business, or, in the case of a nonoccupant owner, by
certified mail to his/her last known address, or, if none, to the address to
which any tax statement is provided to such owner for the dwelling or place of
business.
C.   Such notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
   1.   That an "unlawful property nuisance" exists, as defined by section
 8.10.020 of this chapter, at the location specified in the notice.
   2.   The date of the commission of the acts which constitute the basis for
the unlawful property nuisance, the name(s) of the person(s) committing such
acts, if known, and all other facts and circumstances that the city relies upon
to allege that such acts form the basis for the disorderly house nuisance.
   3.   The date, time and place where the person is to appear, and meet with
the city attorney or his/her designee, to participate in the nuisance abatement
conference.
   4.   That failure to appear, or failure to make satisfactory arrangements
for an alternative date and time, at the time and place designated in the
notice may result in prosecution of a violation of section
8.10.030 of this chapter and the imposition of penalties, as prescribed by this
code. (Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.050: NUISANCE ABATEMENT CONFERENCE:
At the nuisance abatement conference, the city attorney or his designee, and
the owner and/or occupant, shall discuss the facts constituting the unlawful
property nuisance and shall attempt to agree on specific actions that the owner
and/or occupant can take to abate said unlawful property nuisance. (Ord. 1010
§1, 2006)
8.10.055: NUISANCE ABATEMENT AGREEMENT:
A.   Within one week after the nuisance abatement conference, the city attorney
or his designee shall submit to the owner and/or occupant a proposed written
nuisance abatement agreement.
B.   Any nuisance abatement agreement under this chapter shall include a list
of specific actions and specific schedule of deadlines for said actions to
abate the unlawful property nuisance. It may also include provisions for a
periodic reassessment of the agreement effectiveness, and the procedure for a
modification of the agreement. A nuisance abatement agreement or any written
modification to said agreement may impose conditions or requirements on the
owner and/or occupant for a period of twenty four (24) months from the date the
original agreement is entered into by the owner and/or occupant and the city.
C.   A nuisance abatement agreement may impose one or more of the following
conditions or requirements on the owner and/or occupant:
   1.   Eviction of identified individuals from the dwelling in question,
   2.   Written notification from the owner and/or occupant to an identified
individual or individuals that they are prohibited from entering onto the
premises of the dwelling or place of business,
   3.   Utilization of written leases containing a provision or provisions
requiring eviction for criminal activity,
   4.   The completion of improvements upon the premises of the dwelling or
place of business which have the impact of mitigation of crime, including, but
not limited to, the erection of fences, installation of security devices,
increased lighting or other security measures,
   5.   Any other reasonable condition or requirement designated to abate the
unlawful property nuisance.
D.   Once a proposed written nuisance abatement agreement or written
modification to nuisance abatement agreement has been submitted to the owner
and/or occupant, said owner and/or occupant shall have forty eight (48) hours
to review it and enter into said agreement by signing it and returning it to
the city attorney or his designee. (Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.060: COMMENCEMENT OF PROSECUTION:
The city attorney, or his designee, may commence prosecution alleging a
violation of this chapter under the following circumstances:
A.   The owner and/or occupant does not attend a conference with the city
within the time period described previously.
B.   The owner and/or occupant fails or refuses to sign a proposed written
nuisance abatement agreement or proposed written modification to said agreement
within the prescribed time period set forth in this section.
C.   The owner and/or occupant agent subsequently fails or refuses to comply
with any conditions or requirements set forth in a nuisance abatement
agreement, including any prescribed deadlines for taking particular actions.
(Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.063: ACTION TO ABATE PENALTIES:
In addition to prosecution of the offense defined in this chapter or pursuing
any other remedies available under Idaho Code or this code, the city attorney
or his designee, upon receipt of reliable information that any dwelling or
place of business within the corporate limits of the city is being maintained
as an unlawful property nuisance, may prosecute an action for equitable relief,
in the name of the city, to abate the nuisance and to enjoin any person who
shall own, rent, or occupy the dwelling or place of business in question from
using or permitting its use in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.070: JUDGMENT:
No judgment finding a violation of this chapter shall be entered against an
owner and/or occupant who has, in good faith, endeavored to prevent the
nuisance. Any owner and/or occupant who has complied with all conditions or
requirements of a nuisance abatement agreement and any modifications to said
agreement, as defined by this chapter, shall be deemed to have endeavored in
good faith to prevent the nuisance. (Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
8.10.080: PENALTIES:
Upon a finding of guilt under this chapter, the court may, in addition to other
remedies permitted by Idaho law or this code, impose a term of probation for a
term of up to two (2) years, conditioned on any or all of the following:
A.   The completion of improvements upon the premises of the dwelling or place
of business which have the impact of mitigating crime and criminal activity,
including, but not limited to, the erection of fences, installation of security
devices or increased lighting;
B.   Requirement of a written lease for occupants which includes provisions
requiring eviction for criminal activity;
C.   Submitting tenancy lists on a periodic basis to the police department;
D.   Posting a cash bond of no less than the minimum fine and up to the amount
of the maximum fine for the period of court supervision or conditional
discharge imposed by the court, such bond to be retained by the court in an
interest bearing account and conditioned on successful completion of the period
of court supervision on conditional discharge; and
E.   Any other condition reasonably related to the objective of abating the
unlawful property nuisance. (Ord. 1010 §1, 2006)
CHAPTER 8.12
WEEDS
(Rep. by Ord. 982, 2005)
CHAPTER 8.16
ABANDONED VEHICLES AND JUNK
SECTION:
8.16.010: Declared Nuisances
8.16.020: Definitions
8.16.030: Placement In Street Unlawful
8.16.040: Placement In Open View On Private Property Unlawful
8.16.050: Abatement
8.16.060: Interference With City Officials Prohibited
8.16.070: Violation Deemed Misdemeanor
8.16.010: DECLARED NUISANCES:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, major
household furnishings or appliances or machinery, or parts thereof, on public
or private property within the city are found to create a condition tending to
reduce the value of property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute attractive nuisances creating
a hazard to health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and
insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare; and the
presence of such items on public or private property within the city except as
expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute and be a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code §16-10(a))
8.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ABANDONED, WRECKED AND JUNKED: With reference to vehicles, an unsightly
motor vehicle which meets any one of the following qualifications:
   A.   It does not carry a current valid state registration and license plate;
   B.   It cannot be safely operated under its own power.
   MACHINERY: All articles of industrial, farm or domestic machinery or
equipment and any and all metal or wooden machinery, motors, equipment or
tools.
   MAJOR HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES: All articles usually referred to
as major household furnishings and appliances used in housekeeping, including,
but not limited to, chairs, tables, davenports, beds, refrigerators, stoves,
washers, driers, furnaces and grease, oil and paint containers of five (5)
gallon or over capacity.
   MOTOR VEHICLES: Any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power designed to travel on the ground by wheels, treads, runners or slides and
to transport persons or property or pull machinery including, but not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles and tractors.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation or partnership. (Prior code §16-10(b))
8.16.030: PLACEMENT IN STREET UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to place, allow, discard, maintain, park or store
any abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major household furnishing or
appliance or machinery, or parts thereof, as defined in section
8.16.020 of this chapter, upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other
public property within the city. (Prior code §16-10(c))
8.16.040: PLACEMENT IN OPEN VIEW ON PRIVATE PROPERTY UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, whether he be owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise of any private property or premises, to place, allow, discard,
maintain, park, store or permit to be placed, allowed, discarded, maintained,
parked or stored upon such property or premises for a period of time exceeding
thirty (30) days any abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major household
furnishing or appliance or machinery, or parts thereof, as defined in section
8.16.020 of this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to any property or premises where the vehicle,
furnishing, appliance or machinery, or part thereof, is housed within a
building or fence so as to not be visible from the street or other public or
private property, or stored or parked in a lawful manner in connection with or
incidental to a business or commercial enterprise which is the primary or
principal use of such property or premises. (Prior code §16-10(d))
8.16.050: ABATEMENT:
A.   By the order of the mayor or any member of the city council, any duly
sworn police officer of the city may order any abandoned, wrecked, or junked
vehicle, a major household furnishing or appliance or machinery, or parts
thereof removed from the premises from which they reside within ten (10) days.
B.   Notice of the order shall be placed by the policeman upon the vehicle,
furnishing, appliance, machinery, or parts thereof, and a copy of the notice
shall additionally be served upon any adult person occupying the premises upon
which same item is located and upon the owner of the item, if said person is
known.
C.   If there be no occupant or owner of the premises, any notice affixed to
any building or upon any other prominent object upon the premises shall
constitute notice to such owner or occupant of the premises of the owner of the
item involved; provided, however, that if such owner or occupant is only
temporarily absent, such notice shall be by certified mail.
D.   If removal is not accomplished within the time and in the manner
prescribed by the order and notice, the police department by the direction of
the mayor and city council, may seek an order from the appropriate court of
competent jurisdiction, directed to the owner or occupant to show cause why the
item of abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicle, major household furnishing or
appliance, or machinery, or part thereof should not be removed.
E.   Upon obtaining a proper order, the police department may cause such item
of abandoned, wrecked, or junked vehicle, a major household furnishing, or
appliance, or machinery or parts thereof to be removed at the expense of the
owner and placed in an impounding yard where it shall be offered for sale to
the highest and best bidder at a public auction after two (2) publications in
any newspaper published within the city, only in full accordance with such laws
and regulations as may govern such dispositions of abandoned or junked vehicles
as established by the proper agency of the state.
F.   The proceeds of such a sale shall be used to pay expenses of removal,
impounding and sale, and if the proceeds are not sufficient therefor the
balance shall immediately become due alone from the owner or occupant of the
premises if not paid by such owner. (Ord. 627(VV), 1980: prior code §16-10(e))
8.16.060: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICIALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow any
authorized city officer or employee to enter upon private or public property
during usual business hours to enforce any provision of this chapter. (Prior
code §16-10(f))
8.16.070: VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 627(WW), 1980: prior code §16-10(g))
CHAPTER 8.20
FIRE PREVENTION 1
SECTION:
8.20.010: Fire Code Adopted
8.20.020: Open Air Fires; Prohibited In Certain Area; Exceptions (Rep. by Ord.
912 §1, 2001)
8.20.030: Open Air Fires; Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.040: Keeping Ashes In Wooden Containers Unlawful (Rep. by Ord. 912 §1,
2001)
8.20.050: Use Of Metal Cans For Oily Waste (Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.060: Accumulations Of Combustible Rubbish (Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.070: Inspections; Right Of Entry
8.20.080: Certain Inspections Required Periodically
8.20.090: Fire Hazard Abatement Order; Issuance
8.20.100: Fire Hazard Abatement Order; Service
8.20.110: Fire Hazard Abatement Order; Failure To Obey
 
Notes
1 1. IC ch. 39-35.
8.20.010: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The 2000 edition of the international fire code as published by the
International Code Council is hereby adopted by the city of Jerome. Any future
editions of the international fire code as published by the International Code
Council are also hereby adopted by the city of Jerome as they become adopted by
the Idaho fire marshal for the state of Idaho. Any inconsistent provisions of
the Jerome municipal code or ordinances of the city of Jerome with the
international fire code 2000 edition are hereby repealed. One copy of the
international fire code 2000 edition shall be filed for use and examination by
the public in the office of the city clerk of the city of Jerome. (Ord. 939
§§1–4, 2003: Ord. 852 §§2, 3, 1998: Ord. 802 §§2, 3, 1996: Ord. 741 §§1, 3,
1992: Ord. 715 §1, 1989: Ord. 695 §2, 1986)
8.20.020: OPEN AIR FIRES; PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREA; EXCEPTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.030: OPEN AIR FIRES; REGULATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.040: KEEPING ASHES IN WOODEN CONTAINERS UNLAWFUL:
(Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.050: USE OF METAL CANS FOR OILY WASTE:
(Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.060: ACCUMULATIONS OF COMBUSTIBLE RUBBISH:
(Rep. by Ord. 912 §1, 2001)
8.20.070: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
All owners or occupants of buildings shall have their premises subject to
inspection by the chief of the fire department for purposes of ascertaining
whether or not the building or buildings are in compliance with provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 627(CCC), 1980: prior code §8-24)
8.20.080: CERTAIN INSPECTIONS REQUIRED PERIODICALLY:
It is the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect or cause to be
inspected by fire department officers, or members, as often as may be necessary
but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and twelve (12) times a
year in the closely built portions of the city, all buildings, premises and
thoroughfares, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent
of any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city affecting the fire
hazard. In private dwellings the inspection shall be restricted to basements
and cellars. (Prior code §8-25)
8.20.090: FIRE HAZARD ABATEMENT ORDER; ISSUANCE:
Whenever any officer or member of the fire department shall find in any
building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter
or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper,
boxes, shavings or any highly inflammable materials especially liable to fire,
or shall find any haystacks or piles of hay or straw which are so situated as
to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the
fire department, or egress of occupants, in case of fire, he shall order the
same to be removed or remedied and such order shall be forthwith complied with
by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to appeal
within twenty four (24) hours to the mayor and city council who shall within
ten (10) days review such order and file their decision thereon, and unless the
order is revoked or modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by
such owner or occupant. (Prior code §8-26)
8.20.100: FIRE HAZARD ABATEMENT ORDER; SERVICE:
The service of any order issued pursuant to section
 8.20.090 of this chapter shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to
whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to such occupant
personally or by delivering a true copy to and leaving it with any person in
charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises,
by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance
of such premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the
owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and
leaving with such person a true copy of such order, or, if such owner or his
agent is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by
mailing such copy to the owner's last known post office address, postage
prepaid. (Prior code §8-27)
8.20.110: FIRE HAZARD ABATEMENT ORDER; FAILURE TO OBEY:
Any owner or occupant failing to comply with the order provided for in section
8.20.090 of this chapter within ten (10) days after such appeal shall have been
determined, or if no appeal is taken, then within ten (10) days after the
service of the order, shall be liable to a penalty as provided in
chapter 1.08 of this code. (Prior code §8-28)
CHAPTER 8.22
OPEN AIR FIRES AND BURNING
SECTION:
8.22.010: Purpose
8.22.020: Definitions
8.22.030: General Provisions
8.22.040: Prohibited Open Burning
8.22.050: Exceptions To Prohibited Open Burning By Permit
8.22.060: Open Burning Uses Allowed Without A Permit
8.22.070: Restrictions To Permitted Or Allowed Open Burning
8.22.080: Compliance With Federal And State Law
8.22.090: Permits
8.22.100: Appeals
8.22.110: Penalty
8.22.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit certain types of open
burning, reduce open burning and find alternative means of open burning within
the city of Jerome subject to the restrictions set forth herein. (Ord. 912 §2,
2001)
8.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
   AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any contaminant or
combination thereof in such quality of such nature and duration and under such
condition as would be injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant
life, to property, or to interfere unreasonably with the enjoyment of life or
property.
   APPROVED INCINERATORS: For purposes of this chapter, "approved incinerators"
shall mean those burning containers which have been approved by the Idaho
division of environmental quality as incinerators. "Burn barrels" and similar
devices are not considered to be approved incinerators.
   BARBECUE PIT: A pit constructed of concrete or approved noncombustible
material for the cooking of food over an open fire.
   CHIEF: The duly appointed fire chief of the city of Jerome. "Chief" for the
purpose of this chapter may also mean any representative designated by the
chief to fulfill any function of the chief under this chapter.
   GARBAGE: Any putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   OPEN BURNING: The burning of any matter in such a manner that the products
of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack, duct or chimney.
   PERMIT: A burning permit by the city of Jerome issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE: A fire for burning of materials other than garbage or
refuse where the fuel being burned is contained in an approved incinerator,
outdoor fireplace or barbecue pit and with a total fuel area of three feet (3')
or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height for pleasure,
religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes.
   REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, plastic exclusions, furniture, bedding and noncombustible trash
including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans and glass.
   SMOKE: Small gas borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion.
   YARD WASTE: Regular wastes produced from landscaping, grooming, pruning and
gardening activities. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.030: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
No person shall burn any trash, garbage, or other refuse upon any grounds in
any manner that may menace the public health or cause a nuisance of smoke, ash,
offensive odors, or fire hazard. All open burning shall comply with this
chapter, rules of the Idaho division of environmental quality and the uniform
fire code. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.040: PROHIBITED OPEN BURNING:
A.   Prohibited Materials: It shall be unlawful to openly burn any of the
following in the city of Jerome:
   1.   Refuse: Refuse outside any building at any time.
   2.   Garbage: Garbage inside or outside any building at any time.
   3.   Yard Waste: Yard waste such as grass clippings or wet vegetable or
other garden debris, green shrubbery, brush, tree clippings, stumps or similar
materials.
   4.   Paper: Paper, paper products or other materials which may be blown
about by the wind or pollute the air unless burned inside a building in a
stove, fireplace, furnace or incinerator sufficiently constructed in compliance
with regulations of the division of environmental quality of the state of
Idaho.
   5.   Other Manmade Materials As Defined By The Department Of Environmental
Quality: Whether inside or outside any building, any other material prohibited
by the department of environmental quality of the state of Idaho, such as, but
not limited to, wire, paints or painted materials, tires or other rubber
products, oil, grease or asphalt, junk motor vehicles, salvage materials,
commercial, industrial, trade or construction waste, dead or diseased waste,
hazardous waste, treated woods and asphalt materials.
B.   Escape Of Materials Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to allow the escape of
soot, ashes or other materials from any fire within the city of Jerome. (Ord.
912 §2, 2001)
8.22.050: EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITED OPEN BURNING BY PERMIT:
A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
8.22.040 of this chapter, the following types of open burning shall be allowed
after an application and permit has been issued:
   1.   Field burning where there is no alternative cropping practice which
provides equivalent benefits.
   2.   Irrigation ditches.
   3.   Fires used for control or alleviation of a fire hazard or for weed
control when no alternative control method exists.
   4.   Fires used in the training of organized firefighting personnel.
   5.   Open air burning of dry, clean tree leaves where other methods of
disposal are impracticable and in a manner which does not create a nuisance.
   6.   Unique fires allowed at the discretion of the Jerome City fire
department, after application and permit, not falling into the subsections
above.
   7.   Burning within real property zoned as the central business district,
after application and permit for demolition or fire prevention practice, at the
discretion of the Jerome City fire department. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.060: OPEN BURNING USES ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
Fires are allowed, without a permit, for the preparation of food provided that
such fires are confined to a barbecue grill, barbecue pit, smoker or other
approved enclosure when the fuel area is three feet (3') or less in diameter
and two feet (2') in height or less for pleasure, religious, ceremonial,
cooking or similar purposes and that the emission of smoke and fumes do not
irritate, annoy or constitute a nuisance to others living in the neighborhood.
(Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.070: RESTRICTIONS TO PERMITTED OR ALLOWED OPEN BURNING:
Permitted or allowed open burning shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
A.   Open burning shall not be conducted within fifty feet (50') of any
structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause the
spread of fire to within fifty feet (50') of a structure, shall be eliminated
prior to ignition. Clearance from structures and other combustible material are
allowed to be reduced to twenty five feet (25') when the pile size is three
feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height, or fifteen
feet (15') when burning is conducted in an approved burning appliance.
B.   Barbecue pits outside of buildings shall not be located within ten feet
(10') of combustible walls, roofs or other combustible material.
C.   A competent person of mature age, i.e., age of majority, and discretion
shall constantly attend open burning until the fire is extinguished.
D.   Fire extinguisher(s) or other on site fire extinguishing equipment, such
as dirt, sand, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate
utilization.
E.   No burning shall take place at any time or place when weather conditions
will create a nuisance to anyone or the property of anyone in the vicinity
thereof, or be a danger to the property or any person in the vicinity thereof.
F.   No burning shall be conducted prior to sunrise and must not be continued
after sunset on any day.
G.   No materials of any kind shall be burned or attempted to be burned in any
street, alley, highway, or between any curb adjacent thereto within the city of
Jerome.
H.   No permitted or allowed burning shall take place in a burn barrel or
similar device. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.080: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW:
A.   Notwithstanding anything set forth in this chapter, all open burning
permitted under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall also be
conducted and performed in compliance with the uniform fire code, the Idaho
division of environmental quality and all federal and state laws, statutes,
rules and regulations applicable thereto. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.090: PERMITS:
A.   Burning permits for fires allowed by permit are to be obtained upon
application to the Jerome City fire department on an application form approved
by the chief during normal working hours, which application shall be in a form
prescribed by the department. Issued permits shall contain the following
information:
   1.   Name, address and home phone of permit holder.
   2.   Name, address and phone number of the person(s) conducting the burn if
different from the permit holder.
   3.   Location of proposed burning.
   4.   Conditions under which burning is to be allowed.
   5.   Signature of issuing fire official.
   6.   Signature of permittee.
B.   Permits may be issued for any period of time up to one week.
C.   Any permit may be suspended by the issuing authority for violations of the
ordinance, severe air pollution, weather conditions and air pollution dispersal
conditions. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.100: APPEALS:
A.   Any person denied a burning permit by the Jerome City fire department may
appeal that decision in writing to the Jerome City council. Such appeal must be
made within thirty (30) days of denial. The council shall rule on said appeal
on or before the next scheduled council meeting following the receipt of the
appeal. (Ord. 912 §2, 2001)
8.22.110: PENALTY:
A.   Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 912 §2,
2001)
CHAPTER 8.24
FIREWORKS; SALES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
8.24.010: Definitions
8.24.020: Permits
8.24.030: Application For Permits
8.24.040: Requirements For Application For Permits
8.24.050: Permit Conditions
8.24.060: Insurance
8.24.070: Authorized Dates Of Sale And Hours Of Use
8.24.080: Regulations For Fireworks Stands
8.24.090: Records
8.24.100: Short Term Storage
8.24.110: Duty To Comply
8.24.120: Revocation Of Permits
8.24.130: Confiscation Of Illegal Fireworks
8.24.140: Penalty
8.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY CLERK: The duly appointed and acting clerk of the city of Jerome or
his/her authorized deputy.
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Dangerous fireworks include any of the following:
   A.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets, including all similar devices employing
any combustible or explosive material and/or which rises in the air during
discharge;
   B.   Roman candles and similar devices, including cakes, repeaters and
multiple tube devices loaded in such a way as to propel pyrotechnic affects
into the air;
   C.   Aerial display shells containing pyrotechnic affects or salutes
producing displays or reports in the sky generally fired or propelled from a
cylindrical or spherical shell casing;
   D.   Snakes or other effects which are ignited or burn containing bichloride
of mercury;
   E.   Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth (1/4") in
diameter;
   F.   Sky lanterns, fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning
material of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath to
propel them.
   FIRE CHIEF: The duly appointed and acting chief of the city of Jerome fire
department or his authorized deputy.
   FIREWORKS AS DEFINED BY IDAHO CODE: Any combustible or explosive
composition, or any substance or any combination of substances or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks include items
classified as common or special fireworks by the United States bureau of
explosives or contained in the regulations of the United States department of
transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or UN 0336 1.4G. The term
"fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety flares, toy guns, toy
cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy guns or toy cannons,
party poppers, pop-its or other devices which contain twenty five hundredths
(0.25) of a grain or less of explosive substance.
      Fireworks shall not include model rockets or model rocket engines and
their components which are designed, sold and used for the prevailing
recoverable aero models.
      Fireworks shall not include flares, noisemakers or signals designed and
used for the purpose of protecting the public.
   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following "nonaerial" common
fireworks:
   A.   Any fireworks such as ground spinners, fountains, sparklers, smoke
devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the ground and not to travel
outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle or emit sparks or other burning
material which land outside a twenty foot (20') diameter circle or above a
height of twenty feet (20'). Nonaerial common fireworks do not include
firecrackers, jumping jacks, or similar products;
   B.   Cylindrical fountains with inside tube diameter not exceeding three-
fourths inch (3/4");
   C.   Sparklers and "dipped sticks" not more than ten inches (10") in length
or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter with pyrotechnic composition not
exceeding four grams (4 g) each. Sparklers or "dipped sticks" described in this
section shall be burned individually and shall not be conjoined, banded,
attached, or affixed to additional sparklers or "dipped sticks" while ignited;
   D.   Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury;
   E.   Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the
ground during discharge containing no picric or gallic acid. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.020: PERMITS:
A.   Dangerous Fireworks Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person in the
city to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or store or permit
the keeping or storing of any dangerous fireworks for any use or purpose,
except that a person holding a dangerous fireworks permit issued pursuant to
the terms and conditions of this chapter may use dangerous fireworks for a
safely supervised and conducted public display of fireworks. Said fireworks may
be stored for a period not exceeding ten (10) days immediately preceding the
date of said public display, provided the fireworks are to be used exclusively
for the public display.
B.   Safe And Sane Fireworks Permit: No person, without having a valid safe and
sane fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in
this chapter, shall import, export, sell, or offer for sale any fireworks. A
short term storage facility as defined by Idaho Code section 39-2608(2) may be
used for the storage of safe and sane fireworks for a period of sixty (60) days
prior to, and fifteen (15) days after, any authorized dates of sale provided
within this chapter. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.030: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
A.   Safe And Sane Fireworks Application: Any reputable person in reasonable
pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business or charitable
purpose desiring to engage in the sale of safe and sane fireworks within the
city of Jerome shall make first written application to the Jerome city clerk
for a safe and sane fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to the Jerome
city clerk a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) at the time the application is
filed. The applicant shall pay a separate fee to the Jerome city clerk of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for inspection of temporary fireworks stands which
is nonrefundable.
B.   Dangerous Fireworks Application: Any reputable person in reasonable
pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business or charitable
purpose desiring to make a public display of dangerous fireworks shall first
make written application to the Jerome fire department for a dangerous
fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay to the Jerome fire department a fee
of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) at the time the application is
filed. No permit fee shall be refunded. The applicant shall also reimburse the
city for all reasonable expenses incurred in investigating to determine whether
the permit should be granted.
C.   Issuance: The Jerome city fire chief and Jerome city clerk shall review
each application and if it is complete and complies with the terms of this
chapter and the provisions of Idaho Code section 39-2601 et seq., shall issue a
permit allowing for issuance of same permit in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.040: REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous fireworks
permit shall file their application with the Jerome city clerk. Each
application shall show the following:
A.   Name and address and contact information of applicant
B.   The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which it
was organized.
C.   The names and addresses of the officers, trustees and/or directors, if
any, of the applicant.
D.   The location where the applicant requests permission to sell safe and sane
fireworks or display dangerous fireworks.
E.   When and where the applicant was organized and established, or, if a
natural person, the applicant's age.
F.   The maximum amount of safe and sane fireworks to be stored shall be
indicated on the application. Such amount shall be specified in pounds.
G.   The applicant's state sales tax permit number.
H.   Such other information as the Jerome fire department may require on a
standard form submitted to all applicants and which is reasonably necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.050: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A.   Investigation And Recommendation For Permits: The Jerome fire department
may cause an investigation to be made of each application and applicant.
B.   Grant Or Denial Of Permits: The Jerome fire department shall have the
power, in its discretion, to grant or deny any application, subject to such
reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall prescribe so long as the denial of
the application or any conditions imposed on the granting of the application
are reasonably necessary for protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
C.   Terms Of Permits: A safe and sane fireworks permit or a dangerous
fireworks permit, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be valid only within
the calendar year in which issued. A permit shall be valid only for the
specific premises or location designated in the permit. However, subject to
reasonable conditions necessary for protection of the public health, safety and
welfare, an applicant may be granted permits for more than one premises or
location within the city. No permit shall be transferable or assignable.
D.   Time Of Application For Safe And Sane Fireworks Permit: Each application
for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks at retail shall be filed with the
Jerome fire department, a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to a date on which
the retail sale of safe and sane fireworks is authorized under this chapter.
E.   Miscellaneous Permit Conditions For The Storage Of Safe And Sane And
Dangerous Fireworks:
   1.   Minimum occupancy separation shall be required pursuant to the
international building code.
   2.   Exits shall comply with the international building code.
   3.   Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the building as
required by the international fire code.
   4.   Automatic fire extinguisher systems shall be in accordance with the
international fire code.
   5.   License or permit holders shall maintain records of all transactions
involving safe and sane fireworks regarding the sale and acquisition of such
fireworks.
   6.   Conspicuous signs shall be placed and posted at intervals not less than
fifty feet (50') inside and outside of the building with the language: "Warning
- No Smoking".
   7.   All provisions as currently adopted by the city pursuant to the
international building code and international fire code shall be required.
(Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.060: INSURANCE:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit or for a dangerous
fireworks permit shall have filed with the clerk, prior to the issuance and
validity of any permit, a policy, or certified copy thereof, of public
liability insurance, including both accident and occurrence coverage. The
insurance coverage limits for public liability coverage shall be at least five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person per occurrence bodily injury,
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence aggregate bodily
injury and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence aggregate
property insurance. Each policy of insurance shall be in form and substance
acceptable to the city and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the
policy of the city, all officials, elected and appointed, of the city in
performance of official functions regarding all operations under or pertaining
to said permit, any licensee or licensor of the applicant, and all vendors of
the fireworks covered by the permit to be issued to the applicant. Said policy
of insurance shall be so written that it cannot be canceled without at least
thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city from the underwriting
insurance company. Cancellation of a policy is a basis for revocation of the
permit. A copy of said policy shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.070: AUTHORIZED DATES OF SALE AND HOURS OF USE:
Safe and sane fireworks may be sold at retail beginning at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight June 23, each and every year, and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight July 5, each and every year, and beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight December 26 and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January 1,
each and every year. The city may at its discretion extend each period of sales
by not more than five (5) days.
Safe and sane fireworks shall only be used or discharged within the city of
Jerome between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight June 23 through July 5 and December 26 through January 1, each and
every year, with the exception of December 31 when the hours can be extended to
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.080: REGULATIONS FOR FIREWORKS STANDS:
Temporary fireworks stands from which safe and sane fireworks are to be sold
shall be subject to the following provisions:
A.   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from
within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or
structure is hereby prohibited.
B.   The stand in which the fireworks will be stored or sold shall not be
located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building or within one
hundred feet (100') of any gasoline station or flammable liquid dispensing
device or installation.
C.   All such stands shall meet the requirements of the building code of the
city of Jerome and all lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall
meet the requirements of the electrical code of the city.
D.   The stand shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at both
ends of the structure and one additional door for each twenty five feet (25')
of rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25'). All doors shall open outward
from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all supplies
and materials at all times.
E.   Each stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) fire extinguishers
with a 2A minimum rating, in good working order and easily accessible for use
in case of fire, which shall be kept in immediate proximity to the location
where the fireworks are retailed.
F.   There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age or
older, on duty at all times. All fireworks shall be effectively kept away from
any kind of self-service by the public, and shall be placed in a location which
is unavailable and inaccessible to members of the public in capacities other
than as legal customers.
G.   No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside of
any stand when it is not open for business.
H.   "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside
the stand. No smoking shall be permitted within the stand or within twenty five
feet (25') of the stand and on four (4) sides of the stand.
I.   No temporary stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The
premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and
debris not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on July 20.
J.   No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25') of
any fireworks stand.
K.   No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any fireworks
stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist.
L.   Fireworks shall not be left in the stand when it is not open for business
unless the stand is locked or secured. If fireworks are not stored in the stand
they shall be stored in compliance with Idaho Code section 39-2608.
M.   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty (750)
square feet. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.090: RECORDS:
Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said
premises are open, and at his principal place of business for a year thereafter
copies of all invoices, receipts and orders evidencing the source from which he
acquired the fireworks which he handled. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.100: SHORT TERM STORAGE:
A short term storage facility may be used for the storage of safe and sane
fireworks for a period of sixty (60) days prior to, and fifteen (15) days
after, any authorized retail sales date. The Jerome fire department shall be
notified of the address or location of all short term storage facilities when
fireworks will not be stored in a temporary fireworks stand. If the short term
storage facility is not within the boundaries of the jurisdiction having issued
the retail sales permit the permittee shall notify the authority having
jurisdiction where the storage is to take place.
Short term storage is allowed in any of the following, provided it is locked or
otherwise secured: a temporary fireworks stand, truck, trailer, or other
vehicle. A truck, trailer or other vehicle used for short term storage must
remain at least twenty five feet (25') from the stand during any time the stand
is open for business, but may abut the stand when it is closed. A truck,
trailer or vehicle used for short term storage must remain at least twenty five
feet (25') from any other inhabited building. Short term storage may occur in a
locked or secured shed, garage, barn or other building or storage container
which is detached from an inhabited building and contains no open flames,
including heating and lighting sources. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.110: DUTY TO COMPLY:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with
all the provisions of the Idaho state fireworks act of 1997 and this chapter.
The conviction of violation of the aforesaid Idaho state fireworks act or any
of the provisions of this chapter by the permittee, or by any of its agents,
employees or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any
subsequent application for a permit. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.120: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
Any permit issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation by the city council
for violation by the holder, his agents or employees, of any of the provisions
contained herein or of any law of the state of Idaho or United States
pertaining to fireworks, provided that at least one day notice of hearing upon
said revocation shall be given to said holder by personal service or by leaving
a copy of notice at the place of business of the holder. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.130: CONFISCATION OF ILLEGAL FIREWORKS:
The Jerome chief of police, or his designated agents, or employees, may
confiscate any fireworks that are imported, exported, sold, offered for sale,
given away, possessed, stored, displayed, or discharged in a manner violating
any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
8.24.140: PENALTY:
The possession or discharge of dangerous fireworks without a dangerous
fireworks permit shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
The use or discharge of safe and sane fireworks outside the designated dates of
sale and hours or used specified within this chapter shall be an infraction
punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
All other violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and imprisonment for a period of
time not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 1141, 2015)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
CHAPTER 9.04
PUBLIC DRUNKENNESS
SECTION:
9.04.010: Drunkenness Prohibited In Public
9.04.010: DRUNKENNESS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to be, at any time on any street,
lane, alley, park or other public place in the city, in an intoxicated
condition. (Prior code §17-10)
CHAPTER 9.08
UNINVITED SOLICITATION
SECTION:
9.08.010: Uninvited Solicitation Prohibited And Declared A Nuisance
9.08.010: UNINVITED SOLICITATION PROHIBITED AND DECLARED A NUISANCE:
It is unlawful for any solicitor or transient merchant, to go in or upon for
the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise,
literature or any service, the premises of any person within the city limits,
who, prior to the solicitation or entry upon property has posted in a
conspicuous location on the property a sign stating in legible printing, that
solicitors shall not enter the premises. (Ord. 627(DD), 1980: prior code §19-1)
CHAPTER 9.12
OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
9.12.010: Obstruction Of Public Sidewalks Or Streets
9.12.010: OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC SIDEWALKS OR STREETS:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or block or cause to be
obstructed or blocked, any public street or sidewalk within the city in such a
fashion to significantly prevent the right of travel along such sidewalks or
streets. With respect to sidewalks, they shall at all times be kept clean and
free of debris and other obstructions so as to allow all pedestrians to use the
sidewalk in an easy, safe and commodious manner.
B.   Any person found guilty of violating the preceding subsection shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by imprisonment in the county
jail for not more than six (6) months and by a fine not exceeding three hundred
dollars ($300.00), or both. (Ord. 677 §§1, 2, 1984: Ord. 627(FFF), 1980: prior
code §17-15)
CHAPTER 9.16
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
SECTION:
9.16.010: Unlawful Possession; Penalty
9.16.010: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION; PENALTY:
A.   It is unlawful for any person except a physician, dentist, podiatrist,
osteopath, pharmacist, registered nurse, wholesaler or manufacturer acting
within the scope of his profession or occupation to possess drugs required by
the laws of this state or of the United States, or by the rules and regulations
of the state board of pharmacy or its successors of the state, to be sold on
prescription order, without a valid prescription from a licensed physician,
dentist, podiatrist, osteopath, pharmacist, registered nurse, wholesaler or
manufacturer.
B.   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding six (6) months or by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) or by both. (Prior code §17-15.1)
CHAPTER 9.20
CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS 1
SECTION:
9.20.010: Definitions
9.20.020: Offenses
9.20.030: Defenses
9.20.040: Enforcement
9.20.050: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. IC 20-501 et seq.
9.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
   CURFEW HOURS: Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day and
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Friday or Saturday until six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. the following day.
   EMERGENCY: For the purpose of this chapter means an unforeseen combination
of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The
term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a nature disaster, automobile
accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily
injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the general public is invited including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN:
   A.   Any person who under court order is the guardian of a minor person, or
   B.   A public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger.
   OPERATOR: Any individual firm, association, partnership, limited liability
company, or corporation operating, managing or conducting the establishment.
The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and
the officers of a corporation.
   PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adopted parent or stepparent of
another person or any other person at least eighteen (18) years of age
authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN: To linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so
by a police officer or the owner/operator or other person in control of the
premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 825 §1,
1997)
9.20.020: OFFENSES:
A.   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
B.   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits
or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
C.   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense
if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours. (Ord. 825 §1, 1997)
9.20.030: DEFENSES:
A.   It shall be a defense to prosecution under section
9.20.020 of this chapter that the minor was:
   1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.
   2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without
any detour or stops.
   3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
   4.   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from an
employment activity without any detour or stops.
   5.   Involved in an emergency.
   6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence.
   7.   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, the Jerome School District, the
Jerome recreation district, any other civic organization, religious
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor
or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by one of the entities previously stated.
   8.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly.
   9.   If the minor is married or has been previously married.
B.   It shall also be a defense to prosecution under section
9.20.020 of this chapter that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present
on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 825 §1, 1997)
9.20.040: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall
have the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless
the officer has reason to believe that an offense has occurred and that based
on any response and other circumstances no defense in section
9.20.030 of this chapter is present. (Ord. 825 §1, 1997)
9.20.050: PENALTIES:
Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 825 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 9.21
RUNAWAY AND INCORRIGIBLE JUVENILE
SECTION:
9.21.010: Prohibitions And Penalty
9.21.020: Definitions And Enforcement
9.21.030: Violation
9.21.010: PROHIBITIONS AND PENALTY:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under the age of eighteen (18) years
within the city of Jerome, Idaho, to be beyond the control of his or her
parents, guardians or other custodian; or to be a runaway. (Ord. 930 §1, 2002)
9.21.020: DEFINITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
Reference is made to the provisions of the juvenile corrections act of the
state of Idaho for definitions, interpretations, conditions and enforcement of
this chapter. Any juvenile found guilty of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided by the juvenile corrections act, chapter 5 of title
20, Idaho Code, as amended, of the state of Idaho, as it now exists or as it
may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 930 §1, 2002)
9.21.030: VIOLATION:
A violation of this chapter shall be considered a status offense. (Ord. 930 §1,
2002)
CHAPTER 9.24
WEAPONS 1
SECTION:
9.24.010: Discharge Of Firearms
9.24.020: Use Of Air Guns, BB Guns, Pellet Guns, Etc., Prohibited
9.24.030: Exemptions For Legitimate And Sanctioned Competitions And Exhibitions
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§18-3301, 50-308, 50-310.
9.24.010: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
It is unlawful for any person not a peace officer in the discharge of his duty,
to discharge any gun, revolver or pistol within the city, except in the
necessary defense of person or property. (Prior code §17-22)
9.24.020: USE OF AIR GUNS, BB GUNS, PELLET GUNS, ETC., PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any device commonly known as
an air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, crossbow and arrow,
paintball gun, or any other device that propels a projectile at a speed to
which it can cause serious bodily harm within the city limits. Any violation of
this prohibition shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1015 §1, 2006: Ord. 767 §1,
1993: prior code §17-21)
9.24.030: EXEMPTIONS FOR LEGITIMATE AND SANCTIONED COMPETITIONS AND
EXHIBITIONS:
An individual, club, or association may sponsor a public or private exhibition,
competition, contest, training, or educational presentation within the city
limits, and may be permitted to allow the use and/or discharge of a firearm,
air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, paintball gun, bow and arrow, crossbow and arrow,
slingshot, or any similar device within city limits, only with the written
permission of the chief of police, or his/her designee, and only after
obtaining any other permits or licenses required by state law or city
ordinance. The sponsor must provide protective measures, approved by the chief
of police or his/her designee, which are adequate to protect the participants,
spectators, and the general public from harm or injury. As a precondition to
authorization for such an event, the chief of police or the city administrator
may require the sponsor to provide proof of or procure liability insurance, and
may also require the sponsor to give notice to the owners or occupants of any
residential, industrial, or commercial properties, or other interested parties
located in the vicinity of the proposed activity. A permit fee, fixed from time
to time by resolution of the city council, shall be required. (Ord. 1015 §2,
2006)
CHAPTER 9.28
OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
9.28.010: Open Container Defined
9.28.020: Removal From Business Premises Unlawful
9.28.030: Permitting Removal From Premises Unlawful
9.28.040: Violation; Penalty
9.28.010: OPEN CONTAINER DEFINED:
"Open container", for purposes of this chapter shall be defined as the original
receptacle of the alcoholic beverage, whose seal has been broken or cap
removed, or any other container into which the alcoholic beverage has been
placed which does not have affixed thereon a permanent airtight seal or cap.
(Ord. 629 §3, 1980)
9.28.020: REMOVAL FROM BUSINESS PREMISES UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to remove from a business premises licensed for
the consumption thereon of any alcoholic beverage, any open container of
alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 629 §1, 1980)
9.28.030: PERMITTING REMOVAL FROM PREMISES UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, licensed by the city for an establishment
whereon the consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place, or any employee
or agent of the licensee, to knowingly permit any person to remove from the
licensed premises an open container of alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 629 §2, 1980)
9.28.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 629 §4, 1980)
CHAPTER 9.32
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
SECTION:
9.32.010: Disorderly Conduct
9.32.020: Noise Regulations
9.32.010: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A.   The commission of any of the following acts shall constitute disorderly
conduct:
   1.   Loitering, prowling or wandering about the private property of another
person without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant of the
property or without the express permission of the owner or occupant;
   2.   While loitering, prowling or wandering upon the property of another
person, peeking into or through the door or window of any residence, building
or structure located thereon, without visible or lawful business with the owner
or occupant, or the permission of the owner or occupant;
   3.   Refusing to disperse from any location upon the lawful order to
disperse given by an officer of the law acting within the scope of his
jurisdiction;
   4.   Engaging in any violent, tumultuous, or offensive conduct, or by
threatening, quarreling or challenging to fight, or fighting, or by using
obscene, offensive or profane language to the annoyance, disturbance or
vexation of another person.
B.   Any person committing the crime of disorderly conduct shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 652 §§1, 2, 1982)
9.32.020: NOISE REGULATIONS:
A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
   CITY: Jerome, Idaho, or the area within the city limits of Jerome, Idaho.
   COMMON AREA(S): The area(s) of a facility, complex, apartment unit, motel or
the like that are open either to the general public or persons with the
permission of the owner or agent of the owner of the area. This definition
would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools,
restaurants, patios, meeting rooms, lounges, bars, or other areas within a
facility that are either constructed or designed for use in this manner.
   EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle owned or leased by a city, county or fire
district; an ambulance; or a motor vehicle owned or leased by a federal, state,
county or municipal law enforcement agency.
   LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound
production, reproduction or amplification, including, but not limited to, any
radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, stereo system, tape player,
compact disc player, loudspeaker, public address system, amplifier or similar
broadcasting device.
   PERSON: Any individual, association, organization or entity having a legally
recognized existence, whether public or private.
   PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and
intended for the overnight accommodation of persons. In the event a building is
used for multiple individual units, such as an apartment, condominium, motel or
other multi-family residence, each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purpose of this section.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly
communicated to the listener, including, but not limited to, sound which is
understandable spoken speech, whether or not the speaker's voice is raised or
normal, comprehensible music or rhythms, melody or instrumentation, and the
source of which is identifiable to the listener.
B.   Noise Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
permit the operation of any loud amplification device in such a manner that the
sound therefrom:
   1.   Is plainly audible within any place of residence not the source of the
sound, or
   2.   Is plainly audible upon a public right of way or street at a distance
of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source of such sound.
C.   Exemptions: The following sounds shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section:
   1.   Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel in responding to an
emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
   2.   Sounds caused by activities upon any outdoor municipal, school,
religious or publicly owned property or facility, provided that such activities
have been authorized by the owner of such property or facility or by its agent.
   3.   Sounds from parades, fireworks displays or any other event for which a
permit for that type of activity is required and has been obtained from the
appropriate governmental entity within the limits imposed by any such permit.
   4.   Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment.
   5.   Sounds from burglar alarms that are not in violation of law.
   6.   Sounds caused by safety warning devices which are required by law.
   7.   Sounds caused from devices associated with lawful land uses within the
zoning district from which the noise emanated, including any sound lawful under
the terms of a special use permit.
   8.   Sounds emanating from devices used within the common area of a multi-
unit residential dwelling, whose use has been approved by the persons who have
lawful authority to manage the common areas. This exemption only applies in
relation to persons complaining about sounds from other units within the same
multi-unit facility.
D.   Relationship To Other Law: The provisions of this section are intended to
be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not affect any other prohibition or
regulation of noise or sound now adopted by the city of Jerome or by any other
jurisdiction with authority to administer laws within the city limits of
Jerome, Idaho.
E.   Penalty: Any person who violates a term or provision of this section shall
be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00), including court costs and fees. (Ord. 980 §1, 2005: Ord. 960 §§1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 2004)
CHAPTER 9.36
NONDISCRIMINATION AGAINST HANDICAPPED
SECTION:
9.36.010: Generally
9.36.020: Coordinating Office
9.36.030: Grievance Procedure
9.36.010: GENERALLY:
The stated policy of the city of Jerome, Idaho, shall be that said city shall
not discriminate against any qualified individual as defined in section 51.55
of the "Federal Register", October 17, 1983, on the basis of handicapped status
and admission or access to, or treatment of employment, in the programs and
activities of said city. (Ord. 676 §1, 1984)
9.36.020: COORDINATING OFFICE:
The office of the city which shall serve as the office responsible for
coordinations of efforts to comply with the policy stated in section
9.36.010 of this chapter, and any other related federal regulations, is the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 676 §2, 1984)
9.36.030: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
A.   Any qualified individual as defined by section 51.55 of the "Federal
Register", as published October 17, 1983, who is aggrieved by any action of the
city, its officers or employees, with respect to the policy stated in section
9.36.010 of this chapter, may file a written notice of said grievance with the
office of the city clerk, Jerome, Idaho. Thereupon, within ten (10) days of the
receipt of said notice in writing, the city clerk shall investigate the matter
and give a written response to the aggrieved person with respect to the
complaint. If the aggrieved person is not satisfied and the perceived injury is
not addressed by the response of the city clerk, said aggrieved person shall,
within ten (10) days of the receipt of the response of the city clerk, file a
written notice asking for a hearing on the grievance. Any such grievance shall
be heard by a three (3) member board composed of the city public works
director, one councilman to be appointed by the mayor, and a department head to
be appointed by the mayor. Said board shall notify the aggrieved person in
writing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a demand of the time and
place fixed for hearing. The aggrieved person may appear personally or be
represented by counsel. Evidence and procedure at said hearing shall be in
conformance with the administrative procedure act of the state of Idaho as
found in Idaho Code sections 67-5209(c), (d), (e), (f) and (g), and sections
67-5210 and 67-5212. The hearing board shall appoint one person to act as
chairman to rule on matters of procedure and speak for the board. A written
determination of the board's findings shall be provided to all parties within
thirty (30) days of the hearing date.
B.   If the aggrieved person is still not satisfied by the ruling of the
grievance committee, an appeal may be made to the city council and mayor.
Notice of any such appeal shall be in writing and shall be presented to the
office of the city clerk of Jerome, Idaho, within ten (10) days of the receipt
of the grievance committee's official determination. The hearing shall be set
by the mayor and city council on any such appeal within thirty (30) days of the
receipt of such notice. The city council and mayor may review the record
established at the hearing before the grievance committee, and rule on the sole
basis of such record, or, in their sole discretion, require a hearing de novo
before themselves on all issues. The notice of hearing provided by the mayor
and council to the aggrieved person shall contain a description of the manner
in which the appeal hearing will be held and resolved. The city council and
mayor shall provide a written decision concerning the matter appealed to the
aggrieved person within thirty (30) days of the date of the final hearing.
(Ord. 676 §3, 1984)
CHAPTER 9.40
ELECTRICAL FENCING
SECTION:
9.40.010: Electrical Fencing Prohibited
9.40.020: Violation
9.40.010: ELECTRICAL FENCING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, use, or allow to be used on any
real property over which they have possession and control within the city, any
fence through which an electric current is passed. (Ord. 717 §1, 1990)
9.40.020: VIOLATION:
Any person violating the previous section of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 717 §2, 1990)
CHAPTER 9.44
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
9.44.010: Definition Of Terms
9.44.020: Graffiti Unlawful
9.44.030: Penalty
9.44.040: Parental Or Guardian Responsibility
9.44.050: Duty To Remove Graffiti
9.44.060: Waiver Of Duty To Obliterate Or Remove Graffiti
9.44.010: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
A.   "Graffiti" means carving, scratching, etching, burning, marking or
painting by any means or method, any private or public real or personal
property without the express consent of the owner or manager of such property.
(Ord. 790 §1, 1995)
9.44.020: GRAFFITI UNLAWFUL:
No person shall place graffiti on any private or public real or personal
property within the city. (Ord. 790 §2, 1995)
9.44.030: PENALTY:
A violation of section
9.44.020 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 790 §3, 1995)
9.44.040: PARENTAL OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY:
Each parent or guardian of a person under eighteen (18) years of age brought
under the purview of the youth rehabilitation act of this state because of a
violation of section
9.44.020 of this chapter shall be liable for damages caused to the real or
personal property by the graffiti up to the amounts established by Idaho Code
section 6-210 as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 790 §4,
1995)
9.44.050: DUTY TO REMOVE GRAFFITI:
Every owner, tenant or occupant of a building, structure or other real or
personal property upon which graffiti is placed must, within five (5) days of
written notice from the police department, remove or obliterate graffiti placed
on that property so as to make it indistinguishable as a message, code,
depiction or marking. If not removed, the obliteration of the graffiti shall be
made with material of a similar color to the material on which the graffiti has
been placed. A violation of the terms of this section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 790 §5, 1995)
9.44.060: WAIVER OF DUTY TO OBLITERATE OR REMOVE GRAFFITI:
Any person under a duty to remove graffiti under section
9.44.050 of this chapter may petition the city council for a waiver of such
duty. Such petition shall be granted only upon a showing of the petitioner that
he or she lacks the financial resources to obliterate or remove the graffiti.
(Ord. 790 §6, 1995)
CHAPTER 9.50
PUBLIC NUDITY
SECTION:
9.50.010: Definitions
9.50.020: Violation
9.50.030: Exclusions
9.50.040: Construction And Severability
9.50.010: DEFINITIONS:
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the
exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic
hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples
and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the
realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general
public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs,
theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific
members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not
an admission charge is required. (Ord. 1004 §1, 2006)
9.50.020: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for a person knowingly or intentionally, in a public
place, to appear in a state of nudity or fondle the genitals of himself,
herself, or another person. Anyone in violation of this chapter will be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1004 §1, 2006)
9.50.030: EXCLUSIONS:
The prohibition set forth herein shall not apply to any child under the age of
ten (10) years of age, or any woman exposing a breast in the process of
nursing. (Ord. 1004 §1, 2006)
9.50.040: CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY:
It is the intention of the city of Jerome that the provisions of this chapter
be construed, enforced and interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least
possible infringement of the constitutional rights of free speech, free
expression, due process, equal protection or other fundamental rights
consistent with the purposes of this chapter. Should a court of competent
jurisdiction determine that any part of this chapter, or any application or
enforcement of it is excessively restrictive of such rights or liberties, then
such portion of this chapter, or specific application of this chapter, shall be
severed from the remainder, which shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 1004 §1, 2006)
CHAPTER 9.60
OVERNIGHT CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
9.60.010: Prohibited; Penalty
9.60.010: PROHIBITED; PENALTY:
   A.   Any overnight camping and any loitering on or upon any city street or
upon any property owned by the city, or upon any property in which the city
owns or holds a right of way is hereby prohibited and unlawful.
   B.   No person shall, as above described, camp, reside or occupy on any such
property or location overnight in any manner or fashion, whether within a
closed vehicle, van, camper, trailer or within a tent or other temporary
movable structure or contrivance or in any other manner.
   C.   A first violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). A second or subsequent violation
shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for any one offense, or by imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day there
is a violation shall constitute a separate violation/offense.
(Ord. 1231, 9-17-2024)
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 1
CHAPTER 10.04
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 1
SECTION:
10.04.010: Parking Zones Established
10.04.015: One Hour Parking Zones
10.04.020: Parking Parallel To Curb
10.04.025: Parking For Disabled Persons
10.04.030: Angle Parking
10.04.035: Bus Stop Areas
10.04.040: (Rep. by Ord. 1232, 9-17-2024)
10.04.050: Registered Owner Liability
10.04.060: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§49-206 – 49-212.
1 1. IC §§49-659 – 49-662.
10.04.010: PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED:
A.   The city, by resolution duly made and adopted by the city council, may,
from time to time, designate and establish two (2) hour parking zones within
the city limits, designating times at which no vehicle shall be parked for
longer than two (2) uninterrupted hours. The following portions of streets are
designated as two (2) hour parking zones, notwithstanding the right of the city
council to supplement such zones in accordance with this chapter:
   Lincoln Avenue between Avenue B and First Avenue.
   Main Street between Buchanan and Birch Streets.
B.   Provided, however, that parking greater than two (2) hours shall be
allowed in such zones on Sundays, holidays within the meaning of section 73-
108, Idaho Code, and between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. or between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. the following day.
C.   The following portions of streets within the city of Jerome are designated
as no parking zones:
   The entire length of the east side of North Tiger Drive between East Main
Street and 16th Avenue East; and the west side of North Tiger Drive between
East Main Street and 1st Avenue East; and the west side of North Tiger Drive
between 3rd Avenue East and 16th Avenue East.
   The entire length of the south side of 10th Avenue East between the
northwest corner of Forsythe Park and Tiger Drive.
   The entire length of the south side of 8th Avenue East between the east
boundary of Tax 2 Blk A-212 and North Tiger Drive.
D.   Any police officer or person designated by the chief of police observing a
violation of the provisions of this chapter may leave upon the violating
vehicle a traffic ticket which shall provide the ticket number, date, time,
license number, make of vehicle, and officer's name or designated person's
name. The ticket shall notify the owner or operator of the fine increase for
failure to pay such fine within the initial seventy two (72) hour period and of
the penalties for failure to pay the increased fine within the same notice
period. If a vehicle upon which a notice of violation has been attached remains
in the same location for a period of twenty four (24) hours after the notice
has been attached, additional notices of violation may be attached to the
vehicle for each twenty four (24) hour period of violation. (Ord. 1073, 2010:
Ord. 1072, 2010: Ord. 1027, 2007: Ord. 983 §1, 2005: Ord. 604 §1, 1978)
10.04.015: ONE HOUR PARKING ZONES:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any area designated and
appropriately signed as a one hour parking area beyond said time limit. The
east side of Lincoln Avenue, between Second Avenue East and Third Avenue East,
is hereby designated a one hour parking area. The council may designate further
one hour parking areas adopted by resolution. (Ord. 631, 1980: Ord. 604 §3A,
1978)
10.04.020: PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the
curb or edge of the roadway and bumpers within the vertical lines designating
the individual parking space; excepting, however, that angle parking may be
permitted as provided in section
10.04.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 604 §2, 1978)
10.04.025: PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS:
A.   Parking a vehicle or the standing of a vehicle in a space reserved for a
person with a disability, which space is signed in conformance with the
requirements specified as follows: For each designated parking space or area
there shall be posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from each stall or
space, a sign, which is at least thirty six inches (36") above the ground,
consisting of the international accessibility symbol as shown in Idaho Code
section 49-410, is prohibited, unless a vehicle is momentarily in the space for
the purpose of allowing a person with a disability to enter or leave the
vehicle, or unless special license plates or card or temporary card for a
person with a disability is displayed on the vehicle.
B.   The registered owner of a vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of
this section is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable by a fine not
exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00).
C.   Law enforcement officials are empowered to enter upon private property
open to public use to enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 824 §§1–3,
1997)
10.04.030: ANGLE PARKING:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway designated for angle
parking other than within the lines designated for such parking and with the
front portion of the vehicle pointed toward the curb. No vehicle shall be
parked at a parking space designated for angle parking in such a manner as to
allow any portion of the vehicle to extend into the roadway beyond the rearmost
portion of the lines used to designate spaces for angle parking. (Ord. 627
(OOO), 1980: Ord. 604 §3, 1978)
10.04.035: BUS STOP AREAS:
A.   The city council may, from time to time, designate by resolution bus stop
areas. Any such resolution shall contain a specific description of the portion
of any street so designated, and shall also fix the hours of each day wherein
buses only may park at said locations. Upon any such designation, the city
council shall cause the bus stop area to be adequately signed, setting forth
the hours in which no motor vehicle, except for commercial buses, may park
therein.
B.   It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, except a bus
engaged in the commercial transportation of goods or passengers, in any
designated bus stop area during the hours prohibited by the city council. (Ord.
635, 1980: Ord. 604 §§1A, 1B, 1978)
10.04.040: TRUCK OR TRAILER PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   (Rep. by Ord. 1232, 9-17-2024)
10.04.050: REGISTERED OWNER LIABILITY:
A motor vehicle illegally parked under this chapter, being registered in the
name of a natural person, shall be prima facie proof that such person was the
operator of such vehicle at the time the violation occurred. (Ord. 613, 1978)
10.04.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A.   Penalty Payment: A single violation of this chapter shall be punishable by
a civil penalty in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00). A person who has
received a notice of violation under this chapter signed by a law enforcement
officer may pay the civil penalty, within ten (10) calendar days of its
receipt, at the office of the city clerk, or by mailing the final amount to the
office of the city clerk, as directed on the notice of violation.
Alternatively, the person receiving the notice of violation may contest the
violation by appearing before an officer of the city of Jerome police
department designated by the chief of police at the time, date, and place
contained in the notice of violation. This officer shall be designated the
review officer. The review officer shall not be the officer who issued the
notice of violation.
B.   Proceedings Before Review Officer: The review officer may take statements
from the officer issuing the notice of violation and the person requesting a
review, and, in the review officer's discretion, may then dismiss or affirm the
notice of violation. If the notice of violation is affirmed, the payment of the
civil penalty shall be immediately due and payable.
C.   Failure To Pay Penalty: Any person who fails to pay a civil penalty due
under this section shall be guilty of an infraction. The civil penalty for
failing to pay a civil penalty under subsection A or B of this section shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00). The person who is alleged to have failed to pay
a civil penalty shall be issued a uniform citation charging a violation of this
section.
D.   Form Of Notice Of Violation: Any person alleged to have committed a
violation of this chapter shall receive a notice of violation in a form
substantially as follows:
City of Jerome                       )   (Citation #                         )
                                     )
vs.                                  ) NOTICE OF VIOLATION
                                     )
                  �)                 
(Last Name)                          )
                                     )
                  �)                 
(First Name, Middle Initial)         )
                                      
                  �                       
Vehicle License Number               State
                                      
                  �                                                         
Vehicle Identification Number        Make and Model   Color
                                      
Address - Street #                   City   State   Zip Code
                                      
The undersigned officer certifies and says:
                                      
On the       day of                     , at       o'clock    .m. at the following location:                               , the person above-named did commit a violation of Jerome Municipal Code by
parking a vehicle as prohibited by:
                                      
Description of Violation             Jerome Municipal Code
                                      
You may discharge this violation by paying the civil penalty to the Jerome City Clerk, 152 East Avenue A, Jerome, Idaho, during regular business hours, Monday through Friday or by mail. If you wish to
have this violation reviewed, you may appear at the City of Jerome Police Department, 124 South Lincoln, Jerome, Idaho, on or before the         day of                   , 20        , to discuss this
notice of violation with a Review Officer, who may either affirm or dismiss the notice of violation after his review. If you fail to pay the civil penalty of $20.00 by the time reserved above for your
appearance before a Review Officer, or if you fail to pay the civil penalty immediately after the Review Officer affirms the notice of violation, a uniform citation will be issued to you for the
infraction of failing to pay a civil penalty of $100.00.
                                    
Officer
(Signature)                         Date
Number
                                    
Officer
Name                                 
(Printed)
                                      
City Clerk use only                   
Receipted by:                        Receipt Number:
                                                                                                    
Date:
 
(Ord. 1019, 2006: Ord. 936 §2, 2002: Ord. 780 §1, 1994: Ord. 627(OOO), 1980:
Ord. 604 §4, 1978)
CHAPTER 10.08
BICYCLES
SECTION:
10.08.010: License; Required
10.08.020: License; Not To Be Issued To Other Than Owner Or Person In
Possession
10.08.030: License; Records
10.08.040: License; Plates To Be Attached To Bicycle
10.08.050: License; Fees
10.08.060: License; Permanent Attachment; Stamping Number On Frame
10.08.070: License; Impoundment Pending Investigation Of Proper Licensing
10.08.080: License; Stamping Of Replacement Parts
10.08.090: Transfer Of Ownership And Registration; Fee
10.08.100: Serial Number Attached To Bicycle
10.08.110: Lights Required
10.08.120: Number Of Persons On Machine
10.08.130: Hanging Onto Vehicles
10.08.140: Riding On Sidewalks
10.08.150: Parking In Parking Racks Provided By City
10.08.160: Racing Prohibited; Exception
10.08.170: Obedience To Traffic Laws
10.08.180: Operation Unlawful When
10.08.190: Bicycle Safety Course Requirements; Persons Under The Age Of
Fourteen Years
10.08.200: Bicycle Safety Pledge
10.08.210: Compliance With Stop Signs
10.08.220: Violation Of Sections 10.08.180 Through 10.08.210; Penalty
10.08.010: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
A bicycle owned by anyone other than a dealer in the same wholesale or retail,
must be registered with the city clerk, and be licensed. The chief of police
shall, upon receipt of a proper application therefor, issue a bicycle license
which shall upon issuance be effective for the life of the bicycle. The life of
the bicycle shall be deemed to be the life of the frame which must have the
serial number stamped or attached thereon. Licenses must be applied for within
ten (10) days of the purchase of a bicycle, and if not licensed within ten (10)
days thereafter, the bicycle shall not be used or ridden within the city. Any
bicycle not so licensed is subject to being impounded until proper license is
issued therefor. (Ord. 627(XX), 1980: prior code §15-95)
10.08.020: LICENSE; NOT TO BE ISSUED TO OTHER THAN OWNER OR PERSON IN
POSSESSION:
No license shall be issued for any bicycle when the issuing officer knows, or
has reasonable grounds to believe, that the applicant is not the owner of, or
entitled to the possession of such bicycle. (Prior code §15-96)
10.08.030: LICENSE; RECORDS:
The chief of police shall maintain a record of the number of each license, the
date issued, the name and address of the person to whom it was issued, the make
of the bicycle, the color of the frame thereof, the person of concern from whom
it was purchased, the number on the frame of the bicycle for which such license
shall be issued. All fees collected for such license shall be transmitted to
the city treasurer and deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 627
(YY), 1980: prior code §15-97)
10.08.040: LICENSE; PLATES TO BE ATTACHED TO BICYCLE:
At time of registration, a number plate or metallic sticker shall be assigned
to the bicycle registered; such plate or metallic sticker must be attached to
the bicycle in such a position as to be plainly visible and must at all times
be displayed during the life of the bicycle. (Ord. 690, 1986: prior code §15-
98)
10.08.050: LICENSE; FEES:
Each bicycle owner shall, at the time of applying for a license, pay a fee of
one dollar ($1.00), for each bicycle registered and to which a number plate is
issued. (Prior code §15-99)
10.08.060: LICENSE; PERMANENT ATTACHMENT; STAMPING NUMBER ON FRAME:
The owner, parent or legal guardian of the owner, shall take the bicycle to the
city clerk where the license shall be sealed, riveted, or otherwise permanently
attached thereto. At time of licensing a member of the police department
designated shall stamp or inscribe with an electric pencil or other suitable
tool a number identical to the license number on the frame. (Ord. 627(JJJ),
1980: prior code §15-100)
10.08.070: LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT PENDING INVESTIGATION OF PROPER LICENSING:
The chief of police shall have the power to order any bicycle impounded which
has a number, other than the license number issued to the bicycle, inscribed or
stamped on any part, while the department conducts an investigation to
determine the ownership of the part. (Ord. 627(KKK), 1980: prior code §15-101)
10.08.080: LICENSE; STAMPING OF REPLACEMENT PARTS:
Any person who purchases a new part to replace a worn or defective part, if
such part is required to be restored, on a bicycle shall have the police
department inscribe or stamp on the replacement part the number issued to the
bicycle on which such part is attached, and shall present proof of ownership of
such replaced part. (Prior code §15-102)
10.08.090: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND REGISTRATION; FEE:
In case of a sale or transfer of a bicycle from one individual to another, the
registration of such bicycle, together with number plate originally assigned
thereto, shall be transferred to the new purchaser or transferee, and the
number plate originally assigned to such bicycle must remain attached thereto.
Each transferee of a bicycle shall within ten (10) days after obtaining title
to such bicycle, notify the police judge of such transfer and shall present
proof of ownership of such bicycle. The police judge shall, upon proof of
ownership, issue a transfer of registration, showing the new owner of such
bicycle. A fee of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be paid to the city for each
transfer of ownership. (Prior code §15-103)
10.08.100: SERIAL NUMBER ATTACHED TO BICYCLE:
No bicycle shall be sold or registered unless it shall have imposed, cut or
impressed on some portion thereof the serial or manufacturer's number. Any
person in possession of a bicycle from which the serial or manufacturers number
is gone, removed or defaced shall apply to the chief of police, who, if he is
satisfied that the bicycle is not stolen, shall issue a number to be stamped on
the bicycle and registered as the serial number therefor. Thereafter, the chief
of police may register the bicycle and issue numbered plates therefor. (Ord.
627(MMM), 1980: prior code §15-105)
10.08.110: LIGHTS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon the streets, alleys or
public places of the city during the nighttime without having the bicycle
equipped with a headlight attached to the front thereof and a reflector at
least one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter attached to the rear thereof.
The headlight shall have a capacity sufficient to be easily seen a distance of
at least three hundred feet (300') and shall be lighted at all times the
bicycle is ridden upon the streets, alleys or public places of the city during
the nighttime. (Prior code §15-106)
10.08.120: NUMBER OF PERSONS ON MACHINE:
It is unlawful for two (2) or more persons to ride on a bicycle at the same
time, unless such bicycle is manufactured with double sets of saddles, steering
handles and cranks or levers and pedals. (Prior code §15-107)
10.08.130: HANGING ONTO VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person riding on a bicycle to take hold of or hang on to
another vehicle for the purpose of being drawn along by such other vehicle. It
is unlawful for any person to permit the rider or operator of a bicycle to take
hold of, or hang on to any vehicle operated by any such person for the purpose
of drawing or towing such bicycle. (Prior code §15-108)
10.08.140: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle upon any public sidewalk
within the city. (Prior code §15-109)
10.08.150: PARKING IN PARKING RACKS PROVIDED BY CITY:
It is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any bicycle upon the
streets, alley or sidewalks of the city, except in parking racks to be provided
by the city. (Prior code §15-110)
10.08.160: RACING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to run or engage in, or cause to be
run or engaged in any bicycle race within the city; provided, however, that
road races may be run and engaged in under supervision and direction of the
chief of police, who is hereby given authority to designate the streets that
may be traversed and used in such road races. (Prior code §15-111)
10.08.170: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway, street or alley within the city
shall be subject to all the rules and regulations applicable to the driver of
any other vehicle, except such rules and regulations which by their very nature
can have no application. (Prior code §15-112)
10.08.180: OPERATION UNLAWFUL WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle, or permit another person to
operate a bicycle, within the city limits of Jerome, Idaho, while such person
operating the bicycle is under the age of fourteen (14) years, and without
having completed an authorized bicycle safety course as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 689 §1, 1986)
10.08.190: BICYCLE SAFETY COURSE REQUIREMENTS; PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF
FOURTEEN YEARS:
Every individual under the age of fourteen (14) years shall, prior to operating
a bicycle within the city limits of Jerome, Idaho, take and complete a bicycle
safety course authorized by the city. Each bicycle safety course shall be
administered by a member of the Jerome City policy department, or their
designee, and shall follow the format of the bicycle safety course authorized
by the National Child Safety Council, Jackson, Michigan. The course of
instruction shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A.   Traffic sign designations and the duties of bicycle operators with respect
thereto;
B.   Duties of bicycle operators with respect to statutes of the state and the
motor vehicle codes;
C.   Prudent safety precautions with respect to bicycle operators and operators
of motor vehicles;
D.   Traffic signaling for bicycle operators;
E.   Required bicycle safety equipment and maintenance and function of bicycle
parts;
F.   Such other safety instructions as may be appropriate. (Ord. 689 §2, 1986)
10.08.200: BICYCLE SAFETY PLEDGE:
Every person successfully completing the required course of instruction shall
be issued a bicycle safety pledge with the name of the person contained
thereon. The card shall be certified by the officer administering the safety
course to the effect that "this bicycle driver has taken the National Child
Safety Council bicycle safety test. In doing so, the driver has met the bicycle
safety test. In doing so, the driver has met the necessary requirements for
safe driving and has agreed to obey the bicycle safety rules listed on the
reverse side of this card." The reverse side of the card shall contain the
following information:
I will... ride single file; keep to the right; look out for cars; never carry a
rider; obey all traffic laws; slow down at all crossings; avoid stunt driving
or showing off; give pedestrians the right-of-way; and keep my bicycle in good
driving condition.
The pledge shall be signed by the individual completing the course. (Ord. 689
§3, 1986)
10.08.210: COMPLIANCE WITH STOP SIGNS:
Every person operating a bicycle within the city shall come to a full and
complete stop at all stop signs on streets within the city and not proceed
until ascertaining that it is safe to do so. (Ord. 689 §4, 1986)
10.08.220: VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 10.08.180 THROUGH 10.08.210; PENALTY:
Every violation of sections
10.08.180 through
10.08.210 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed thirty
five dollars ($35.00). (Ord. 689 §5, 1986)
CHAPTER 10.12
STREET CLOSURE
SECTION:
10.12.010: Portion Of Third Avenue West Closed
10.12.020: Violation; Penalty
10.12.010: PORTION OF THIRD AVENUE WEST CLOSED:
Third Avenue West between North Lincoln and North Birch Street is closed to all
traffic with the exception of necessary school vehicles and activities,
including buses between August 15 and June 1 of each year. (Ord. 584 §1, 1976)
10.12.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The use of the avenue during the above periods of closure shall be a
misdemeanor under the laws of the state and punishable by a fine not exceeding
fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 584 §1, 1976)
CHAPTER 10.16
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
10.16.005: Designated; Generally
10.16.010: Designated; Portions Of Streets Adjacent To Public Schools
10.16.020: Section 10.16.010 Effective When
10.16.030: Signing; Public Works Director Duties
10.16.040: Violation Of Section 10.16.010; Infraction
10.16.005: DESIGNATED; GENERALLY:
A.   A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour for motor vehicles
traveling upon the following streets or portions of streets within the city of
Jerome, Idaho, is hereby established:
   North Fillmore Street from 4th Avenue Drive to 6th Avenue East
   North Lincoln Avenue from 1010 North Lincoln to Mountain View Drive
   South Lincoln from 423 South Lincoln to 610 South Lincoln
   North Tiger Drive from East Main Street to 4th Avenue Drive
   10th Avenue East from North Fillmore Street to North Tiger Drive
B.   A maximum speed limit of thirty five (35) miles per hour for motor
vehicles traveling upon the following streets or portions of streets within the
city of Jerome, Idaho, is hereby established:
   North Lincoln from Mountain View Drive to 16th Avenue
   South Lincoln from G Street to 2825 South Lincoln
   East Main Street from Cleveland Street to Tiger Drive
   West Main Street from Birch Street to Iron Wood Drive
   East Nez Perce from South Lincoln to South Tiger Drive
   West Nez Perce from South Lincoln to Victory Lane
   South Tiger Drive from East Main Street to East Yakima
   Victory Lane from West Nez Perce Avenue to West Yakima
   100 West Road North from West Main Street to 100 North Road West
C.   A maximum speed limit of forty five (45) miles per hour for motor vehicles
traveling upon the following streets or portions of streets within the city of
Jerome, Idaho, is hereby established:
   South Lincoln from 2825 South Lincoln to East Montana
   West Main Street from Iron Wood Avenue to the boundaries of Interstate 84
D.   All other streets or portions of streets within the corporate boundaries
of the city of Jerome, Idaho, not otherwise described in subsections A through
C of this section shall have a maximum speed limit of twenty five (25) miles
per hour. (Ord. 1090, 2011)
10.16.010: DESIGNATED; PORTIONS OF STREETS ADJACENT TO PUBLIC SCHOOLS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at more than twenty
(20) miles per hour between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the following portions of streets within the city
limits:
A.   North Lincoln Street between the midpoint of the 200 block and the
midpoint of the 500 block;
B.   North Fillmore Street, from its intersection with Fourth Avenue to its
intersection with Eighth Avenue. (Ord. 693 §1, 1986)
10.16.020: SECTION 10.16.010 EFFECTIVE WHEN:
The speed limits provided by this chapter shall be effective only on such days
public schools are in session. When the public schools are not in session, the
previous posted speed of twenty five (25) miles per hour shall constitute the
speed limit on the above described portions of streets. (Ord. 693 §2, 1986)
10.16.030: SIGNING; PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR DUTIES:
The reduced speed limit, and portions of streets to which the speed limit
applies, shall be designated by appropriate signing, under the direction of the
public works director, consistent with the standards and regulations of the
state. (Ord. 693 §3, 1986)
10.16.040: VIOLATION OF SECTION 10.16.010; INFRACTION:
A violation of the prohibition of section
10.16.010 of this chapter shall be an infraction within the meaning of Idaho
Code 49-3401(3). (Ord. 693 §4, 1986)
CHAPTER 10.20
TRUCKS
SECTION:
10.20.010: Definitions
10.20.020: Parking Unlawful When
10.20.030: Owner Responsibilities
10.20.040: Violation
10.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
   For purposes of this chapter, the words “truck”, “semitrailer” and “truck-
tractor” shall be as defined in Idaho Code 49-121 as said sections now exist
and as they may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 1232, 9-17-2024: Ord. 1162, 2017)
10.20.020: PARKING UNLAWFUL WHEN:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand, or to allow to be
parked or stood, on any street or alley within the City of Jerome,. Any truck,
semi-trailer, semi-tractor, or semi-tractor/trailer falling in any of the
categories following:
   A.   Any truck with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 8,000 pounds;
   B.   Any truck or semi-trailer, whether considered separately or when
connected, which exceeds more than twenty-two feet (22') in length;
   C.   Any semi-trailer;
   D.   Any truck-tractor, whether stood or stopped.
   Exception: while in the actual process of loading or unloading a truck and
semi-trailer may park.
(Ord. 1323, 9-17-2024: Ord. 1162, 2017)
10.20.030: OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   The registered owner of the truck, semi-trailer, semi-tractor, or semi-
tractor/trailer shall be presumed to be in control of the equipment found to be
in violation of this chapter, and subject to the penalty therefor. Provided,
however, that no such presumption shall apply where the owner demonstrates the
equipment illegally parked was placed there without the consent, express or
implied, of the owner. Any business that willfully allows the registered owner
and/or themselves parks or stands any truck, semi-trailer, semi-tractor, or
semi-tractor/trailer shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalty therefor.
(Ord. 1323, 9-17-2024: Ord. 1162, 2017)
10.20.040: VIOLATION:
   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction and shall pay a fine of one-hundred dollars
($100.00). Any person found guilty of a subsequent violation within a twelve
(12) month period, shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Any person found guilty of a third violation in any twelve (12) month period
shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Any violations
of this code by a business shall be found guilty and pay the fines as stated
above regardless of the registered truck owner.
(Ord. 1323, 9-17-2024: Ord. 1162, 2017)
CHAPTER 10.24
MOTOR VEHICLES AND SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICES
(Rep. by Ord. 1012 §1, 2006)
CHAPTER 10.28
OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
10.28.010: Definitions
10.28.020: Prohibited Areas Of Operation
10.28.030: Violations; Penalties
10.28.040: Vehicles In Excess Of Twenty Two Feet
10.28.010: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified
elsewhere in this code, the following definitions shall be used:
   HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes
streets and roads.
   MOTOR VEHICLES: A motor vehicle as defined by Idaho Code section 49-123(g)
as it now exists or may hereafter be amended.
   UNIMPROVED PRIVATE PROPERTY: Under this chapter means any parcel of land
under common ownership which contains no buildings or which is not surfaced
with cement, concrete, asphaltic concrete or other similar material, or which
does not have a hard surface made up of a mixture of rock, sand or gravel bound
together with a chemical or mineral substance other than natural soil. (Ord.
769 §1, 1994)
10.28.020: PROHIBITED AREAS OF OPERATION:
A.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, other than a publicly owned motor
vehicle, upon any public sidewalk, walkway, parkway or in any public park or
recreational area or upon any other publicly owned property, except highways,
within the city.
This shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of a motor vehicle having
a valid Idaho vehicle registration by any person possessing a valid Idaho
operator's license upon the public highways in the city.
B.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, other than a publicly owned motor
vehicle, upon any unimproved private property within the city. (Ord. 769 §2,
1994)
10.28.030: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 769 §3, 1994)
10.28.040: VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF TWENTY TWO FEET:
A.   Prohibited Turns: It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle or combination
of motor vehicle and attached vehicles, as both terms are presently defined in
Idaho Code section 49-123(2), as the same now exists or as it may hereafter be
amended, in excess of twenty two feet (22') in total length to make any turn at
the intersection of Main and Lincoln Streets within the city of Jerome, Idaho.
B.   Truck Route: Any motor vehicle, or combination of a motor vehicle and
attached vehicles in excess of twenty two feet (22') in total length shall, in
lieu of making a turn at the intersection of Main and Lincoln Streets within
the city of Jerome, Idaho, travel on the city of Jerome truck route, which
truck route is hereby designated as follows:
   1.   Heading southbound on Lincoln Street, turn right onto West Avenue D;
then right onto South Birch Street; and then proceed northbound to West Main
Street.
   2.   Heading northbound on Lincoln Street, turn left onto West Avenue D;
then right onto South Birch Street; and then proceed northbound to West Main
Street.
   3.   Heading eastbound on Main Street, turn right onto South Birch Street;
then left onto West Avenue D; and then proceed eastbound to South Lincoln
Street.
   4.   Heading westbound on Main Street, turn left onto South Birch Street;
then left onto West Avenue D; and then proceed eastbound to South Lincoln
Street.
C.   Residential Zones: It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle or any
combination of a motor vehicle and attached vehicles in excess of twenty two
feet (22') in total length, to park on or travel on any street of any area of
the city of Jerome zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3.
D.   Exemptions: A motor vehicle or a combination of a motor vehicle and
attached vehicles in excess of twenty two feet (22') or more in total length
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section as follows:
   1.   Any motor vehicle or combination of a motor vehicle and attached
vehicles of more than twenty two feet (22') in total length which travels on
Main Street or Lincoln Street in the city of Jerome without making a turn of
any kind at the intersection of Main and Lincoln Streets shall be exempt from
subsection A of this section.
   2.   Any motor vehicle or combination of a motor vehicle and attached
vehicles in excess of twenty two feet (22') in total length which is making a
delivery of goods or services to a residence or owners of a residence in an
area within the city of Jerome zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 shall be exempt from
subsection C of this section.
   3.   An authorized emergency vehicle as that term is defined at Idaho Code
section 49-123(2)(b) as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall
be exempt from this section.
E.   Penalties: Any person operating or parking a motor vehicle or combination
of a motor vehicle and attached vehicles in excess of twenty two feet (22') in
total length in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction
punishable by a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 1057 §§1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 2008)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 1
CHAPTER 12.04
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS 1
SECTION:
12.04.010: Materials And Specifications
12.04.020: Construction; When Required
12.04.030: Construction; Notice To Abutting Owner
12.04.040: Construction; By City Upon Failure Of Abutting Owner; Collection Of
Costs
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-311 et seq.
1 1. IC §50-316.
12.04.010: MATERIALS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Sidewalks, curbs, crosswalks and driveways within the city shall be of
concrete, of such dimensions and thickness and constructed according to such
official plans and specifications as from time to time may be adopted by order
of the city council and filed with the city clerk. (Prior code §24-2)
12.04.020: CONSTRUCTION; WHEN REQUIRED:
The mayor and city council may, at any regular meeting, or at any special
meeting called for that purpose, by a vote of three- fourths (3/4) of the
members of the city council or by a vote of a majority of the council upon a
petition of three-fourths (3/4) of the property owners of not less than one
side of a block, by an order entered upon the minutes of such meeting, direct
the construction of sidewalks on any street, block or part of a block, within
the city, assessing the cost thereof to the property in front of which the same
shall be paid, and may direct the owner thereof to lay the same at his own
expense. (Prior code §24-17)
12.04.030: CONSTRUCTION; NOTICE TO ABUTTING OWNER:
Whenever the mayor and city council shall order any sidewalk constructed, as
provided in section
12.04.020 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city engineer within
five (5) days after the passage of such order, to serve a written or printed
notice to construct such sidewalks within thirty (30) days upon the owner or
his agent of all of the property in front of which such sidewalk has been
ordered laid. If the owner resides out of the city and his address is known,
such notice shall be sent by registered mail, and if he cannot be found, and
his address is unknown, such notice shall be published at least once a week for
two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the city. (Prior code
§24-18)
12.04.040: CONSTRUCTION; BY CITY UPON FAILURE OF ABUTTING OWNER; COLLECTION OF
COSTS:
If, within thirty (30) days after serving of such notice, or after the first
publication, if the address of the owner is not known, or if he cannot be
found, the owner fails and neglects to construct such sidewalk in front of his
property as ordered, such sidewalk may be constructed by the city, under the
direction of the city engineer, who shall keep an account of the construction
of such sidewalk, and the cost thereof, in front of each lot or part of lot,
and after the same has been completed he shall present to the city council a
detailed statement of the cost thereof and the amount assessed against the
property owned by each person in front of whose property such sidewalk shall
have been constructed by the city, and after such account shall have been
approved by the city council, if not paid by the owner within ten (10) days
thereafter, the same shall be and constitute a lien against such property in
favor of the city, and shall be recoverable, together with all costs as
provided by law, for the foreclosure of liens. (Prior code §24-19)
CHAPTER 12.08
GRADES AND CURB LINES
SECTION:
12.08.010: Base Point Established
12.08.020: Grades To Be Measured From Base Point
12.08.030: Adoption Of Grade And Grade Elevation Map
12.08.040: Curb Lines Established Generally
12.08.050: Grades And Curb Lines In Bremer Addition
12.08.060: Sidewalk Slopes
12.08.010: BASE POINT ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of establishing grades in the streets, avenues, alleys and
block intersections in the city, the following named point shall be taken as a
base, or starting point: The top of west anchor bolt on the southwest pier of
the city water tower as now located, the elevation of such point being 3,776.21
feet above sea level. (Prior code §24-11)
12.08.020: GRADES TO BE MEASURED FROM BASE POINT:
Whenever any point is given by numbers as a grade point, it shall mean the
number of feet and hundredths of a foot above the datum plane as compared with
the elevation of the base established by section
12.08.010 of this chapter, and the grade of any street, avenue, alley or block
intersection of the city, between grade points as established in this chapter,
shall be a plane between such points. (Prior code §24-12)
12.08.030: ADOPTION OF GRADE AND GRADE ELEVATION MAP:
The grades and grade elevations of streets, avenues, sidewalks and alleys
within the city, shown by map of L. C. Kelsey, civil engineer, entitled
"Jerome, Idaho map showing established grades, 1918", on file in the office of
the city clerk, are made the established grades and grade elevations of such
streets, avenues, sidewalks and alleys, and such map is adopted as an
authorized grade and grade elevation map of the city. (Prior code §24-13)
12.08.040: CURB LINES ESTABLISHED GENERALLY:
Curb lines within the territory shown in the map referred to in section
12.08.030 of this chapter shall be the distances from the property lines shown
by such map, except that the curb lines on Avenue A and First Avenue from
Cherry Street to Elm Street and on Lincoln Avenue from the south city limits to
the north city limits shall be sixty feet (60') from curb to curb, being thirty
feet (30') on each side of the centerline of the street. (Prior code §24-14)
12.08.050: GRADES AND CURB LINES IN BREMER ADDITION:
Sidewalks and curbs laid and constructed prior to January 1, 1939, on the
portion of the city included within Bremer Subdivision of Jerome Townsite shall
be deemed laid and constructed to authorized grades and at authorized distances
from the property lines. (Prior code §24-15)
12.08.060: SIDEWALK SLOPES:
The grades given in this chapter shall be the grade of the top of the sidewalks
at their inner edges when the latter are on the block lines or not more than
two feet (2') out therefrom. When the inner edge of the sidewalk is more than
two feet (2') out from the block lines, the elevation of top of the inner edge
of walk shall be determined by subtracting from the established grade at the
block line, an amount equal to the amount of fall from the block line to the
inner edge of sidewalk, which shall be at the rate of one-fourth inch (1/4")
per foot from the block line to the outer edge of curb. (Prior code §24-16)
CHAPTER 12.12
STREET NUMBERING 1
SECTION:
12.12.010: Purpose
12.12.020: Supervision
12.12.030: Initial Point Of Numbering
12.12.040: Manner Of Using Even And Odd Numbers
12.12.050: Block Numbers
12.12.060: Frontage
12.12.070: Numbers To Be Of Uniform Size
12.12.080: Diagonal Streets
12.12.090: Unextended Streets
12.12.100: Owner Required To Affix Number
12.12.110: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-318.
12.12.010: PURPOSE:
A.   The purpose of this plan for numbering of residences and business houses
within the city is to establish a uniform and orderly system through which the
locating of any residence or business may be expedited.
B.   It is not the purpose of this chapter to change the existing numbers given
to residences or businesses to conform with the footage numbering system
established by this chapter; however, it is the purpose of this chapter that
all residences and businesses within a block shall conform with the one hundred
(100) numbers assigned to the block, as shown on the official plat; and that
there shall not be two (2) residences within the same block with identical
numbering. The official plat in this chapter referred to is a plat prepared by
the city engineer for the purposes of this chapter and is on file in the office
of city clerk, which plat is adopted for such purposes. (Prior code §24-24)
12.12.020: SUPERVISION:
The mayor and city council, or other persons designated by the mayor and city
council, are hereby given the exclusive right to determine the building numbers
as provided for in this chapter. Such numbering shall be placed on the front of
residences and other buildings and mayor and council shall determine what
constitutes the front of any such residence or other building. (Prior code §24-
25)
12.12.030: INITIAL POINT OF NUMBERING:
The initial point of numbering shall be the intersection of the centerlines of
Main Street and Lincoln Avenue. The baselines shall be Main Street and Lincoln
Avenue. (Prior code §24-26)
12.12.040: MANNER OF USING EVEN AND ODD NUMBERS:
On streets running east and west, even numbers shall be on the north side of
the streets and odd numbers shall be on the south side of the streets. On
streets running north and south, odd numbers shall be on the west side of the
streets and even numbers shall be on the east side of the streets. (Prior code
§24-27)
12.12.050: BLOCK NUMBERS:
Each block shall be numbered by hundreds beginning with 100 at Main Street on
streets running east and west, the second block beginning with 200 and so on,
and the same system on Lincoln Avenue running north and south. (Prior code §24-
28)
12.12.060: FRONTAGE:
A.   In numbering houses in the city, one whole number shall be allowed on
every twenty five feet (25') of property wherever practicable. In numbering
business houses, one whole number shall be allowed on every twelve and one-half
feet (121/2') of property wherever practicable. The number given to the house
or the business shall be determined by the actual increment measurement to the
entrance door of the building and the number given shall in all cases be
determined by the mayor and the city council.
B.   On a large commercial building of two (2) or more stories, one basic
number shall be issued for each office within the building.
C.   In residential areas where three- or more plex apartment units are
available, one basic number shall be issued for the apartment unit and each
apartment shall be issued a letter of the alphabet. (Prior code §24-29)
12.12.070: NUMBERS TO BE OF UNIFORM SIZE:
All numbers used in numbering of houses or businesses under this chapter shall
not be less than three inches (3") in height and all figures making such number
shall be uniform in size, style and composition. (Prior code §24-32)
12.12.080: DIAGONAL STREETS:
All buildings and lots on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as the
north and south streets if the diagonal runs more from north to the south, and
the same of east and west streets if the diagonal runs more from the east to
the west. (Prior code §24-30)
12.12.090: UNEXTENDED STREETS:
All streets not extending through to the baseline shall be assigned the same
relative numbers as if the street extended to the baselines. (Prior code §24-
31)
12.12.100: OWNER REQUIRED TO AFFIX NUMBER:
It shall be the duty of the property owner or person in charge of any house or
place of business having entrance from any street in this city to number the
same in the manner provided by this chapter within ninety (90) days after
notice in writing has been served upon him by the city. (Prior code §24-33)
12.12.110: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any owner, agent or person having control of such dwellings or business houses
in the city who shall fail, neglect or refuse to number or keep and maintain on
such dwelling, house or business a number as herein provided, or shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any such provisions of this chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined in
any sum not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Prior code §24-34)
CHAPTER 12.16
CUTTING AND EXCAVATION
SECTION:
12.16.010: Permit To Excavate Or Cut Public Curbs, Streets, Or Pathways;
Required
12.16.020: Permit Application
12.16.030: Permit Issuance
12.16.040: Fees
12.16.050: Action On Application For Permit; Appeal
12.16.060: Definition Of Public Pathway
12.16.070: Penalty
12.16.010: PERMIT TO EXCAVATE OR CUT PUBLIC CURBS, STREETS, OR PATHWAYS;
REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or in any way demolish any public
curb, sidewalk, street or pathway, or to perform any excavation within any
public street or right of way without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the city's building official, as defined in the latest edition of the
international building code adopted by the city of Jerome, as it now exists or
as it may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
12.16.020: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Applications for any permit required by section
12.16.010 of this chapter shall be made in writing on such forms as prescribed
by the city, and shall include, in addition to whatever other information the
city may require, the location, character, extent and purpose of the work for
which the permit is sought. The application shall be submitted to the building
official. (Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
12.16.030: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A.   Every submitted application shall be reviewed by the building official,
who shall determine whether or not to grant the application. In determining
whether or not an application shall be deemed to be within the public interest
and subject to approval, the building official shall consider the following
factors:
   1.   Whether the action proposed by the application would benefit adjacent
real property;
   2.   Whether the work proposed in the application would result in
irreparable damage to a public street, alley or pathway;
   3.   Whether the work proposed would irreparably endanger existing public
water, sewer, or other public improvements;
   4.   Whether the work proposed would unduly hamper or impede the passage of
traffic or persons on a public street, alley or pathway;
   5.   Any other factor which may be presented to the building official, which
may impact upon the general health, safety and well being of the citizens of
Jerome.
B.   Any permit issued by the building official shall, among such other
reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the building official, require the
applicant to backfill, repave, or reinstall any curb, sidewalk or street
disturbed as a result of the work, in keeping with city standards and
specifications, to the satisfaction of the city. The building official shall
inspect all backfill, repaving, or reconstruction as required and give approval
of such activity, in writing, before it shall be deemed accepted by the city.
(Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
12.16.040: FEES:
Every application under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the council by resolution in
effect at the time the application is submitted. (Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
12.16.050: ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; APPEAL:
The building official shall issue a permit for every completed, approved
application accompanied by the proper permit fee, within fifteen (15) calendar
days of its submittal to the building official. Should the application be
denied, the applicant may appeal such decision to the council by filing a
notice of appeal in writing setting forth all grounds for the appeal which
written notice of appeal must be filed with the Jerome city clerk within ten
(10) days of the date upon which the written notice of denial of the
application is mailed by the building official to the applicant at the address
provided by the applicant. (Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
12.16.060: DEFINITION OF PUBLIC PATHWAY:
For purposes of this chapter, the term "public pathway" shall mean any bike
path, hiking path, or any other similar path which is publicly owned and
intended for pedestrian and/or bicycle use by the public. The term shall
include all existing bike paths owned by the Jerome recreation district and
such additional bike paths as may be established by the Jerome recreation
district in the future. (Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
12.16.070: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1062 §2, 2009)
CHAPTER 12.20
OBSTRUCTIONS AND FOREIGN MATTER IN STREETS 1
SECTION:
12.20.010: Allowing Irrigation Water To Be Run Upon Street
12.20.020: Obstruction Of Streets And Sidewalks; Generally
12.20.030: Depositing Rubbish On Streets
12.20.040: Spilling Vehicle Loads On Streets
12.20.050: Utility Poles; Prohibited On Main Street; Exception
12.20.060: Utility Poles; Movement To Alleys
12.20.070: Utility Poles; Location In Streets Generally
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-314.
12.20.010: ALLOWING IRRIGATION WATER TO BE RUN UPON STREET:
No person shall run, or permit to be run, into or upon any public street,
boulevard or avenue within the city, any irrigation water used by such person,
and when such water is run into or upon such street, boulevard or avenue as the
result of the wilfulness or negligence of such person, the same shall
constitute a misdemeanor. (Prior code §24-1)
12.20.020: OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; GENERALLY:
A.   In General: "Obstruction of streets and sidewalks generally" shall mean:
   1.   Obstruction Of Street Or Sidewalk Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person to place or leave or permit to be placed or left in any street, or
sidewalk, or alley, any wagon, cart, dray, barrow, handcart, sleigh or other
vehicle, or any lumber, wood, timber or any other article or thing whatsoever,
in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere in any manner with the public use
of any street or sidewalk.
   2.   Parking Of Trailer, Motor Home Or Boat Transporter: It is unlawful for
any person to place, leave, or permit to be placed or left in any street any
trailer, motor home or boat transporter for more than seventy two (72)
consecutive hours.
   3.   Exception: Any "speed trailer", "reader board", "display board" or
public safety device used for law enforcement or prevention purposes is
excepted from the prohibited conduct set forth above.
B.   Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   MOTOR HOME: A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters,
built into an integral part of or permanently attached to a self-propelled
motor vehicle chassis.
   TRAILER:
   1.   Generally: Every vehicle without motive power designed to carry persons
or property and for being drawn by motor vehicle.
   2.   Fifth Wheel Trailer: A vehicular unit equipped in the same manner as a
travel trailer, but constructed with a raised forward section that allows a
bilevel floor plan. This style is designed to be towed by a vehicle equipped
with a device known as a fifth wheel hitch, which is typically installed in the
bed of a pickup truck.
   3.   Fold Down Camping Trailer: A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels
and constructed with collapsible partial side walls, which fold for towing by
another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living
quarters, for recreational, camping or travel use.
   4.   Park Trailer: A trailer designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle,
and of such size and weight as not to require special highway movement permit.
It is designed for seasonal or temporary living quarters and may be connected
to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. It
is hooked on a single permanent chassis and constructed to permit setup by
persons without special skills.
   5.   Pull Trailer: Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn
by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or
pull or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes, or structured members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   6.   Semitrailer: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
the towing vehicle.
   7.   Travel Trailer: A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels, designed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
emergency use and of such size or weight as not to require special highway
movement permits when towed by a motorized vehicle.
   8.   Utility Trailer: Every trailer or semitrailer designed primarily to be
drawn behind a passenger car or pickup truck for domestic and utility purposes.
Utility or domestic use shall include a farm trailer while being used to haul
agricultural products or livestock from farm to storage, market, or processing
plant, or returning therefrom.
   9.   Speed Trailer, Reader Board, Display Board Or Other Public Safety
Device: A "utility trailer", cart, or other public safety device owned and/or
used by law enforcement or a public agency which is equipped with a device
capable of measuring and displaying in large digits the speed of oncoming
traffic. Reader boards or display boards are owned by a public agency to make
public service announcements.
   TRANSPORTER: Any vehicle combination designed and used specifically to
transport assembled boats and boat hulls.
C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who violates a term or provision of this
section should be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) including court costs and fees. Each and every day the
violation continues shall be a separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 1099,
2012: Ord. 1018 §1, 2006: Ord. 1006 §1, 2006: prior code §24-5)
12.20.030: DEPOSITING RUBBISH ON STREETS:
It is unlawful to throw, cast or lay any ashes, offal, shavings, dirt, filth,
soapsuds, filthy water or rubbish of any kind whatsoever, in any street,
sidewalk, watercourse, ditch, lane, alley or public place, except at such
places as may be designated by city authorities within the city. (Prior code
§24-6)
12.20.040: SPILLING VEHICLE LOADS ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle loaded with ashes, cinders, coal,
sand, gravel, mortar, tin cans, rubbish or similar materials to permit or allow
the load or any part thereof to scatter along the street. (Prior code §24-7)
12.20.050: UTILITY POLES; PROHIBITED ON MAIN STREET; EXCEPTION:
No telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles shall be placed upon
Main Street, in the city, except by permission of the city council. (Prior code
§24-8)
12.20.060: UTILITY POLES; MOVEMENT TO ALLEYS:
Whenever repairs to, or the reconstruction of, any telegraph, telephone,
electric light or other line, shall amount to a rebuilding of same, such line
shall be removed to the alleys or the middle of the blocks, except if
permission be granted by the city council for its continuance on the streets.
(Prior code §24-9)
12.20.070: UTILITY POLES; LOCATION IN STREETS GENERALLY:
All poles placed on the streets of the city shall be placed at the inner edge
of the curb line. (Prior code §24-10)
CHAPTER 12.24
STREET SPRINKLING
SECTION:
12.24.010: Local Sprinkling District 1
12.24.010: LOCAL SPRINKLING DISTRICT 1:
A.   Local sprinkling district 1 of the city shall embrace the territory
described in this section for the purpose of sprinkling the streets within the
city within such territory. The territory embraced in such district shall be:
all streets and avenues within the city.
B.   The cost and expense of the sprinkling district shall be taxed and
assessed upon all lots fronting thereon in proportion to the number of feet of
such lots and in proportion to the benefits derived therefrom. (Prior code §24-
4)
CHAPTER 12.28
PARKS
SECTION:
12.28.010: Purpose And Construction Of Chapter
12.28.020: Rules And Regulations; Promulgation Authorized
12.28.030: Rules And Regulations; Posting
12.28.035: Permits For Use Of Public Parks
12.28.037: Hours
12.28.040: Violation; Penalty
12.28.010: PURPOSE AND CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city,
acting in its governmental capacity for the protection of the health, welfare,
morals, safety and cleanliness of the city and all its provisions shall be
liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (Prior code §18-1)
12.28.020: RULES AND REGULATIONS; PROMULGATION AUTHORIZED:
The mayor and council may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations governing
the use of the public parks, skate park, swimming pools, public playgrounds,
tennis courts, athletic fields, picnic grounds and other public places, and
other buildings or grounds of any kind or description, to which the public has
general access. (Ord. 1127, 2014)
12.28.030: RULES AND REGULATIONS; POSTING:
A.   After the adoption of any such rules and regulations pursuant to section
 12.28.020 of this chapter, same rules and regulations shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to any swimming pool, park, skate
park, public playground, tennis court, athletic field, picnic grounds or public
building, a copy of any rules and regulations adopted by governing the use of
such facility.
B.   Such regulations shall be either typewritten or printed in plain English
so that the same may be easily read by persons using any of the facilities of
the grounds or buildings governed by such rules and regulations. (Ord. 1127,
2014)
12.28.035: PERMITS FOR USE OF PUBLIC PARKS:
A.   Applications For Private Use of Public Parks:
   1.   Any person or entity seeking to reserve a public park in the city for
any private use must complete a written application form provided by the City
Clerk, which shall contain the following information:
      a.   The name of the person or entity conducting the activity.
      b.   The event, if any, pursuant to which the activity will be conducted.
      c.   Specific description of any commercial activities to be conducted as
part of the activity.
      d.   The dates upon which the activities will be conducted.
      e.   The exact location within each public park where the commercial
activity will be conducted.
      f.   The expected duration of the activity.
      g.   Any other information required by the City Clerk.
      h.   Each application shall include an attachment for the Applicant to
keep that includes a checklist of items that must be attended to by the
applicant following the close of the activity.
   2.   Each application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   3.   Deposit. No Permit for Private Use of a City Park involving any two of
the conditions listed herein will be issued until approved by City Council and
until the Applicant has made a security and cleaning deposit in the sum of
$300.00. Deposits are refundable in the sole discretion of the Parks
Supervisor. A refund of the Deposit will be based upon the Applicant’s
compliance with the terms and conditions of its application and its compliance
with post-event checklist included with the Application. Activities involving
two of the following conditions shall pay the Deposit:
      a.   Any event reserving more than one shelter, including the
amphitheater at ICCU Park;
      b.   Any event lasting more than 3 hours; or
      c.   Any event involving commercial sales of goods or services of any
kind.
   4.   Applications involving commercial activity shall be considered by the
city council at its next regular city council meeting following the date of the
submission of the completed application to the city clerk. Applications may be
approved as part of the City Council’s Consent Agenda. Any application denied
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Council prior to final decision on
the denial. Any application may be approved, denied or approved with conditions
found acceptable by the Council.
   5.   Should the council approve the application, the Deposit shall become
due and upon the making of said Deposit and proof of insurance, a permit shall
be issued to the applying entity to conduct the activity which permit shall
provide:
      a.   The date, the name of the person or entity in which the permit is
issued.
      b.   The time, duration, place and date at which the activity may be
conducted.
      c.   The exact nature of the activity which may be conducted.
      d.   The effective date of the Permit, which shall be the date it is
issued by the City.
B.   Insurance. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Applicant shall
provide proof to the city of the placement of public liability insurance in an
amount not to exceed the single limit coverage of at least five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) of which policy the city has been made an
additional insured. A permit shall further be issued subject to the
understanding by the applicant that by obtaining the permit it agrees to hold
harmless and indemnify the City, from all liability which may arise from, touch
or concern the commercial activity permitted by the City. (Ord. 1127, 2014;
amd. Ord. 1218, 3-21-2023)
12.28.037: HOURS:
A.   Prohibition: No person shall remain within the boundaries of any public
park or public tennis court between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following morning.
B.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the terms "public park" and
"public tennis court" shall refer to any park or tennis court owned by the city
or the Jerome recreation district.
C.   Exceptions: The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to:
   1.   Any person traveling through a public park by foot or other lawful
means without stopping or loitering;
   2.   The public tennis court located at the intersection of 1st and Buchanan
in the city;
   3.   Any person who is a part of a group which has been permitted by the
city council, after application on a suitable form, to use the public park or
public tennis court for a specific event, the dates and times for which shall
be specified on the permit. Each application under this section shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and shall
include:
      a.   The name of the sponsoring group.
      b.   The event for which the permit is sought.
      c.   The dates and times for which the event is sought.
      d.   Security and noise abatement arrangements.
      e.   Such other provisions as may be reasonably required.
   4.   This section shall not be construed to supersede any other provision of
this code requiring permits for the use of public parks.
D.   Emergencies: Any public park or public tennis court may be closed to the
public during any emergency wherein the public health, safety, or welfare is
clearly threatened by any occurrence. The order of closure may be entered by
the chief of police or mayor.
E.   Penalty: A violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord.
1127, 2014)
12.28.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of the rules or regulations adopted
by the mayor and council, as provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of an
offense, punishable as follows:
A.   First Offense: A first offense shall be an infraction punishable by a fine
of fifty dollars ($50.00).
B.   Second Offense: A second offense committed within one calendar year shall
be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or
six (6) months in jail. (Ord. 1127, 2014)
CHAPTER 12.30
TREES
SECTION:
12.30.010: Policy Statement
12.30.020: City Administrator
12.30.030: Tree Committee
12.30.040: Authority And Control Over Trees
12.30.050: Permit Required For Action To Trees; Application
12.30.060: Definitions
12.30.070: Trimming And Pruning Of Trees
12.30.080: Unlawful To Abuse Trees
12.30.090: Hedges And Shrubbery
12.30.100: Penalty
12.30.010: POLICY STATEMENT:
The city hereby declares that it shall be the policy of the city to protect
trees planted and growing within the public rights of way, city parks, and
other real property owned by the city, or over which it has the right to
control trees. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.020: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The city administrator shall administer the provisions of this chapter and
shall have all administrative powers in connection therewith which are not
specifically assigned to some other person or body. Administrator shall have
the following authority and duties:
A.   Supervise planting, pruning, spraying, preserving and removing of trees
and other work authorized by this chapter;
B.   Prepare and distribute rules and regulations containing guidelines for the
pruning of trees;
C.   Prepare a tree list consisting of acceptable varieties, size of trees,
property planting and spacing instructions for trees. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.030: TREE COMMITTEE:
There is hereby created a tree committee to consist of five (5) members to be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The members of the
committee shall be eligible and registered voters of the city. The terms of
office for the first members shall be one, two (2) and three (3) years, to be
determined by lot and thereafter the term for each member shall be three (3)
years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through expiration of terms shall be
filled by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members may be removed
after a hearing before the city council by a majority vote of the city council.
Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall
serve without compensation.
A.   Organization And Meetings: Meetings of the committee shall be held when
duly called by the chairman upon reasonable prior written or oral notice. A
majority of the members of the committee shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum at any meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. Written rules
consistent with this chapter and the laws of the state for the transaction of
business of the committee shall be adopted and a written record of meetings
kept.
B.   Duties Of Committee: The duties of the tree committee shall include, but
are not limited to, the following:
   1.   Provide advice to the mayor and city council as to appropriate
practices for the preservation, protection and management of trees subject to
this chapter.
   2.   Assist the city administrator in taking an inventory of all existing
trees on all city properties.
   3.   Assist the city administrator in providing information to the public
through educational campaigns, published material and other opportunities.
   4.   Assist the city administrator in implementing Arbor Day celebrations
and activities.
   5.   Encourage and solicit donation and other funding for city tree
projects.
   6.   Identify and implement suitable landscaping projects for city property.
   7.   Assist the city administrator to plan and review applicable budgets and
to make recommendations to the mayor and city council. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.040: AUTHORITY AND CONTROL OVER TREES:
The mayor and the city council have complete authority over all trees on or
within real property owned or controlled by the city. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.050: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ACTION TO TREES; APPLICATION:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, trim, cut or in any
way damage any tree or within real property owned or controlled by the city
without first procuring a permit to do so from the city administrator,
provided, that no permit shall first be required in situations where public
inconvenience would result from the delay entailed in obtaining a permit or
where such delay would place life, limb or property in jeopardy.
B.   Any person desiring a permit to plant, remove, cut or in any way damage a
tree on or within the city properties shall file with the city administrator an
application to do so on forms to be furnished by the city administrator setting
forth therein in detail the work that is contemplated and the location and
address of the same. Upon the filing of such application, the city
administrator shall investigate the contemplated work and if in his judgment it
is desirable and within the parameters of this chapter, shall issue a written
permit therefor; provided that the work authorized in such permit shall be done
under the supervision of the city administrator or his designee. (Ord. 847 §1,
1998)
12.30.060: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter whenever the following words are used, the
intent and meanings shall be interpreted as follows:
   CITY PROPERTY: Real property dedicated, deeded or leased to the city or
otherwise under the physical control of the city, including, but not limited
to, public rights of way and city parks.
   HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY: Any plant of more than two feet (2') but less than
eight feet (8') in height.
   OWNER: The legal owner or owners of the real property adjacent to a public
street in the city of Jerome, Idaho.
   PARKWAY: That portion of a street between a roadway and a sidewalk.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company,
association, corporation, group or combination acting as a unit.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used by
the public for vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used by
the public for pedestrian travel.
   STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of a public right of way
dedicated or deeded to the city for use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel, whether or not maintained by the city and whether or not open for
vehicular traffic.
   TREES: Any plant which at maturity would exceed a height of more than eight
feet (8'). (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.070: TRIMMING AND PRUNING OF TREES:
A.   Trees on or within the city property shall at all times be so trimmed and
pruned that there shall be at least seven and one- half feet (71/2') of clear
space between the surface of the sidewalk or parkway, as the case may be, and
the overhanging branches and leaves, and so that there is at least thirteen
feet (13') of clear space between the surface of the roadway and the
overhanging branches and leaves.
B.   The branches or leaves of any tree, which overhang any sidewalk, parkway
or roadway present in such manner as to create a hazard to, or impediment to
the progress or vision of any person traveling on any street, sidewalk or
roadway, or which covers, endangers or impairs the view of any traffic control
device by a person operating a motor vehicle on a roadway, including any
branches or leaves with the restricted areas mentioned in subsection A of this
section, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, whether or not within the
restricted areas mentioned in subsection A of this section.
C.   Each owner of property abutting on a street shall at all times keep pruned
and trimmed all trees on his property which abut this property so as at all
times to prevent such branches and leaves from protruding within the restricted
area mentioned in subsection A of this section and from constituting a public
nuisance under subsection B of this section. Each owner of property shall also
treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect ridden as to constitute
a hazard to trees or plants in public places.
D.   Any tree which shall endanger or damage the usefulness of any street,
roadway, sidewalk, parkway or public sewer or water line, whether growing on
private property or on a parkway, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
and each owner of property abutting on a street shall at all times keep trimmed
and pruned all trees, including the pruning and trimming of branches, leaves
and roots, growing on his property which abut this property so as to prevent
such trees from damaging or endangering the usefulness of any street, sidewalk,
roadway, parkway, or public sewer or water line. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.080: UNLAWFUL TO ABUSE TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse, damage or mutilate any tree, in
any parkway, or in any public place, or to attach or place any rope or wire,
other than one used to support a young or broken tree, or any sign, poster,
handbill, advertisement or other thing to or on any tree, growing on any
parkway or public place or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity
to come in contact with any such tree, or to cause or permit any gaseous,
liquid or solid substance which may be harmful to any such tree to come in
contact with the tree. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
12.30.090: HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/
or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the city. (Ord.
847 §1, 1998)
12.30.100: PENALTY:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 847 §1,
1998)
CHAPTER 12.32
ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS
SECTION:
12.32.010: Definition Of Terms
12.32.020: Prohibited Use
12.32.030: Penalty
12.32.010: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
For purposes of this chapter terms shall be defined as follows:
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: The area within the central business district
zone boundary line as shown on the current city of Jerome planning and zoning
map.
   ROLLER SKATES; ROLLERBLADES: Any footwear or other device which can be
attached to the foot containing wheels in contact with the surface as a means
of transporting the wearer. "Rollerblades" refers to any such footwear or
device with in-line wheels.
   SKATEBOARD: A board or platform of any material containing wheels in contact
with the surface upon which an individual may ride as a means of transporting
that individual. (Ord. 920 §1, 2002)
12.32.020: PROHIBITED USE:
A.   No person may use or operate roller skates, rollerblades or a skateboard
on the public streets or public sidewalks in a central business district.
B.   No person may use or operate roller skates, rollerblades or a skateboard
in a reckless or inattentive manner so as to threaten the safety of that person
or any other person or property. (Ord. 920 §1, 2002)
12.32.030: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 920 §1, 2002)
TITLE 13
WATER, SEWERS AND PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 13.04
SEWER SYSTEM; GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
13.04.010: Definitions
13.04.020: Unlawful Disposal Of Human Or Animal Excrement, Garbage And Waste
13.04.030: Discharge Of Sewage Into Natural Outlets
13.04.040: Sewer Connection Requirement
13.04.050: Damage Or Destruction Of Sewerage System; Violation Deemed
Disorderly Conduct
13.04.060: Limitation Of City Liability For Interruption Of Service
13.04.070: City Administrator Inspection Duty
13.04.080: Violation; Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-332.
13.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
                The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
BOD:            organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
                at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in parts per million
                by weight.
                That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which
                receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
BUILDING DRAIN: inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
                sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the
                building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
                place of disposal.
CITY            City administrator or representative of the city administrator.
ADMINISTRATOR:
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both sewage and surface runoff.
                Any place of business, manufacturing facility, or other enterprise
COMMERCIAL      not primarily used as a residence, connected to the city sewage
USER:           collection system, and which does not meet the definition of an
                industrial user.
GARBAGE:        Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food,
                and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
                A source of indirect discharge of effluent into the POTW by means of
                pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage
INDUSTRIAL      ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed
USER:           devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. This term includes
                federal, state, and local facilities as part of the regulated
                community, and shall not include “domestic user.”
INDUSTRIAL      The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from
WASTES:         sanitary sewer.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
                surface or ground water.
OWNER:          The person or entity who owns fee simple title to the real property
                being provided with wastewater collection and treatment services.
PERSON:         Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
                group.
pH:             The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
                grams per liter of solution.
                The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that
PROPERLY        have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried
SHREDDED        freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
GARBAGE:        sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
                dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER:   A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
                rights, and is controlled by public authority.
RESIDENTIAL     Any single- or multiple-dwelling unit connected to the city sewage
USER:           collection system.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground
                waters are not intentionally admitted.
                A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
SEWAGE:         buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
                with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE
TREATMENT       Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
PLANT:
SEWAGE WORKS:   All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of
                sewage.
SEWER:          A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
                Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
                concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
SLUG:           exceeds for any period of duration more than fifteen (15) minutes
                and more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour
                concentration or flow expected during normal operation.
STORM SEWER OR  A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but
STORM DRAIN:    excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
SUPERINTENDENT: The city, or its authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
SUSPENDED       Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in
SOLIDS:         water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by
                laboratory filtering.
                The person occupying or in possession of the real property to which
USER:           wastewater treatment and collection services are provided and/or the
                person who has made application for the domestic water services
                provided to that real property.
WATERCOURSE:    A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
                intermittently. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 1076, 2010)
 
13.04.020: UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF HUMAN OR ANIMAL EXCREMENT, GARBAGE AND WASTE:
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
an insanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste. (Prior code §23-2)
13.04.030: DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE INTO NATURAL OUTLETS:
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial
wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code §23-3)
13.04.040: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENT:
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of
official notice to do so; provided, that such public sewer is within one
hundred feet (100') of the property line. (Prior code §23-4)
13.04.050: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM; VIOLATION DEEMED
DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Prior code §23-5)
13.04.060: LIMITATION OF CITY LIABILITY FOR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
The city shall not be liable for damage to any sewer user by reason of a
stoppage or other interruption of his water supply or sewer disposal service
caused by scarcity of water, accidents to the sewage works, alterations,
additions, or repairs to the sewer system, or from other unavoidable causes
beyond the control of the city. (Prior code §23-6)
13.04.070: CITY ADMINISTRATOR INSPECTION DUTY:
The city administrator, or an employee of the city designated by him, shall
perform all duties of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing required by this chapter. (Ord. 722 §1, 1990: Ord. 627(PPP), 1980:
prior code §23-7)
13.04.080: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
section
13.04.050 of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation. (Prior code §23-8)
CHAPTER 13.08
PRIVATE SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.08.010: Chapter Conformity Requirement
13.08.020: When Allowed
13.08.030: Permit; Requirement (Rep. by Ord. 722, 1990)
13.08.040: Permit; Not Effective Until City Inspection And Approval
13.08.050: General Requirements (Rep. by Ord. 722, 1990)
13.08.060: Sanitary Operation Requirement
13.08.070: Abandonment And Filling Upon Public Sewer Availability
13.08.075: Classification Of Building Sewer Connection Permits
13.08.080: Authority To Impose Additional Requirements
13.08.010: CHAPTER CONFORMITY REQUIREMENT:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Prior code §23-9)
13.08.020: WHEN ALLOWED:
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions
of section
13.04.040 of this title the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior
code §23-10)
13.08.030: PERMIT; REQUIREMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 722, 1990)
13.08.040: PERMIT; NOT EFFECTIVE UNTIL CITY INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within forty eight (48) hours of the
receipt of notice by the superintendent. (Prior code §23-12)
13.08.050: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 722, 1990)
13.08.060: SANITARY OPERATION REQUIREMENT:
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Prior code §23-14)
13.08.070: ABANDONMENT AND FILLING UPON PUBLIC SEWER AVAILABILITY:
A.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in section
13.04.040 of this title, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with clean
bank run gravel or dirt.
B.   The city may upon majority vote of the city council allow a private sewage
disposal facility to remain in use, after showing has been made to the
satisfaction of the council that the existing system is equivalent to the
public wastewater treatment system. (Ord. 674 §§1, 2, 1984: Ord. 622 §2, 1979:
prior code §23-15)
13.08.075: CLASSIFICATION OF BUILDING SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS:
A.   There shall be five (5) classes of sewer permits:
   1.   Single-family residential services;
   2.   Mobile home park residential services;
   3.   Multi-family dwelling residential services;
   4.   Commercial services;
   5.   Industrial waste services.
B.   The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the city which shall indicate which class of building sewer permit is
sought. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
city administrator. A permit and inspection fee shall be assessed for each
class of permit as follows:
   1.   Single-family residential connection, eight hundred dollars ($800.00);
   2.   Manufactured home park residential connection, eight hundred dollars
($800.00) for initial manufactured home space; six hundred dollars ($600.00)
for each additional manufactured home space;
   3.   Multi-family dwelling residential connection, eight hundred dollars
($800.00) for first dwelling unit; six hundred dollars ($600.00) for each
additional dwelling unit;
   4.   Commercial connection.
      a.   "Light commercial connection", defined as a business with less than
ten (10) employees and a private restroom, eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per
connection.
      b.   "Heavy commercial connection", defined as a business with more than
eleven (11) employees or which has a public restroom, three thousand five
hundred dollars ($3,500.00) per connection.
   5.   Industrial connection, a fee determined on an individual basis after
analysis of flow, loadings, and other criteria.
C.   All building connection permit fees shall be paid to the city by the
applicant at the time application is filed. (Ord. 954 §3, 2004: Ord. 804 §1,
1996: Ord. 722 §2C, 1990: Ord. 674 §§1, 2, 1984: Ord. 622 §2, 1979: prior code
§23-15)
13.08.080: AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the department of environment
(state of Idaho) or the city administrator. (Ord. 722 §2, 1990: prior code §23-
16)
CHAPTER 13.12
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
13.12.010: Permit; Required
13.12.020: Permit; Required; Fee
13.12.030: Costs Borne By Property Owner; Indemnification Of City For Loss Or
Damage
13.12.040: Separate Sewer Requirement For Each Building; Unconnected Trailers
Prohibited
13.12.050: Use Of Old Building Sewers In New Buildings
13.12.060: General Specifications
13.12.070: Size And Slope
13.12.080: Location Restrictions
13.12.090: Lifting Sewage By Artificial Means When Gravity Flow Not Practicable
13.12.100: Excavations Generally
13.12.110: Joints And Connections Generally (Rep. by Ord. 722 §3, 1990)
13.12.120: Antiflow Back Valves Required For Certain Sewer Connections
13.12.130: Manner Of Entering Public Sewer
13.12.140: Notification For Inspection
13.12.150: Use Of Barricades; Restoration Of Streets And Sidewalks
13.12.010: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. (Prior code §23-17)
13.12.020: PERMIT; REQUIRED; FEE:
Permits required by section
 13.12.010 of this chapter shall be issued upon applications by the owner or
his agent on forms to be provided by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the city administrator. A permit, inspection and
connection fee in amounts set forth in section
13.08.075 of this title shall be paid to the city at the time the application
is filed. (Ord. 722 §3, 1990: prior code §23-18)
13.12.030: COSTS BORNE BY PROPERTY OWNER; INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY FOR LOSS OR
DAMAGE:
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner; provided, however, that the actual
connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be made by a
licensed plumber or the owner under the direct supervision of the city's
approved inspector, such connections shall be made in accordance with section
 13.12.130 of this chapter. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer. (Ord. 722 §3, 1990: prior code §23-19)
13.12.040: SEPARATE SEWER REQUIREMENT FOR EACH BUILDING; UNCONNECTED TRAILERS
PROHIBITED:
A.   A separate and independent building sewer with a minimum diameter of four
inches (4") shall be provided for every house, building and property mentioned
and provided for in section
13.04.040 of this title; provided, however, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; and provided,
further, however, that when adequate piping capacities, meeting the
requirements of this chapter are provided, properties and buildings designed
for, and used as, trailer courts, parks and motels may use one building sewer
for such properties, and each trailer and building shall be required to be
connected with the building sewer provided for such properties. Maintenance,
upkeep and repair of such building sewers shall be borne by owners of the
property up to and including the connection to the city's collection line.
B.   No trailer used for human occupancy shall be permitted in the city unless
it shall be connected with a public building sewer. (Ord. 722 §3, 1990: prior
code §23-20)
13.12.050: USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS IN NEW BUILDINGS:
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter. (Prior code §23-21)
13.12.060: GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS:
The building sewer shall be four inch (4") PVC ASTM D2729 T21 sewer and drain
pipe, or equivalent, such as ABS pipe of four inch (4") diameter. Joints shall
be properly cleaned and joined with a cement compatible with type of pipe used.
Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet (10') of a water
service pipe shall be encased within at least schedule 40 ABS pipe with proper
seals and plugs at each end. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the
building sewer shall be schedule 40 ABS pipe ASTM F 628-88 up on a suitable
concrete bed or cradle as approved by inspector. All building sewers which
cross over rock outcroppings shall be bedded with at least two inches (2") of
sand on grade. (Ord. 722 §3, 1990: prior code §23-22)
13.12.070: SIZE AND SLOPE:
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches
(4"). The slope of such four inch (4") pipe shall be not less than one-eighth
inch (1/8") per foot. (Prior code §23-23)
13.12.080: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to
or within three feet (3') of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building
sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and
fittings. (Prior code §23-24)
13.12.090: LIFTING SEWAGE BY ARTIFICIAL MEANS WHEN GRAVITY FLOW NOT
PRACTICABLE:
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. (Prior code
§23-25)
13.12.100: EXCAVATIONS GENERALLY:
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification (C-12-19)
except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected.
(Prior code §23-26)
13.12.110: JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS GENERALLY:
(Rep. by Ord. 722 §3, 1990)
13.12.120: ANTIFLOW BACK VALVES REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SEWER CONNECTIONS:
A.   All plumbing installations for sewer service lines of the city which
require openings into the sewer service lines within the same elevations as the
main sewer line, or which are basement sewer line connections, or which are
from single level buildings which may be determined to be within a critical
distance of any lift station on such main sewer line of the city, such distance
to be determined by the city public works director, shall be required to have
installed on such sewer connection line, an antiflow back valve on such
effluent line prior to entry into the city main sewer connection line, and such
antiflow back valve shall be located in an accessible location for cleaning and
repair by the premises owner.
B.   The city shall inspect all building permit applications to determine
whether or not such building sewer connection to the main sewer line is within
a category above specified, and if so, the owner of such premises shall be
notified of the requirements hereof, prior to completion of such sewer line
connection. The line shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector
or authorized agent of the city.
C.   No premises hereafter erected or to be hereafter connected to the sewer
connection system of the city shall be allowed to connect the sewer effluent
line to the main connection system prior to installation of the antiflow back
valve as herein provided and inspection by the proper official of the city.
D.   All residences and premises hereinbefore connected to the sewer connection
system of the city, which have had two (2) or more incidents of sewage backup,
shall be required to install, at their own expense, an antiflow back valve as
hereinbefore described. The city will not be responsible for any damage
incurred after such antiflow back valve is required to be installed, pursuant
to this section.
E.   All antiflow back valves to be installed as required in this chapter shall
be of sufficient size and capacity to insure operation and shall be maintained
at all times in operable condition by the owner of the premises. (Prior code
§23-27.1)
13.12.130: MANNER OF ENTERING PUBLIC SEWER:
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made no
closer than two inches (2") from the bell or joint of the public sewer, a neat
hole may be cut, chiseled, topped or drilled to receive the building sewer.
Such holes shall be placed at approximately ten o'clock (10:00) or two o'clock
(2:00) depending on side of entry, with a diameter just in excess of the pipe
being used, but small enough to prevent entry of a joining collar or fitting. A
twenty two and one-half degree (221/2°) or forty five degree (45°) ell may be
used with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the
public sewer. This may also be accomplished with a coupler and a short section
of pipe. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and
watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings or saddles may be used
for the connection only when approved by the city's appointed inspector. (Ord.
722 §3, 1990: prior code §23-28)
13.12.140: NOTIFICATION FOR INSPECTION:
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city employee so
designated by the city administrator when the connection is ready for
inspection and connection to the public collection system. The actual
connection shall be made under the direct supervision of the appointed city
inspector. (Ord. 722 §3, 1990: prior code §23-29)
13.12.150: USE OF BARRICADES; RESTORATION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Prior code §23-
30)
CHAPTER 13.16
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY
SECTION:
13.16.010: Certain Discharges Prohibited Into Sanitary Sewer
13.16.020: Stormwater And All Other Unpolluted Drainage Discharge
13.16.030: Prohibited Discharges
13.16.040: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors; Required; Construction
Specifications (Rep. by Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.16.050: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors; Maintenance (Rep. by Ord. 1045,
2008)
13.16.060: Preliminary Treatment; When Required
13.16.070: Preliminary Treatment; Maintenance Of Facilities
13.16.080: Control Manhole; When Required
13.16.090: Control Manhole; Use Generally
13.16.100: Special Agreement On Discharge Of Certain Waste
13.16.010: CERTAIN DISCHARGES PROHIBITED INTO SANITARY SEWER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, irrigation water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Prior
code §23-31)
13.16.020: STORMWATER AND ALL OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE:
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the
superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. (Prior code
§23-32)
13.16.030: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the director of public works that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the director of public works will give consideration to such factors as
to quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
   1.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
   2.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F);
   3.   Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) parts
per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or grease;
   4.   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   5.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Installation and
operation of any garbage grinder with a motor of 0.75 horsepower or greater
shall be subject to review and approval by the superintendent;
   6.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, hair,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch material, manure, or any other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
   7.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;
   8.   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   9.   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant;
   10.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
   11.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the superintendent for such materials;
   12.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the superintendent as necessary after the treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
   13.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
   14.   Materials which exert or cause:
      a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
      b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions);
      c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
      d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined in this section;
   15.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
B.   If any waters or wastewaters are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in this section, and which in the judgment of
the city administrator, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
treatment facility, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
administrator may:
   1.   Reject the wastes;
   2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
   4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes
not covered by sewer charges under the provisions of section
13.20.010 of this title.
C.   If the city administrator permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
by established industry methods, and shall be subject to approval of the city
administrator or his appointed agent. Effluent from pretreatment facilities
shall be subject to the requirements of title 40, part 403, "General
Pretreatment Regulations For Existing And New Sources Of Pollution", the code
of federal regulations. The requirements of title 40, part 403 shall supersede
conflicting local requirements. (Ord. 722 §4, 1990: Ord. 622 §3, 1980: prior
code §23-33)
13.16.040: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS; REQUIRED; CONSTRUCTION
SPECIFICATIONS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 1045, 2008)
 
Notes
  1. See sections
1 13.18.1200 through
  13.18.1290 of this title.
13.16.050: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS; MAINTENANCE 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 1045, 2008)
 
Notes
  2. See sections
1 13.18.1200 through
  13.18.1290 of this title.
13.16.060: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; WHEN REQUIRED:
A.   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having:
   1.   A five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred
(300) parts per million by weight; or
   2.   Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by
weight of suspended solids; or
   3.   Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics
described in section
13.16.030 of this chapter; or
   4.   Having an average daily flow of 0.025 million gallons per day, in any
one day or a flow that will average more than 0.025 million gallons per day for
a monthly period.
B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
   1.   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per
million and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million
by weight; or
   2.   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents within the maximum
limits provided for in section
13.16.030 of this chapter; or
   3.   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
superintendent and of the water pollution control commission of the state, and
no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is
obtained in writing. (Ord. 722 §4, 1990: prior code §23-36)
13.16.070: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation,
by the owner at his expense. (Prior code §23-37)
13.16.080: CONTROL MANHOLE; WHEN REQUIRED:
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Prior code §23-38)
13.16.090: CONTROL MANHOLE; USE GENERALLY:
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in sections
 13.16.030 and
13.16.060 of this chapter shall be determined in accordance with "standard
methods for the examination of water and sewage", and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided for in section
13.16.080 of this chapter, or upon suitable samples taken at such control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. (Prior code §23-
39)
13.16.100: SPECIAL AGREEMENT ON DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WASTE:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(Prior code §23-40)
CHAPTER 13.18
WASTEWATER SYSTEM USER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
General Provisions
13.18.010: Purpose And Policy
13.18.020: Administration
13.18.030: Definitions
13.18.040: Abbreviations
13.18.050: Confidential Information
General Requirements
13.18.100: Prohibited Discharge Standards
13.18.110: Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
13.18.120: State Requirements
13.18.130: Local Limits
13.18.140: City's Right Of Revision
13.18.150: Special Agreement
13.18.160: Dilution
13.18.170: Pretreatment Facilities
13.18.180: Deadline For Compliance With Applicable Pretreatment Requirements
13.18.190: Additional Pretreatment Measures
13.18.200: Accidental Spill Prevention Plans
13.18.210: Septic Tank Wastes
Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements
13.18.300: General Permit Requirements
13.18.310: Existing SIU
13.18.320: New Source And New User
13.18.330: Extrajurisdictional Users
13.18.340: Application Contents
13.18.350: Signatory And Certification Requirement
13.18.360: Decisions
13.18.370: Contents
13.18.380: Appeals
13.18.390: Duration
13.18.400: Modification
13.18.410: Transfer
13.18.420: Revocation
13.18.430: Reissuance
Reporting Requirements
13.18.500: Final Compliance Report (Initial Compliance Report)
13.18.510: Periodic Compliance Report
13.18.520: Compliance Schedules For Meeting Applicable Pretreatment Standards
13.18.530: Notification Of Significant Production Changes And Notification Of
Changes At An SIU Facility
13.18.540: Hazardous Waste Notification
13.18.550: Notice Of Potential Problems, Including Accidental Spills, Slug
Loads
13.18.560: Noncompliance Reporting
13.18.570: Notification Of Changed Discharge
13.18.580: Reports From Unpermitted Users
13.18.590: Record Keeping
Sampling And Analytical Requirements
13.18.600: Sampling Requirements For Users
13.18.610: Analytical Requirements
13.18.620: City Monitoring Of User's Wastewater
Compliance Monitoring
13.18.700: Inspection And Sampling
13.18.710: Monitoring Facilities
13.18.720: Search Warrants
13.18.730: Vandalism
13.18.740: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
13.18.800: Notification Of Violation
13.18.810: Consent Orders
13.18.820: Show Cause Hearing
13.18.830: Compliance Orders
13.18.840: Cease And Desist Orders
13.18.850: Administrative Fines
13.18.860: Emergency Suspensions
13.18.870: Termination Of Discharge (Nonemergency)
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
13.18.900: Injunctive Relief
13.18.910: Civil Penalties
13.18.920: Criminal Prosecution
13.18.930: Remedies Nonexclusive
Supplemental Enforcement Action
13.18.1000: Performance Bonds
13.18.1010: Liability Insurance
13.18.1020: Water Supply Severance
13.18.1030: Public Nuisances
13.18.1040: Informant Rewards
13.18.1050: Contractor Listing
Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
13.18.1100: Upset
13.18.1110: Prohibited Discharge Standards
13.18.1120: Bypass
Grease Management
13.18.1200: Definitions And Abbreviations
13.18.1210: Purpose And Applicability
13.18.1220: Grease Traps And Interceptors
13.18.1230: Food Service Facilities Permitting Program
13.18.1240: Grease Hauler Regulation Program
13.18.1250: Fees
13.18.1260: Appeal Of Permit Denial Or Revocation
13.18.1270: Legal Proceedings
13.18.1280: Penalties
13.18.1290: Administrative Enforcement And Abatement
Charges And Fees
13.18.1300: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.18.010: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) for the city of Jerome (city) and enables the city to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the clean water
act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part
403). The objectives of this chapter are:
A.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
B.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
C.   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
D.   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in
the course of their employment and to protect the general public; and
E.   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge
from the POTW.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance,
and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (Ord. 806
§1, 1996)
13.18.020: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city administrator shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the city administrator may be delegated by the city
administrator to other city personnel. (Ord. 806 §1, 1996)
13.18.030: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
   ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, city
prohibitive standards, city specific pretreatment standards (local limits),
state of Idaho pretreatment standards, or EPA's categorical pretreatment
standards (when effective), whichever standard is appropriate or most
stringent.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
   A.   If the user is a corporation:1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or
a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions
for the corporation; or2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production,
or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or
having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures;
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively;
   C.   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her
designee.
   D.   The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in section
13.18.100. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific
category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405–471.
   CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one of EPA's categorical pretreatment
standards.
   CITY: The city of Jerome or the city council of Jerome or the city
administrator for Jerome or any authorized representatives of these entities/
individuals.
   CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the city to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
   COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
   COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such
as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the
only pollutant added is heat.
   DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes, or
allows the contribution of wastewater into the POTW that is of a similar volume
and/or chemical makeup as that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from
a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one hundred (100) gallons
per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita, and 0.17 pounds of TSS per
capita.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection
agency or, where appropriate, the director of the region 10 office of water, or
other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE: For a categorical industrial user, an "existing source" is
any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior
to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which
will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in
accordance with section 307 of the act.
   EXISTING USER: For noncategorical users, an "existing user" is defined as
any user which is discharging wastewater prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
   GRAB SAMPLE: A sample consisting of either a single discrete sample or
individual samples collected over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15)
minutes. The grab sample should be representative of the wastewater conditions
at the time of sample collection. The sample volume depends on the type and
number of analyses to be performed.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of
the act. The discharge into the POTW is normally by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water
intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto.
   INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, either: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations; b) inhibits or disrupts its sludge
processes, use or disposal; or c) is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the
clean water act; the solid waste disposal act (SWDA), including title II
commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA); any
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the clean air act; the toxic substances
control act.
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration (or loading) of
a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial
flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   NEW SOURCE:
   A.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
      1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
      2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
   C.   Construction of a new source as herein defined has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site
construction program:a. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities
or equipment; orb. Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
   NEW USER: A new user is a user that is not regulated under federal
categorical pretreatment standards but that applies to the city for a new
building permit or occupies an existing building and plans to commence
discharge of wastewater to the city's collection system after the effective
date of this chapter. Any person that buys an existing facility that is
discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an existing user if no
significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.
   PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city's IPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).
   PERMITTEE: A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental
entities.
   pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics
of the wastewater including, but not limited to, pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, or odor.
   PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits established by the city.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in subsections
13.18.100A and B of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works", as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
The term also means the city.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
   SEWER: Any pipe, conduit ditch, or other device used to collect and
transport sewage from the generating source.
   SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
   A.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
   B.   A user that:
      1.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater); or
      2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%)
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
      3.   Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   C.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.
   SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the discharge standards in sections
13.18.100 through
13.18.130 of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to
the standard industrial classification manual issued by the United States
office of management and budget.
   STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
   TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the
United States.
   USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge. The source shall
not include "domestic user" as defined herein.
   WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: An authorization or equivalent control document
issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may
contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements as set forth in
this chapter.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural
shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. (Ord. 1203,
2021: Ord. 806 §1, 1996)
13.18.040: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASPP  - Accidental spill prevention plan
BOD   - Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   - Code of federal regulations
COD   - Chemical oxygen demand
DEQ   - Idaho Department of Environmental Quality
EPA   - U.S. environmental protection agency
gpd   - Gallons per day
IPDES - Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
l     - Liter
LEL   - Lower explosive limit
mg    - Milligrams
mg/l  - Milligrams per liter
NPDES - National pollutant discharge elimination system
O&M   - Operation and maintenance
POTW  - Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  - Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC   - Standard industrial classifications
SWDA  - Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TSS   - Total suspended solids
USC   - United States Code
 
(Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §1, 1996)
13.18.050: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available
to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When
requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the IPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data"
as defined by 40 CFR section 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential
information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord.
1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §7, 1996)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
13.18.100: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A.   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
   1.   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not
limited to, any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, or fuel oil; and, in no case
wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
section 261.21, as amended; and, in no case pollutants which produce readings
on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the POTW or at any point
in the POTW, greater than five percent (5%) of the lower explosive limit of the
meter for any two (2) successive readings nor greater than ten percent (10%) of
the lower explosive limit for the meter for any single reading;
   2.   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to the POTW
structures, equipment, processes, or personnel;
   3.   Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud,
or glass grinding or polishing wastes; and, in no case any other solid or
viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the
POTW resulting in interference; and, in no case solid substances of such
character or quantity that special and unusual attention is required for their
handling;
   4.   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released
in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with
the POTW;
   5.   Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity
in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C) unless the approval
authority, upon the request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits;
   6.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil
origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
   7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
   8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by
the city;
   9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or hazard to life or to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance or repair;
   10.   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the city's IPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of
the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent
(10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
   11.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as
specifically approved by the city administrator in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations;
   12.   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the city administrator;
   13.   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes or from industrial processes, unless specifically authorized
by the city administrator;
   14.   Medical wastes;
   15.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
   16.   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the POTW;
   17.   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its IPDES and/or
other disposal system permits;
   18.   Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the city administrator can
cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special
agreement by the city administrator (except that no special waiver shall be
given from categorical pretreatment standards);
   19.   The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person
in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank waste,
or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained testing and approval
as may be generally required by the city and paid all fees assessed for the
privilege of said discharge;
   20.   Any hazardous wastes as defined in IDAPA 58.01.05 “Rules & Standards
for Hazardous Waste” or in EPA rules 40 CFR part 261;
   21.   Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the federal
insecticide fungicide rodenticide act (FIFRA).
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be
processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.110: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
The national categorical pretreatment standards as amended and promulgated by
EPA pursuant to the act and as found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405–471, are applicable to all users and are hereby incorporated and shall be
enforceable under this chapter. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.120: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW contained in
“Rules Regulating the Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Program” as
amended and promulgated by DEQ, and as found at IDAPA 58.01.25, shall be met by
all users which are subject to such standards and are hereby incorporated and
shall be enforceable under this chapter. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.130: LOCAL LIMITS:
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through
and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of
the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits:
0.186 mg/l arsenic
0.260 mg/l cadmium
3.103 mg/l chromium
3.37  mg/l copper
0.65  mg/l cyanide
0.43  mg/l lead
0.002 mg/l mercury
2.17  mg/l nickel
0.24  mg/l silver
1.48  mg/l zinc
 
These apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW (end of
the pipe). All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal
unless indicated otherwise. The city administrator may impose mass limitations
in addition to (or in place of) the concentration based limitations above.
Where a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local
limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable
pretreatment standard shall apply. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.140: CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW. (Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.150: SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting
out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a
special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or
federal pretreatment requirement. However, users may request a net gross
adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.15.
They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard
from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.13. (Ord. 806
§2, 1996)
13.18.160: DILUTION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The city administrator may impose mass limitations on users which
he believes may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. (Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.170: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations
specified by the EPA, the DEQ, or the city administrator, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable
to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.180: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards
shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a
shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The city
shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not
covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when
the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the federal
categorical pretreatment standards.
New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment
standards within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days from the
beginning of discharge). New sources and new users shall install, shall have in
operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment
required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to
discharge.
Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain
a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA's categorical
pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must
comply with a more stringent local limit which is in noncompliance with any
local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an
industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time
feasible. (Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
13.18.190: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
A.   Whenever deemed necessary, the city administrator may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B.   Each user discharging into the POTW greater than one hundred fifty
thousand (150,000) gallons per day or greater than ten percent (10%) of the
average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is less, shall install and maintain,
on the user's property and at the user's expense, a suitable storage and flow
control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty four (24) hour
period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least one hundred percent
(100%) of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a
rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the
city administrator. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
C.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the city administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city administrator and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at his expense.
D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required
to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Ord. 806
§2, 1996)
13.18.200: ACCIDENTAL SPILL PREVENTION PLANS:
The city administrator may require any user to develop and implement an
accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP) or slug control plan. Where deemed
necessary by the city, facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug
discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost
and expense. An accidental spill prevention plan or slug control plan showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the city for review and approval before implementation. The city
shall determine which user is required to develop a plan and require said plan
to be submitted within ninety (90) days after notification by the city. The
city shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of same to review and comment on
the plan and the compliance schedule and to mandate any changes in either. Each
user shall implement its ASPP as submitted or as modified after such plan has
been reviewed and approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
A.   Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention
plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
   1.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   2.   Description of stored chemicals;
   3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug
discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would
violate any of the standards in sections
13.18.100 through
13.18.130 of this chapter; and
   4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
chemicals (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
B.   Users shall notify the city wastewater treatment plant immediately after
the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated by
this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and
time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW,
in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account thereof
under state or federal law.
C.   Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the city administrator a detailed written report describing the cause
of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
D.   Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user's
premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover
such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures. (Ord. 806
§2, 1996)
13.18.210: SEPTIC TANK WASTES:
A.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at a designated
receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are
established by the city administrator. Such wastes shall not violate this
section or any other requirements established or adopted by the city.
Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities
shall be issued by the city administrator.
B.   Septic tank waste haulers may only discharge loads at locations
specifically designated by the city administrator. No load may be discharged
without prior consent of the city administrator. The city administrator may
collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards. The city administrator may require the hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
C.   Septic tank waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste.
D.   Fees for dumping hauled wastes will be established as part of the user fee
system as authorized in section
13.18.1300 of this chapter. (Ord. 806 §2, 1996)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
13.18.300: GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without
first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city administrator. Any
violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge
permittee to the sanctions set forth in this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
The city administrator may require other users, including septic tank waste
haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits (as necessary) to carry out the
purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.310: EXISTING SIU:
Any SIU that was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective
date of this chapter and that wishes to continue such discharges in the future
shall, within ninety (90) days after notification by the city administrator,
submit a permit application to the city in accordance with section
13.18.340 of this chapter and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW
to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this
chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the
city administrator. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.320: NEW SOURCE AND NEW USER:
At least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated startup, new sources,
sources that become a user subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard, and new users considered by the city to fit
the definition of SIU, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit and will
be required to submit to the city at least the information listed in
subsections
13.18.340A through E of this chapter. A new source or new user cannot discharge
without first receiving a wastewater discharge permit from the city. New
sources and new users shall also be required to include in their application
information on the method of pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable
pretreatment standards. New sources and new users shall give estimates of the
information requested in subsections
13.18.340D and E of this chapter. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.330: EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USERS:
Any existing user who is located beyond the city limits and who is required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall submit a wastewater discharge permit
application as outlined in section
13.18.310 of this chapter. New sources and new users who are located beyond the
city limits and who are required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
comply with section
13.18.320 of this chapter. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.340: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
The city administrator shall approve a form to be used as a permit application.
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit, at a
minimum, the following information (categorical users submitting the following
information shall have complied with 40 CFR section 403.12(b)):
A.   Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of the
facility including the name of the operator and owners.
B.   Permits: The user shall submit a list of all environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
C.   Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of
the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification
of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user, including a list of
all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; number and type
of employees; hours of operation; each product produced by type, amount,
process or processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials
processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of
discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or
manufacturing processes. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection
manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
D.   Flow Measurement:
   1.   Categorical User: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
      a.   Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
      b.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e).
   2.   Noncategorical User: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
      a.   Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant
flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the city
administrator.
The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by
cost or feasibility considerations.
E.   Measurements Of Pollutants:
   1.   Categorical User:
      a.   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for
each regulated or manufacturing process.
      b.   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by
the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the city) of regulated
pollutants (including standards contained in sections
13.18.100 through
13.18.130 of this chapter, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated
or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures
outlined in sections
13.18.600 through
13.18.620 of this chapter.
      c.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection
E1.
      d.   Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e) for a categorical user covered by a
categorical pretreatment standard, this adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted as part of the application.
   2.   Noncategorical User:
      a.   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for
its wastewater discharge.
      b.   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass
where required by the city) of regulated pollutants contained in sections
13.18.100 through
13.18.130 of this chapter, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical
procedures outlined in sections
13.18.600 through
13.18.620 of this chapter.
      c.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection
E2.
      d.   Where the city administrator developed alternate concentration or
mass limits because of dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data
shall be submitted as part of the application.
F.   Certification: The user shall submit a statement, reviewed by an
authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional
as outlined in section
13.18.350 of this chapter, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
G.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The user's schedule shall conform with the
requirements of section
13.18.520 of this chapter. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established pursuant to section
13.18.180 of this chapter.
   1.   Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by
a removal allowance (40 CFR section 403.7), the combined wastestream formula
(40 CFR section 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance
(40 CFR section 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by
subsection F of this section and this subsection G, the information required by
subsection F of this section and this subsection G shall pertain to the
modified limits.
   2.   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal
allowance (40 CFR section 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR
section 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR
section 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsections F and
G of this section, then a report containing modified information shall be
submitted by the user within sixty (60) days after the new limit is approved.
H.   Other Information: The user shall submit any other information as may be
deemed necessary by the city administrator to evaluate the wastewater discharge
permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.350: SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT:
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by
an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.360: DECISIONS:
The city administrator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the city administrator will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. Upon a determination to
issue, the permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full evaluation
and acceptance of the data furnished. The city administrator may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.370: CONTENTS:
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably
deemed necessary by the city administrator to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A.   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
   1.   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which
in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
   2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit;
   3.   Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on
applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and State and local law;
   4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping
requirements, including an identification of pollutants to be monitored
(including the process for seeking a waiver for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with § 403.12(e)(2), or a
specific waived pollutant in the case of an individual control mechanism),
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable
pretreatment standards, local limits and state and local law; and submittal of
technical reports, compliance schedules, and record keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state,
and local law; and
   5.   Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-
monitoring results indicate noncompliance;
   6.   Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
   7.   Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit results to the city within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation;
   8.   A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule.
B.   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following conditions:
   1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
   2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution
control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works;
   3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;
   4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
   5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management
of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
   6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
   7.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
   8.   Any special agreements the city administrator chooses to continue or
develop between the city and user;
   9.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city administrator to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.380: APPEALS:
The city shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal.
D.   If the city fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
5th district judicial court within thirty (30) days of the city's written
decision. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.390: DURATION:
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five (5) years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the city administrator.
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it
will expire. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.400: MODIFICATION:
The city administrator may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good
cause including, but not limited to, the following:
A.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance. The administrator may deny or condition new or
increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants
to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause
the POTW to violate its NPDES permit;
C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the
city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required report;
G.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards
pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.13;
H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new
owner/operator. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.410: TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner
and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days' advance
notice to the city administrator and the city administrator approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city administrator must
include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
A.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
B.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer.
Provided that the above occurs and that there were no significant changes to
the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be
considered an existing user and be covered by the existing limits and
requirements in the previous owner's permit. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.420: REVOCATION:
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
A.   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior
to the changed discharge;
B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions;
C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application;
D.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F.   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and
records;
G.   Failure to meet discharge limitations;
H.   Failure to pay fines;
I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit
application;
L.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
M.   If the city has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in section
13.18.860 of this chapter; or
N.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the
wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations.
All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the
issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
13.18.430: REISSUANCE:
A user who is required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, in accordance with section
13.18.340 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. A user whose
existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who has submitted its
reapplication in the time period specified herein shall be deemed to have an
effective wastewater discharge permit until the city issues or denies the new
wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing wastewater discharge permit
has expired and who failed to submit its reapplication in the time period
specified herein will be deemed to be discharging without a wastewater
discharge permit. (Ord. 806 §3, 1996)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
13.18.500: FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT (INITIAL COMPLIANCE REPORT):
A.   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance of an
existing significant industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements set forth in this chapter, in federal categorical standards, or in
a wastewater discharge permit, or, in the case of a new source or a "new user"
considered by the city to fit the definition of SIU, within ninety (90) days
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, the
affected user shall submit to the city a report containing the information
outlined in subsections
13.18.340D through F of this chapter.
B.   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established
by the city in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR section 403.6
(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. (Ord. 806 §4,
1996)
13.18.510: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT:
A.   Any user that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit and
performs self-monitoring shall submit to the city during the months of June and
December, unless required on other dates or more frequently by the city, a
report indicating the nature of the effluent over the previous reporting
period. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the
industrial waste discharge permit. At a minimum, users shall sample their
discharge at least twice per year.
B.   The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if
specified in the wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants listed in the
wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a record of all flow
measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling locations
and shall also include any additional information required by this chapter or
the wastewater discharge permit. Production data shall be reported if required
by the wastewater discharge permit. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. If a user sampled
and analyzed more frequently than what was required by the city or by this
chapter, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it must submit all results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period.
C.   Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by
the city or by unit production limits specified in the applicable categorical
standards, shall report production data as outlined in subsection B of this
section.
D.   If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or nonregulated
flows, the user will be responsible for providing flows from the regulated
process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated flows.
E.   Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided,
however, that the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows
estimated by verifiable techniques if the city determines that an actual
measurement is not feasible.
F.   Discharges sampled shall be representative of the user's daily operations
and samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements specified in
sections
13.18.600 through
13.18.620 of this chapter.
G.   The city may require reporting by users that are not required to have an
industrial wastewater discharge permit if information or data is needed to
establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or
determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of
the sewer system.
H.   The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by the
user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to prepare
the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the city agrees
to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it may charge the user for such
monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city for the sampling and
analyses. Any such charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and shall
be payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under no obligation to
perform periodic compliance monitoring for a user. (Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.520: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES FOR MEETING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
B.   No increment referred to in subsection A of this section shall exceed nine
(9) months.
C.   Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps
being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress
reports. (Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.530: NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCTION CHANGES AND NOTIFICATION OF
CHANGES AT AN SIU FACILITY:
Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits shall notify the city within two (2) business days
after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not providing a
notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the existing
limits contained in its wastewater discharge permit.
In addition to the foregoing notification of production changes, all SIUs must
immediately notify the POTW of any changes at an SIU facility that may affect
the potential for a slug discharge. Such notification is sufficient grounds for
the POTW to re-evaluate the notifying SIU's need for a slug control plan or any
other actions the POTW deems necessary to prevent slug discharges. (Ord. 1203,
2021: Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.540: HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION:
A.   Required; Content:
   1.   Any user that is discharging more than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of
hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in
a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) is required to provide a
onetime notification in writing to the city, EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, Idaho Department of Environmental Quality. Any existing user
exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained
herein within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or any discharge of
acutely hazardous wastes to the city sewer system.
Such notification shall include:
      a.   The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
      b.   The EPA hazardous waste number; and
      c.   The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
   2.   If an industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms (100
kg) of such waste per calendar per month to the sewer system, the notification
shall also contain the following information to the extent it is known or
readily ascertainable to the industrial user:
      a.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes,
      b.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month, and
      c.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
B.   Exception For Self-Monitoring:
These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported
under the self-monitoring requirements.
Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes
or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the city of the
discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of
such regulations.
In the case of any notification made under this section, an industrial user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.550: NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, INCLUDING ACCIDENTAL SPILLS, SLUG
LOADS:
Any user shall notify the city immediately of all discharges that could cause
problems to the POTW, including any slug loads, as defined in section
13.18.030 of this chapter. The notification shall include the concentration and
volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact
should also be noted during the notification. Any user who discharges a slug
load(s) of pollutants shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the
POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city under state or
federal law. (Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.560: NONCOMPLIANCE REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the city within eight (8) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling within five (5) days and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of
the violation. Where the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu
of the user, the city must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it
notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat
analysis. Re-sampling is not required if:
A.   The city performs sampling at the user at a frequency of at least once per
month, or
B.   The city performs sampling at the user between the time when the user
performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results
of this sampling. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.570: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE:
All users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any substantial change
in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including
significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the
listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted
initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). (Ord. 806 §4, 1996)
13.18.580: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the city as the city administrator may require. (Ord.
806 §4, 1996)
13.18.590: RECORD KEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, including
documentation associated with best management practices, and any additional
records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by
the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date,
exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking
the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the
analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These
records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This
period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning the user or POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified
of a longer retention period by the city administrator. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord.
806 §4, 1996)
SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS
13.18.600: SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS FOR USERS:
A.   A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. The city administrator
will determine on a case by case basis whether the user will be able to
composite the individual grab samples. For all other pollutants, twenty four
(24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional
composite sampling techniques where feasible. The city may waive flow
proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow
proportional composite sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be
obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a
minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will
provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
B.   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities
if such exist, immediately downstream from the regulated or manufacturing
process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by the city and
specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For categorical users, if
other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e) in
order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment
standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted its local limits to
factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations
necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standard(s).
C.   All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling,
and methods of analysis, and shall certify that the wastestream sampled is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the
user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required in
its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it
must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of
its self-monitoring report. (Ord. 806 §5, 1996)
13.18.610: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the EPA and DEQ. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §5, 1996)
13.18.620: CITY MONITORING OF USER'S WASTEWATER:
The city will follow the same procedures as outlined in sections
13.18.600 and
13.18.610 of this chapter. (Ord. 806 §5, 1996)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
13.18.700: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter, and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with all
requirements thereof. Users shall allow the city administrator ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
A.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the city administrator will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B.   The city administrator shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
C.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the city administrator and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
D.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city administrator access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 806 §6, 1996)
13.18.710: MONITORING FACILITIES:
Each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to
allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to
the city. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises,
except, where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, the city may concur with the facility being constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area, providing that the facility is located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The city administrator,
whenever applicable, may require the construction and maintenance of sampling
facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line
or a wastewater treatment system).
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including the
sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
The city administrator may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy. (Ord. 806 §6, 1996)
13.18.720: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the city administrator has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to
verify compliance with this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the city administrator shall seek issuance of a search
and/or seizure warrant from the fifth district court of the city. Such warrant
shall be served at reasonable hours by the city administrator in the company of
a uniformed police officer of the city. (Ord. 806 §6, 1996)
13.18.730: VANDALISM:
No person shall wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or
equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this
requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this chapter. (Ord.
806 §6, 1996)
13.18.740: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during
the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall mean:
A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit
for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which
thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product
of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
C.   Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough (including
endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);
D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the
public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
F.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H.   Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 806 §8,
1996)
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
13.18.800: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the city administrator finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
administrator may serve upon that user a written notice of violation via
certified letter. Within five (5) days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the city administrator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of
the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 806 §9,
1996)
13.18.810: CONSENT ORDERS:
The city administrator may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to
be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect
as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
13.18.830 and
 13.18.840 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a
consent order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
13.18.820: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The city administrator may order via a certified letter a user which has
violated or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, to appear before the city administrator and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
13.18.830: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the city administrator finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
administrator may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the
order. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in
the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance
of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
13.18.840: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the city administrator finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city administrator may
issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
13.18.850: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A.   When the city administrator finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
administrator may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day
basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten percent (10%)
per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
city administrator to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the city administrator shall convene a hearing on the matter within
thirty (30) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
13.18.860: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The city administrator may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after
informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
city administrator may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after
notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment.
A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop
or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city administrator shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The city administrator shall allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in section
13.18.870 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the city administrator prior to the date of
any show cause or termination hearing under sections
 13.18.820 and
13.18.870 of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
13.18.870: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE (NONEMERGENCY):
In addition to the provisions in section
13.18.420 of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
A.   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
C.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume,
constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
E.   Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections
13.18.100 through
13.18.210 of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under section
13.18.820 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (Ord. 806 §9, 1996)
JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
13.18.900: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the city administrator finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
administrator may petition the 5th district judicial court through the city
attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as
is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user. (Ord. 806 §10, 1996)
13.18.910: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A.   A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum
civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In
the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B.   The city administrator may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
city.
C.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic
benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user,
the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
D.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 806 §10, 1996)
13.18.920: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
A.   A user which has wilfully or negligently violated any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days, or both.
B.   A user which has wilfully or negligently introduced any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and/or be subject to imprisonment for not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause
of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
C.   A user which knowingly made any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsified, tampered with,
or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or imprisonment for not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or both. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806
§10, 1996)
13.18.930: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions in sections
13.18.740 through
13.18.1050 of this chapter are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the
right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement in response to pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However,
the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken
concurrently. (Ord. 806 §10, 1996)
SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
13.18.1000: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The city administrator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the city administrator to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance. (Ord. 806 §11, 1996)
13.18.1010: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The city administrator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits
proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 806 §11, 1996)
13.18.1020: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed.
Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 806 §11, 1996)
13.18.1030: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed
by the city administrator. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be
subject to any and all provisions of the city code governing such nuisances,
including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or
remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 806 §11, 1996)
13.18.1040: INFORMANT REWARDS:
The city administrator may pay up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. (Ord. 806 §11,
1996)
13.18.1050: CONTRACTOR LISTING:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale
of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or
services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance
with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion
of the city. (Ord. 806 §11, 1996)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
13.18.1100: UPSET:
A.   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in
which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of
subsection C of this section are met.
C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
   1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
   2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
   3.   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW and
treatment plant operator within eight (8) hours of becoming aware of the upset
(if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within 5 days):
      a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
      b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
and
      c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim
of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards.
F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §12,
1996)
13.18.1110: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in subsections
13.18.100A and
13.18.100B3 through B7 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or
have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and
that either: a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-
through or interference; or b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not
change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its IPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements. (Ord. 1203, 2021: Ord. 806 §12, 1996)
13.18.1120: BYPASS:
A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
   BYPASS: The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
B.   Bypass Permitted: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this
section.
C.   Notice Of Bypass:
   1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the POTW, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass,
if possible.
   2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass
that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24) hours
from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also
be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case by
case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
D.   Bypass Conditions:
   1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
      a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
      b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
      c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this
section.
   2.   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 806 §12, 1996)
GREASE MANAGEMENT
13.18.1200: DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS:
A.   Definitions: The definitions included herein are specific to this section
and sections
13.18.1210 through
13.18.1290 of this chapter. Definitions of other terms used herein are the same
as those contained in all sections of this chapter.
   CITY SERVICE AREA: The area within the city limits of the city of Jerome,
Idaho, and the area outside the city boundaries to which the city provides
wastewater treatment services.
   FOOD SERVICE FACILITY OR FACILITY: Any food service facility which prepares
and/or packages food or beverages for sale or consumption, on or off site, with
the exception of private residences. Food service facilities shall include, but
are not limited to: food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers,
restaurants, grocery stores, bakeries, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing
homes, churches, schools and all other similar facilities.
   GARBAGE DISPOSAL: A device which shreds or grinds up waste materials into
small portions for discharge into the city's wastewater collection system.
   GRAY WATER: All the liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below
the floating grease layer and above the food solids layer.
   GREASE: A material either liquid or solid, and composed primarily of fat,
oil and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "fats, oils, and
grease (FOG)", "oil and grease", or "oil and grease substances" shall be
included within this definition.
   GREASE DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Jerome authorizing
the discharge of wastewater to the wastewater collection system from a food
service facility.
   GREASE HAULER: A person or entity that collects the contents of the grease
interceptor or trap and transports it to an approved recycling or disposal
facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services to a food service
facility related to grease interceptor maintenance.
   GREASE HAULER PERMIT (GHP): A permit issued by the city of Jerome
authorizing a grease hauler to collect grease and operate a grease hauling
business in the city.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A device located underground and outside of a food
service facility designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and greases
from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to
discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. Grease interceptors
shall have at least one inspection hatch on the top surface to facilitate
inspection, cleaning and maintenance by grease hauler.
   GREASE TRAP: A device located in a food service facility or under a sink
designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the waste
stream while allowing the balance of a liquid waste to discharge to the
wastewater collection system by gravity. Grease traps shall have a removable
lid on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance.
   WASTEWATER DIRECTOR (DIRECTOR) OR DESIGNEE: The city wastewater treatment
plant manager or another person designated and appointed by the city
administrator to implement a pretreatment and grease management program.
B.   Abbreviations: For the purposes hereof, the following abbreviations shall
have the following designated meanings:
Director Wastewater director or designee
GDP      Grease discharge permit
GHP      Grease hauler permit
GMP      Grease management program
ISPWC    Idaho standards for public works construction
JMC      Jerome municipal code
mg/l     Milligrams per liter
NOV      Notice of violation
WWTP     City wastewater treatment plant
 
(Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1210: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A.   Purpose: These provisions establish uniform permitting, maintenance and
monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of grease from food
service facilities discharging into the WWTP and from commercial grease
haulers. These provisions are intended:
   1.   To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the
city of Jerome's wastewater collection system.
   2.   To prevent clotting or blocking of the city's sewer lines due to grease
buildup causing backup and flooding of streets, residences and commercial
buildings, resulting in potential liability to the city.
   3.   To implement a procedure to recover costs incurred in cleaning and
maintaining its sewer lines and disposing of grease blockages.
   4.   To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred by
the city for damages caused by grease blockages resulting in the flooding of
streets, residences or commercial buildings.
   5.   To issue "grease discharge permits" (GDPs) to food service facilities
requiring maintenance, monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities.
   6.   To establish administrative review procedures and reporting
requirements.
   7.   To establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
   8.   To issue "grease hauler permits" (GHPs) to grease haulers operating
within the city's boundaries.
   9.   To establish enforcement procedures for violations of any requirements
hereof.
B.   Applicability: The provisions hereof shall apply to all existing food
service facilities that are located within the municipal boundaries of the city
of Jerome and to all food service facilities that begin operations within the
municipal boundaries of the city of Jerome or by contract within the city
service area outside the city limits on or after the effective date hereof. The
provisions hereof shall also apply to all grease haulers providing service to
any food service facility located within the city of Jerome. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1220: GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS:
A.   Requirements: All new food service facilities that cook with fats, oils,
and greases (FOGs) are required to have a grease trap or grease interceptor.
The requirements herein are in addition to any applicable requirements of the
Idaho plumbing code and the standard plumbing code.
   1.   New Facilities: On or after the effective date hereof, food service
facilities which are newly proposed or constructed or existing facilities which
will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such
facility did not previously exist, shall be required to install, operate and
maintain a grease interceptor or grease trap according to the requirements
contained herein. Grease interceptors or grease traps shall be installed and
permitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   2.   Existing Facilities: For the purpose of sizing and installation of
grease interceptors, all food service facilities existing within the city prior
to the effective date hereof shall be permitted to operate and maintain
existing grease interceptors or grease traps provided their grease interceptors
or grease traps are in efficient operating condition.
On or after the effective date hereof, the city may require an existing food
service facility to install, operate and maintain a new grease interceptor or
trap that complies with requirements hereof or to modify or repair any existing
noncompliant plumbing, interceptor or trap within ninety (90) days of written
notification by the city where any one or more of following conditions exist:
      a.   The facility is found to be contributing oils and grease in
quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitates increased
maintenance on the wastewater collection system.
      b.   The facility does not have grease interceptors or traps.
      c.   The facility has an undersized, irreparable or defective grease
interceptor or trap.
      d.   Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system
is performed which requires a permit to be issued by the city of Jerome.
      e.   The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership.
      f.   The existing facility does not have plumbing connections to a grease
interceptor or trap in compliance with the requirements hereof.
      g.   The facility fails to submit a completed application form for a GDP
within sixty (60) days after the date of the receipt of an application form by
the city of Jerome.
      h.   The facility has not operated as a food service facility for twelve
(12) consecutive months prior to receiving the GDP application form.
B.   Plumbing Connections: Grease interceptors or traps shall be located in the
food service facility's lateral sewer line between all fixtures which may
introduce grease into the sewer system and the connection to the city's
wastewater collection system. Such fixtures shall include, but not be limited
to, sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood and wash units, floor
drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixture which is
determined to be a potential source of grease. Wastewater from sanitary
facilities and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the grease
interceptor or trap under any circumstances.
C.   Grease Traps: Grease traps shall be prohibited for new food service
facilities. They may be approved for those facilities where inadequate space is
available for the installation of a grease interceptor. Approval of the
installation of a grease trap instead of a grease interceptor at a new food
service facility shall meet the following criteria:
   1.   Trap Design And Location: Grease traps shall conform to the standards
in the Idaho standards for public works construction 2005 (ISPWC). Grease traps
shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Grease traps shall be equipped with a cover that can be opened for inspection
and sampling and mechanism for secure closing.
   2.   Trap Capacity: The capacity of the grease trap shall be related to the
flow rate as indicated in table 1 and the appendix of the Idaho standards for
public works construction 2005 (ISPWC) document.
   3.   Flow Through Rate: Flow through rates shall be calculated in accordance
with procedures in the Idaho standards for public works construction 2005
(ISPWC).
   4.   Flow Control Device: Grease traps shall be equipped with a device to
control the rate of flow through the unit. The rate of flow shall not exceed
the manufacturer's rate capacity recommended in gallons per minute for the
unit.
   5.   Venting: The flow control device and the grease trap shall be vented in
accordance with the Idaho plumbing code current edition. The vent shall
terminate not less than six inches (6") above floor rim level or in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
   6.   Inspection, Cleaning And Maintenance: Each food service facility shall
be solely responsible for the cost of trap installation, inspection, cleaning
and maintenance. Each food service facility may contract with a grease hauler
who has been permitted by the city for cleaning services or it may develop a
written protocol and perform its own grease trap cleaning and maintenance
procedures. Cleaning and maintenance must be performed when the total volume of
captured grease and solid material displaces more than twenty percent (20%) of
the total volume of the unit. Each food service facility shall determine the
frequency at which their grease trap shall be cleaned, but all grease traps
shall be opened, inspected, cleaned and maintained at a minimum of once per
week by the owner.
   7.   Inspection: Grease traps shall be inspected by director or his designee
as necessary to assure compliance with the GMP and to assure proper cleaning
and maintenance schedules are being adhered to.
   8.   Repairs: The food service facility shall be responsible for the cost
and scheduling of all repairs to its grease trap(s). Repairs required by the
director or his designated official shall be completed within fourteen (14)
calendar days after the day of written notice of required repairs is received
by the facility, unless the city approves a different schedule in writing.
   9.   Disposal: Grease and salt materials removed from grease traps shall be
disposed of by the grease hauler at an approved site.
   10.   Recordkeeping: The food service facilities shall maintain records of
the date and time of all cleaning and maintenance of each grease trap in a
bound logbook and shall make this book available for inspection by the director
or his designated official on demand.
D.   Grease Interceptors: Grease interceptors shall be installed on all new
food service facilities except where physical space is limited as described in
this section. All new and existing grease interceptors shall meet the following
criteria:
   1.   Interceptor Design And Location: Grease interceptors shall have a
minimum of two (2) compartments and shall be capable of separation and
retention of grease and storage of settled solids. Interceptor design shall
conform to requirements of Idaho standards for public works construction 2005
(ISPWC). A control manhole over each compartment for monitoring purposes shall
be required and installed at the owner's/operator's sole expense. Covers shall
have a gastight fit and the lid shall say "SEWER" on it. The grease interceptor
shall be designed, constructed and installed for adequate load bearing
capacity. Flow control devices shall be required where the water flow through
the interceptor may exceed its rated flow. Interceptors shall be installed in a
location outside of the building which provides easy access at all times for
inspections, cleaning and proper maintenance, including pumping.
   2.   Interceptor Capacity: Grease interceptor capacity calculations shall be
performed by each food service facility based on size and type of operation
according to the formula contained in the Idaho standards for public works
construction 2005 (ISPWC). Minimum capacity in any one unit shall be at a
minimum one thousand (1,000) gallons as required by Idaho plumbing code and
maximum capacity shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. Where
sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single unit, installation of
grease interceptors in series is required. Interceptor capacity calculations
shall be approved by the director or his designated official prior to the
installation of the interceptor(s). The capacity of the grease interceptor
required for food manufacturing or processing facilities which are not covered
by the Idaho plumbing code shall be approved by the director or his designated
official according to the mass and type of food prepared, the wastewater volume
produced from food preparation or manufacture, total hours of operation per day
and load factor depending on the installed equipment.
   3.   Inspection, Pumping And Maintenance: Each food service facility shall
be responsible for the cost of installing, inspecting, pumping, cleaning and
maintaining its grease interceptor. All food service facilities that have
grease interceptors shall utilize a grease hauler who has been permitted by the
city for pumping services. Pumping services shall include the initial complete
removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom
sludges and solids from the interceptor. The return of gray water into the
grease interceptor from which the wastes were removed is allowable, provided
that the grease and solids are not returned to the interceptor and further
provided the grease hauler has written authorization from the food service
facility to return the gray water. Grease interceptor cleaning shall include
scraping excessive solids from the walls, floors, baffles and all pipe work.
The grease hauler shall wait at least twenty (20) minutes to allow the
interceptor waste to separate in the truck tank before attempting to
reintroduce the gray water to the interceptor. It shall be the responsibility
of each food service facility to inspect its grease interceptor during the
pumping procedure to ensure that the interceptor is properly cleaned out and
all fittings and fixtures inside the interceptor are in working condition and
functioning properly.
   4.   Interceptor Pumping Frequency: Each food service facility shall have
its grease interceptor(s) pumped at a minimum frequency of once every calendar
month. There shall be a minimum period of two (2) weeks between each required
pumping. In addition to required monthly pumping, each food service facility
shall determine an additional frequency at which its grease interceptor(s)
shall be pumped according to the following criteria:
      a.   When the floatable grease layer exceeds six inches (6") in depth as
measured by approved dipping method; or
      b.   When the settleable solids later exceed eight inches (8") in depth
as measured by approved dipping method; or
      c.   When the total volume of capture grease and solid materials
displaces more than twenty percent (20%) of the capacity of the interceptor as
calculated using an approved dipping method; or
      d.   During an inspection it is found that the interceptor is not
retaining/capturing oils and greases. The director or his designee can require
the interceptor to be pumped within twenty four (24) hours after the
inspection.
   5.   Variance Procedure: If a food service facility determines that monthly
pumping of their grease interceptor is unnecessary in order to remain in
compliance with the criteria of subsection D4 of this section, the facility may
make written application for a variance from the monthly pumping requirements
to the city. The variance procedures shall be as follows:
      a.   The food service facility shall submit an application for a variance
form provided by the city along with the appropriate application fee. The
application shall include the next day and time the facility intends to have
its interceptor pumped and cleaned.
      b.   The director or his designee shall observe the pump out procedure
and inspect the interceptor on the specified day and time.
      c.   If the interceptor is in good working condition during the initial
inspection, the director or his designee shall reinspect the interceptor
approximately one month after an initial inspection. If there are less than
four inches (4") of surface grease and less than six inches (6") of bottom
solids at the time of reinspection, the interceptor will not need to be pumped
out at that time.
      d.   After the initial reinspection, the director or his designee shall
inspect the interceptor at intervals of approximately every ten (10) working
days to determine degrees and solids level using a dipping method approved by
the city.
      e.   At the reinspection when either the level of grease reaches six
inches (6") or the level of solids exceeds eight inches (8"), the director or
his designee shall use the number of days from the initial pumping date to the
final reinspection date as the new pumping frequency requirements to be
included in a variance granted.
      f.   If, at reinspection, the level of grease exceeds six inches (6") or
the level of solids exceeds eight inches (8"), the director or his designee
shall use the number of days from initial pumping date to the previous
reinspection date as the new pumping frequency requirement to be included in
the variance granted.
   6.   Inspections: Grease interceptors shall be inspected by the director or
his designee as necessary to assure compliance with the GMP and to determine if
proper cleaning and maintenance schedules are being adhered to.
   7.   Repairs: Each food service facility shall be responsible for the cost
and scheduling of all repairs to its grease interceptor. Repairs required by
the director or his designee shall be corrected within fourteen (14) calendar
days after the date of written notice of requiring the repairs is received by
the facility or unless notice from the city establishes a different compliance
date.
   8.   Disposal: Wastes received from each grease interceptor shall be
disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes or a location
designated by the city of Jerome for such purposes. Neither grease nor solid
materials removed from interceptors shall be returned to any grease
interceptor, private sewer line or to any portion of the city's wastewater
collection system or wastewater treatment facilities without prior written
permission from the city administrator or wastewater director.
   9.   Recordkeeping: Each food service facility shall maintain a bound
logbook in which a record of all interceptor maintenance is entered, including
the date and time of the maintenance, details of any repairs required and dates
of repair completion and any other records pertaining to the interceptor. This
logbook shall be made available for review upon request by the director or his
designee. Each food service facility shall also maintain a file on site which
contains the following information:
      a.   The (as built) drawings of the plumbing system.
      b.   A copy of the current grease discharge permit.
      c.   Records of inspections.
      d.   Copies of annual reports.
      e.   Receipts.
      f.   Log of pumping activities.
      g.   Log of maintenance activities.
      h.   Hauler information.
      i.   Disposal information.
      j.   Monitoring data.
The files shall be available at all times for inspection and review by the
director or designated official.
   10.   Annual Reporting: Each food service facility shall submit an annual
report to the city on a form provided by the city. Reports shall be submitted
on or before September 30 each year. Each report shall record the number of
times the interceptor trap has been cleaned since the last report and shall
indicate the volume of liquids and solids removed on each occasion and the name
and address of grease hauler. If a variance has been granted, the alternate
cleaning frequency shall also be reported. Each report shall also note any
repairs that have been made to the interceptor or trap including the dates that
these repairs were affected. Reports shall be submitted to the address provided
in the permit and shall be deemed to be late and subject to a late fee if they
are received by the city more than thirty (30) days after the end of the month
specified above.
   11.   Interceptor Additives: Any chemicals, enzymes, emulsifiers, live
bacteria or other grease cutters or additives shall be approved by the director
prior to their use by the food service facility or grease hauler. Material
safety data sheets (MSDS) and any other applicable information concerning the
composition, frequency of use and mode of action of the proposed additive shall
be sent to the city together with their written statement outlining the
proposed use of the additive(s). Based upon the information received and any
other information solicited from the potential user or supplier, the city shall
permit or deny the use of the additive in writing. Permission to use any
specified additive may be withdrawn by the city at any time.
   12.   Alterative Grease Removal Devices Or Technologies: Alternative devices
and technologies such as automatic grease removal systems shall be subject to
approval by the director prior to installation. Approval of the device shall be
based on demonstrated (proven) removal efficiencies and reliability of
operation. The city may approve these types of devices depending on
manufacturer's specifications on a case by case basis. The food service
facility may be required to furnish analytical data demonstrating that grease
discharge concentrations to the city's wastewater collection system will not
exceed the limitation established in this code. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1230: FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES PERMITTING PROGRAM:
A.   Permitting Requirements For Food Service Facilities: Each food service
facility shall be evaluated to determine whether it falls within the definition
of a significant industrial user (SIU). Facilities classified as SIUs shall be
subject to permitting as provided in section
13.18.300 of this chapter. All food service facilities shall be required to
apply for and obtain a "grease discharge permit" or GDP, from the city. The
city shall approve, deny, or approve with special conditions all applications
for GDPs in accordance with the policies and regulations established herein.
The GDP shall be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or
occupational licenses which may be required by federal, state or local law. It
shall be a violation hereof for any food service facility identified by the
city to discharge wastewater containing fats, oils and grease to the city's
wastewater collection system without a current GDP.
B.   Application Form: The city shall provide an application form for a GDP.
The appropriate form shall be sent to all food service facilities identified by
the city. All food service facilities required under the terms of this program
to obtain a GDP shall submit a completed application form for a GDP to the city
at the address shown on the form within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of
the form. Each application form submitted shall include the following
information:
   1.   Name, address, telephone number and location (if different from the
address) of applicant, owner of the premises (if different from the tenant when
property is leased) from which fat, oils and greases are discharged, and the
name of a representative duly authorized to act on behalf of the food service
facility.
   2.   A description of the activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all equipment, raw materials and chemicals used
or stored at the facility. Material safety data sheets (MSDS) of all such
chemicals shall be included.
   3.   A drawing in sufficient detail to show the location of all kitchen
equipment that produces wastewater, and all sewers, floor drains, sewer
connections, grease interceptors and appurtenances in the user's premises if
known or it may be readily ascertained.
   4.   Number of employees, number and times of shifts, and hours and days of
facility operation.
   5.   Copies of recent water bills.
   6.   Details of all grease interceptor maintenance within the past year.
   7.   A signed statement of the information provided is accurate, and that
the applicant agrees to abide by the regulations contained herein, as well as
any other applicable federal, state or local regulations governing the food
service facility.
   8.   Any information determined by the city administrator or wastewater
director to be necessary in order to evaluate the GDP application.
C.   Application Procedure: Once a completed application form has been
received, the food service facility will be inspected prior to the issuance of
the GDP. During the prepermit inspection, the information contained in the
application form will be verified, the average daily potable water use will be
calculated and the permit fees determined, and the grease interceptor or trap
will be inspected. If all information is verified and the grease interceptor or
trap is in proper working condition, a GDP will be issued together with a copy
of the ordinance codified herein. If the grease interceptor or trap requires
any maintenance or repairs, or incorrect information has been given, the
director or his designated official shall provide a written notice to correct
any deficiencies, including a required time schedule for repairs to be
effective prior to a second prepermit inspection. Second prepermit inspections
shall be performed after a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed to
allow for corrective action by the food service facility to occur. If the
facility is not in compliance at the second prepermit inspection, charges and
fees will be levied for future inspections. An application for a permit shall
be granted with conditions or denied within sixty (60) days after the date of
last prepermit inspection which the applicant's facility is in compliance.
D.   Grease Discharge Permit: The following criteria applied to all GDPs:
   1.   Each GDP shall be effective for a five (5) year period and shall have
an effective and an expiration date.
   2.   The GDP must be displayed in a conspicuous place or can be seen by the
staff of the food service facility and a copy of the GDP must be kept in the
records file.
   3.   The GDP shall be issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A
GDP shall not be transferred or sold to a new owner under any circumstances. A
new owner is required to apply for a new GDP.
   4.   An application for renewal of the GDP shall be submitted at least sixty
(60) days prior to the expiration date of the existing GDP by each applicant
wishing to continue to discharge into the wastewater collection system. Failure
to submit applications in a timely manner shall be a violation hereof.
   5.   The terms and conditions of the GDP are subject to modification by the
city during the term of the permit, if limitations or requirements in this
program are modified. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the
issued permit at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of the
change(s). Any changes or new conditions in the GDP shall include a reasonable
schedule for achieving compliance.
E.   Entry: Each food service facility shall allow the director or his designee
and other duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper
credentials and identifications access at all reasonable times to all parts of
the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions hereof. The
refusal of the food service facility to allow the director or his designee
entry to or upon the facility's premises for purpose of inspection, sampling
effluents or inspecting and copying records or performing such other duties as
shall be required hereby shall constitute a violation hereof. The city
administrator or his designee may seek a warrant or use such other legal
procedures as may be advisable and reasonably necessary to discharge his duties
pursuant hereto.
F.   Inspection: Inspection of all food service facilities shall be inspected
as follows:
   1.   Prepermit Inspections: Prepermit inspections shall be conducted by
director or his designee as outlined in this section.
   2.   Inspections: The director or his designee shall inspect food service
facilities on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis
after a GDP has been issued for compliance with the requirements hereof. All
food service facilities with current GDPs shall be inspected. Inspections shall
include all equipment, food processing and storage areas and shall include a
review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from the facility
through the grease interceptor or trap. The director or his designee shall also
inspect the interceptor or trap maintenance logbook and file, other pertinent
data, and the grease and interceptor or trap and may check the level of the
interceptor or trap contents and/or take samples as necessary. The director or
his designee shall require all observations in a written report. Any
deficiencies shall be noted, including, but not limited to:
      a.   Failure to properly maintain the grease interceptor or trap in
accordance with provisions of the grease discharge permit and these provisions.
      b.   Failure to report changes in operations, or wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
      c.   Failure to report pumping activities or keep copies of manifest
forms or receipts.
      d.   Failure to maintain logs, files, records or access for inspection or
monitoring activities.
      e.   Failure to obtain or renew the grease discharge permit in a timely
manner.
      f.   Any other inconsistency which program requires correction by the
food service facility is concerned.
If any deficiencies are recorded by the director or his designee during an
inspection, the director or his designee shall provide the food service
facility written notice to correct the deficiency within twenty one (21)
calendar days, and a tentative date for a first reinspection.
   3.   Reinspections: The director or his designee shall reinspect food
service facilities which receive deficiency notices after the original
inspection. The director or his designee shall inspect any repairs or any
deficiencies and shall provide written notice of compliance or noncompliance as
the case may be. In the event that the food service facility has returned to
compliance with all of the deficiencies, there shall be no charge for the
reinspection. In the event of continuing noncompliance, a successive
reinspection will be scheduled and appropriate fees shall be charged to the
food service facility concerned for the first and all successive reinspections.
A first reinspection shall be performed after a minimum of twenty one (21)
calendar days have elapsed to allow for corrective action by the food service
facility to be completed.
G.   Monitoring: The city shall have the right to sample and analyze the
wastewater from any food service facility at any time to determine compliance
with the requirements of this code. If violations of oil and grease limits are
detected, enforcement action may be initiated and demand monitoring costs
billed to the food service facility. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1240: GREASE HAULER REGULATION PROGRAM:
A.   Administration And Permitting Of Grease Haulers: Any person, firm or
business desirous of collecting, pumping or hauling grease interceptor wastes
from businesses located within the municipal limits of Jerome, Idaho, who does
not hold and maintain a current Jerome city "grease waste hauler permit" shall
be required to apply for and obtain a "grease hauler permit (GHP)" from the
city. The director shall approve, deny, or approve with special conditions all
applications for GHPs in accordance with policies and regulations established
herein. It shall be unlawful for any grease hauler to clean or pump out grease
interceptors within the city limits or within the city wastewater treatment
service area, without a current GHP.
B.   Application Form: To obtain a GHP, a grease hauler shall submit a
completed GHP application form together with the appropriate fee to the city.
The grease hauler shall be issued a GHP within thirty (30) working days of the
city's receipt of the completed application form and appropriate fees. The
grease hauler shall obtain the GHP prior to providing grease hauling services
within the city's wastewater collection system service area. Each application
shall include the following information:
   1.   Name of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or
other business entity, the name of an individual who legally is able to act on
behalf of the organization must be provided.
   2.   Applicant address and phone number, including information for person(s)
to contact at times other than regular business hours.
   3.   The type, license tag number, and capacity of each vehicle which will
be used to pump or haul liquid wastes from grease interceptors. New or
replacement equipment acquired subsequent to the application shall be reported
to the city prior to use.
   4.   A copy of the current state or the South Central Idaho health district
or other appropriate regulatory license if the hauler pumps or hauls septic
tank waste or portable toilet wastes.
   5.   A list of the disposal facilities that the applicant intends to use.
   6.   A signed statement that the information provided is accurate, and that
the applicant agrees to abide by the regulations contained herein, as well as
any other applicable federal, state or local regulations governing their
activities.
   7.   Any other information determined by the director or his designated
official to be necessary to evaluate the GHP application.
C.   Grease Hauler Permit (GHP): Each GHP approved by the city shall be
effective for a period of three (3) years, and may include special conditions
as required by the city. The GHP required by the city shall be in addition to
other permits, registrations, or occupational licenses which may be required by
federal, state, local agencies having lawful jurisdiction.
   1.   Permit Content: All approved GHPs shall include a statement of the
duration of the permit, including the effective and expiration dates;
identification of all approved vehicles and liquid wastes which may be hauled
by each; standard conditions relating to permit renewal and permit revision; a
list of definitions; reporting requirements, spill procedures, and any other
applicable special conditions. Special conditions may include, but are not
limited to:
      a.   A statement that all grease interceptors shall initially be pumped
completely empty. Excessive solids shall be scraped from the walls and baffles,
and inlet, outlet and baffle ports shall be cleared. Reintroduction of gray
water only into the interceptor shall be permitted, provided the grease hauler
has written authorization to return the gray water from the food service
facility concerned. The grease hauler shall wait at least twenty (20) minutes
to allow the interceptor waste to separate in the truck tank before attempting
to reintroduce the gray water to the interceptor. No grease or solids may be
reintroduced into the interceptor.
      b.   A statement indicating that no grease or gray water will be accepted
at any city owned facility and that the permittee should contract with other
private or public food facilities to properly dispose of the grease and food
solids.
      c.   A statement that the grease hauler is required to comply with all
federal, state and local regulations concerning the pumping of grease
interceptors and the hauling and disposal of their contents.
      d.   Any other statement or requirement that the city believes to be
necessary meets the intent hereof.
   2.   Permit Renewal: An application for GHP renewal shall be submitted on
the appropriate renewal form together with renewal fees at least sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration date of the existing GHP by each applicant wishing
to provide grease hauling services to permitted food service facilities located
in the city's wastewater collection service area.
D.   Spill Reporting: Any accident, spill, or other discharge of grease or gray
water which occurs within the city shall be reported to the city by the grease
hauler as soon as possible but not longer than twenty four (24) hours after the
incident. The grease hauler shall comply with all procedures contained in
applicable federal, state and local regulations. The grease hauler shall be
responsible for all cleanup procedures and costs.
E.   Recordkeeping: Grease haulers shall retain and make available for
inspection and copying, all records related to grease interceptor pumping and
grease disposal from businesses located in the Jerome wastewater collection
service area. These records shall remain available for at least three (3)
years. The city may require additional recordkeeping and reporting, as
necessary, to ensure compliance with the terms hereof.
F.   Vehicle Inspection: Grease haulers shall permit the city to inspect grease
haulers' registered vehicles. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1250: FEES:
A.   Fees And Billing: The fees provided for herein are separate and distinct
from all other fees chargeable by the city. All fees shall become immediately
due and owing to the city upon receipt of invoice(s) for rendition of services
or expenditure by the city and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within
forty five (45) days after receipt. Any delinquent amount shall be subject to a
late charge of fifteen percent (15%). These applicable hereto are as follows:
   1.   Grease Discharge Permit Fees: Grease discharge permit (GDP) fees shall
be determined according to the computed average daily water usage by the food
handling area (including sanitary wastewater) of the food service facility
based on at least six (6) months' accumulated data from the potable water
meter. Fees shall be charged annually throughout the duration of the three (3)
year permit and shall be as follows:
 
0 to 100 gallons per day            $25.00 per year
101 to 10,000 gallons per day       35.00 per year
Greater than 10,001 gallons per day 40.00 per year
 
In cases where more than twenty percent (20%) of potable water is used for
purposes other than in the food handling area, at the prepermit inspection, the
director or his designated official shall estimate the food handling area
(including sanitary wastewater) water usage based on best professional judgment
by taking at least, but not limited to, the following criteria into
consideration:
      a.   Size of food handling area and number of employees;
      b.   Number of meals served per day if applicable;
      c.   Number of seats or beds if applicable;
      d.   Utensils used in food preparation and service;
      e.   Types of washing the processes;
      f.   Number of sinks, garbage disposals, dishwashers, floor drains,
restrooms, etc.
      g.   Total monthly potable water use for at least the previous six (6)
month period; and
      h.   Other uses of water within the facility.
In the case of a new facility, best professional judgment shall be applied by
the director or his designated official to determine the projected average
daily water usage by the food handling area using the above criteria without
the water meter data.
   2.   Variance Fee: A food service facility applying for a variance shall
submit an application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   3.   Prepermit Inspection Fees: The charge for the initial prepermit
inspection and the second inspection shall be included as part of a permit
application fee. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged to a
food service facility for a third inspection prepermit inspection fee. If a
fourth or more inspections are required, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall
be charged to the food service facility to recover the cost for each
inspection. Such fees shall be in addition to any enforcement actions.
   4.   Inspection And Reinspection Fees: There shall be no charge for random
inspections conducted by the GMP official on food service facilities with
current GDPs. If a grease interceptor or trap has to be reinspected because of
deficiencies found during the previous inspection by the GMP official, and all
the deficiencies have been corrected, there shall be no charge for the
reinspection. If all the deficiencies have not been corrected, a first
inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged to the food
service facility. If a second reinspection is required, a second reinspection
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged to the food service facility if
all of the other deficiencies have still not been corrected. If a third or more
reinspections are required a reinspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each successive reinspection shall be charged to the food service facility
in addition to other enforcement actions if all of the other deficiencies have
still not been corrected.
   5.   Demand Monitoring Fees: Fees for any demand monitoring, sampling, and
analysis of wastewater discharges deemed necessary for the protection of the
WWTP shall be charged to the food service facility in the amount established in
subsection
13.18.1230G of this chapter.
   6.   Late Reporting Fee: Permitted food service facilities are required to
submit an annual report to the city as outlined in subsection
 13.18.1220D10 of this chapter. Reports submitted more than thirty (30) days
after the end of each quarterly period shall be subject to a late fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00).
   7.   Grease Hauler Permit Fee: Each GHP application filed pursuant hereto
shall be accompanied by application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for an
initial application together with a twenty five dollar ($25.00) vehicle fee for
each vehicle included on the application form. Renewal fees shall be the same
as initial application fee.
   8.   Administrative Order Fee: A fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall
be charged to any food service facility or grease hauler that is issued with an
administrative order as required by section
13.18.1280 of this chapter. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1260: APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
Any permit denial or revocation of a permit pursuant hereto may be appealed to
the Jerome city council. The permit applicant or permittee shall have fifteen
(15) days from date of notification of the permit denial or revocation to
submit a written request for a hearing. Failure to file an appeal constitutes
acceptance of the decision to approve or deny the permit and any conditions
thereof. The city council shall conduct a public hearing and decide within
sixty (60) days from receipt of the appeal, whether or not to grant the permit.
The decision of the city council shall be final. The city council shall follow
the same guidelines as established in this code with respect to permit
issuance, and may impose reasonable conditions on any order granting the
permit. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the city's
established hearing procedures. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1270: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS:
A.   Search Warrant: The city administrator or his designee may seek to obtain
a search warrant from the appropriate authority to gain access to a food
service facility for the purposes of inspection and monitoring if such lawful
entry hereunder has previously been denied by the food service facility.
B.   Injunctive And Other Relief: The city may file a petition in the name of
the city in a court having jurisdiction seeking the issuance of an injunction,
damages, or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions hereof or other
applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all
damages suffered by the city as a result of any action or inaction of any
person who causes or suffers damage to occur to the city's WWTP or collection
system, or for any other expense, loss or damage in the kind or nature suffered
by the city.
C.   Criminal Mischief: No person shall maliciously, wilfully or deliberately
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the WWTP's collection system. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charge of destruction of public property in accordance with this code.
D.   Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies provided for in the ordinances are not
mutually exclusive. The city administrator may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant person. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1280: PENALTIES:
A.   Violations: Any violation hereof or any condition of a permit issued
pursuant hereto, shall be a misdemeanor, subject to a penalty in an amount not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than
six (6) months, or by both, for each offense. Each separate violation shall
constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction of a specified ordinance
violation, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. In
addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable
attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees and other expenses of
litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated
these provisions or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
B.   Falsifying Information: A false statement, representation or certification
in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to
be maintained pursuant hereto, or tampering with or knowingly rendering
inaccurate any monitoring device or methods required herein, shall be a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, a penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both,
shall be imposed. Each day in which a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 1045, 2008)
13.18.1290: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT:
A.   Food Service Facility Enforcement: Administrative action against food
service facilities in violation hereof shall be as follows:
   1.   Notice Of Violation: A notice of violation (NOV) shall be issued to a
food service facility for any one or more of the following reasons:
      a.   Failure to properly maintain the oil and/or grease interceptor or
trap in accordance with the provisions of the grease discharge permit and these
provisions.
      b.   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
      c.   Failure to maintain a file of records on site at all times.
      d.   Failure to report pumping activities.
      e.   Failure to provide logs, files, records or access for inspection or
monitoring activities.
      f.   Failing to obtain or renew a GDP in a timely manner.
      g.   Any other failure to comply with the requirements hereof or
conditions of a permit, or failure to obtain a GDP as required hereby.
   2.   Notice Of Violation Response: Any food service facility issued an NOV
shall respond to the city in writing within ten (10) calendar days of receipt
of the NOV describing how the noncompliance occurred and what steps will be
taken to prevent the reoccurrence of the noncompliance. Escalating enforcement
procedures, demand monitoring and other penalties will be applied when
continuing noncompliance is detected, including, but not limited to, revocation
of the GDP or institution of civil or criminal proceedings. If a food service
facility violates or continues to violate the provisions set forth herein or
fails to initiate/complete corrective action in response to an NOV, the city
may pursue one or more of the following options:
      a.   Contract with a permitted grease hauler to pump the grease
interceptor and bill the appropriate charges to the food service facility
concerned.
      b.   Impose an administrative fine.
   3.   Best Management Practice (BMP) Training: All food service facilities
that receive notices of violation or administrative fine may be required to
send both managerial and other staff to an approved training session regarding
the BMPs. These training sessions will be held at locations and times that will
be announced by the director or designated official.
   4.   Permit Revocation: Any GDP issued under the provisions hereof is
subject to be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part during its
term for cause shown after notice and a hearing, including, but not limited to,
one of the following:
      a.   Falsification of any information submitted as part of application
for the GDP.
      b.   Failure to comply with requirements or regulations concerning
discharges to the city's WWTP or collection system as provided by this title
(or any amendments thereto).
      c.   Failure to comply with any requirements or regulations concerning
grease interceptors as provided for in this chapter.
      d.   Failure to pay required fees, or any assessed surcharges in a timely
manner.
      e.   Failure to attend required BMP training courses.
      f.   When necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare in
accordance with the terms set forth in this chapter.
B.   Grease Hauler Enforcement: Failure of any grease hauler to comply with
requirements hereof or with the provisions of any permit or approval granted or
authorized hereunder shall constitute a violation hereof. Violations of the
provisions hereof shall be subject to, but not limited to, the following
procedures:
   1.   Notice Of Violation: A notice of violation (NOV) will be issued to any
grease hauler which is found to be in noncompliance with the regulations and
requirements hereof. Response to this NOV must be received by the city within
ten (10) calendar days of its receipt by the grease hauler. The grease hauler
will be required to describe how the noncompliance occurred, verification that
the violation has been corrected, and shall provide assurance that steps will
be taken to prevent the reoccurrence of the noncompliance.
   2.   Permit Revocation: Any GHP or notice of permission issued pursuant to
the provisions of this program may be modified, suspended or revoked in whole
or in part during its term for cause shown after notice and hearing including,
but not limited to, any one of the following:
      a.   Falsification of any information submitted as part of the
application for the GHP or the notice of permission.
      b.   Falsifying information required for a discharge manifest.
      c.   Discharging any liquid waste into an unauthorized location.
      d.   Failure to maintain financial assurance as required herein.
      e.   Failure to comply with any other permit condition.
C.   Administrative Order: The city may enter into consent agreements,
compliance agreements, and assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents will include specific actions to be taken by the
person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such document shall be judicially enforceable. An administrative
order may include, but shall not be limited to, the following items:
   1.   Required corrective actions, including, but not limited to, submittal
of records for interceptor maintenance, immediate pump out of the grease
interceptor, or establishment of an ongoing contract with a permitted grease
hauler. When required by the city, the facility manager and/or other designated
employees shall attend an educational program approved by the city. This
program will cover kitchen practices, food handling and waste disposal
procedures to minimize loading on the grease interceptor, as well as explaining
grease interceptor design, operation and maintenance; and
   2.   Requirements for submittal of plans for installation or upgrade grease
interceptors, including time frames for the preparation of plans, acquisition
of necessary equipment, initiation of construction (including time for permit
approval where required), completion of construction, and a date for
achievement of final compliance with the provisions of the administrative order
and these provisions; and
   3.   Payment of an administrative order fine.
D.   Recovery Of Costs: When a discharge of waste causes an obstruction, damage
or any other impairment to the facilities, or any expense of whatever character
or nature to the city, the director shall assess the expenses incurred by the
city to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the facility, and any other
expenses or damage of any kind or nature suffered by the city. The director
shall file a claim with the user or any other person or entity causing such
damages seeking reimbursement for any and all expenses or damages suffered by
the city. If the claim is ignored or denied, the director shall notify the city
attorney to initiate other legal proceedings authorized hereby.
E.   Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies provided for herein are not exclusive.
The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
person violating these provisions, as the city shall determine. (Ord. 1045,
2008)
CHARGES AND FEES
13.18.1300: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the city's pretreatment program which may include:
A.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the
cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by users;
C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
D.   Fees for filing appeals; and
E.   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the city. (Ord. 806 §14, 1996)
CHAPTER 13.20
SEWER CHARGES AND FEES
SECTION:
13.20.010: Monthly Charges; Established
13.20.020: Monthly Charges; Schedule
13.20.025: Deposit Charge
13.20.030: Septage Dumping Fee
13.20.040: Industrial Cost Recovery
13.20.050: Appeal Of Charges
13.20.060: Review And Adjustment Of Charges
13.20.070: Credit For Interim User Charge
13.20.080: Reduction In Charges
13.20.090: Billing; Water Service Disconnection Upon Nonpayment Of Delinquent
Charges
13.20.100: Settlement Of Disputed Claims
13.20.110: Disconnection Of Sewer Service For Nonpayment Period
13.20.120: Property Lien For Collection Of Delinquent Charges
13.20.010: MONTHLY CHARGES; ESTABLISHED:
There is established a system of monthly charges and fees for the purpose of
equitably imposing upon all users of the sewer system expenses of construction,
operation and maintenance, repair, and replacement of the system and wastewater
treatment facilities. The charges and fees shall be based upon the volume and
content of wastewater discharged into the system and the costs of constructing,
operating, maintaining, repairing and replacing the sewer system and treatment
facilities of the city, the charges and fees having been determined to benefit
each building, structure or user within the system.
A.   The following accounts are hereby established:
   1.   Debt Service: An account is hereby established in the sewer fund and
shall be credited monthly to track the allocation of revenues intended for the
amounts necessary for the retirement of all debt and/or bonds payable from the
revenues of the system, including the accruing interest on all such debt and/or
bonds and reserves. The amount to be deposited will be determined by resolution
of the city council and may be changed from time to time.
   2.   Capital Reserve: An account is hereby established in the sewer fund and
shall be credited monthly to track the allocation of revenues intended for
capital reserves. Funds shall be used exclusively for the payment of capital
projects of the sewer fund. No more than ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00)
shall be accumulated in the capital reserve account fund at any one time. The
amount to be deposited will be determined by resolution of the city council and
may be changed from time to time. (Ord. 1124, 2014)
13.20.020: MONTHLY CHARGES; SCHEDULE:
The monthly wastewater collection and treatment service charges for each
property owner, domestic, commercial, or industrial in nature, shall be
determined by the cubic feet of water used plus a fixed monthly base fee.
Monthly bills shall be sent to the property owner. The owner of real property
to which wastewater treatment and collection services are provided shall be
responsible for the payment of all deposits, charges and fees required by this
chapter which are not paid in full at the time water or wastewater treatment
services are terminated to that real property. Each owner of real property to
which wastewater treatment and collection services is provided shall receive
written notice of termination of water service to such real property at least
ten (10) days prior to the termination of such services, which notice shall
also contain the amount of all delinquent charges and fees. The following rate
schedule shall determine service charges and fees:
A.   User Classes: The city administrator, or his/her designee, shall classify
all residential, commercial, and industrial users into appropriate user classes
according to the user's wastewater characteristics. Service charges for
residential and commercial users shall be derived from the rate schedule stated
in this section.
B.   Service Charges And Fees Rate Schedule:
 
Class 1 - Residential, Low Strength Commercial/Light Industrial
(Wastewater Strength Classification Based On Biochemical Oxygen Demand Plus
Total Suspended Solids Strength Of 0 - 450 mg/l)
Water meter size        0.75"  1"     1.5"   2"      3"      4"      6"
Base monthly fee        $14.95 $26.58 $59.80 $106.31 $239.20 $425.18 $956.80
Usage fee per 100 cubic 2.80   2.80   2.80   2.80    2.80    2.80    2.80
feet
 
 
Class 2 - Medium Strength Commercial
(Wastewater Strength Classification Based On Biochemical Oxygen Demand Plus
Total Suspended Solids Strength Of 450 - 600 mg/l)
Water meter size        0.75"  1"     1.5"   2"      3"      4"      6"
Base monthly fee        $18.69 $33.22 $74.75 $132.89 $299.00 $531.56 $1,196.00
Usage fee per 100 cubic 4.23   4.23   4.23   4.23    4.23    4.23    4.23
feet
 
 
Class 3 - High Strength Commercial
(Waste Strength Classification Based On Biochemical Oxygen Demand Plus Total
Suspended Solids Strength Of 600 - 800 mg/l)
Water meter size        0.75"  1"     1.5"   2"      3"      4"      6"
Base monthly fee        $22.43 $39.87 $89.70 $159.47 $358.80 $637.87 $1,435.20
Usage fee per 100 cubic 5.65   5.65   5.65   5.65    5.65    5.65    5.65
feet
 
 
Class 4 - High Strength Commercial
(Waste Strength Classification Based On Biochemical Oxygen Demand Plus Total
Suspended Solids Strength Of 800 - 1,000 mg/l)
Water meter size        0.75"  1"     1.5"    2"      3"      4"      6"
Base monthly fee        $26.16 $46.52 $104.65 $186.04 $418.60 $744.18 $1,674.40
Usage fee per 100 cubic 7.03   7.03   7.03    7.03    7.03    7.03    7.03
feet
 
 
Class 5 - High Strength Commercial
(Waste Strength Classification Based On Biochemical Oxygen Demand Plus Total
Suspended Solids Strength Of 1,000 - 1,500 mg/l)
Water meter size        0.75"  1"     1.5"    2"      3"      4"      6"
Base monthly fee        $29.90 $53.16 $119.60 $212.62 $478.40 $850.36 $1,913.60
Usage fee per 100 cubic 9.55   9.55   9.55    9.55    9.55    9.55    9.55
feet
 
C.   Oversized Meter: Where a customer can demonstrate that the purpose of an
oversized meter is for irrigation or fully consumptive uses, then the city
administrator has the authority to bill based on the theoretical meter size
that would be necessary for servicing just the nonconsumptive potable usage
based on the adjustment schedule below. Such a modification would be subject to
review if at a later date additional data suggested that a larger meter would
be needed.
   1.   For meters greater than one inch (1"): Actual meter sizes can be
reduced according to the following adjusted sizes:
      Use 1" wintertime equivalent meter size for flows less than 1,032 cf (a
1" meter is 1.78 times the area of a 3/4" meter. 1.78*580 = 1,032)
      Use 1.5" wintertime equivalent meter size for flows between 1,032 and
2,320 cf (a 2" meter is 4 times the area of a 3/4" meter. 4*580 = 2,320)
      Use 2.0" wintertime equivalent meter size for flows between 2,320 and
4,125 cf
      Use 3.0" wintertime equivalent meter size for flows between 4,125 and
9,280 cf
   2.   For all single-family residential use a wintertime equivalent meter
size of three-fourths inch (3/4").
D.   Industrial Users With High Wastewater Strength: For industrial users with
high wastewater strength (400+ mg/l), high flows (generally 10,000+ gallons per
day), and/or unique wastewater characteristics as determined by the city
administrator or his/her designee, the base monthly fee will be determined
based on an equivalent residential unit (ERU) as calculated utilizing the
formula below. The usage fee will be per the user class above based on
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS), unless a
higher rate is justified based on unique wastewater characteristics or impacts
to the city's collection and treatment systems.
      ERUs = Flow*0.00135 + BOD*0.164 + TSS*0.0324 + Phos*0.39
 
Flow = Average daily flow (gallons/day)
BOD  = Average biochemical oxygen demand (pounds/day)
TSS  = Average total suspended solids (pounds/day)
Phos = Average phosphorous load (pounds/day)
 
For larger industries with individual discharge permits with the city, the city
may negotiate with the industry to develop a monthly base fee based on the
equivalent residential units permitted and a usage fee that is based on flow
and wastewater strength (including biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended
solids, and phosphorous).
E.   Consumption Not Metered: The monthly wastewater collection and treatment
service charge for each property owner or user, domestic, commercial, or
industrial in nature, whose water consumption is not metered shall be fixed by
the city council based upon the rate established in the rate schedule above and
the cubic feet of water discharged into the collection system as determined by
the city administrator; provided, however, that in the case of single-family
residential dwellings, with unmetered or unavailable water discharge data,
cubic feet discharge shall be deemed to be four hundred (400) cubic feet per
month for dwellings with less than three (3) permanent residents, and eight
hundred (800) cubic feet per month for dwellings with three (3) or more
residents.
F.   Private Well Or Water Supply: Each nonresidential property owner not
serviced by a public water supplier with water, but having a private well or
water supply, shall install and maintain at his or its own expense a water
meter capable of measuring the total gallons per day of water being used. The
meter shall:
   1.   Be approved by the city administrator prior to installation;
   2.   Be installed within sixty (60) days of the receipt of approval for
installation;
   3.   Be situated on property accessible to the city, its agents or employees
daily between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. (Ord. 1109, 2012)
13.20.025: DEPOSIT CHARGE:
It is established that a deposit charge shall be paid by all new users of the
wastewater treatment system. A "new use", for purposes of this section, shall
be deemed to be any person or entity being serviced by the Jerome wastewater
treatment system for the first time. A deposit charge as fixed from time to
time by resolution of the council shall be collected from each new user with a
classification of two (2) or less, prior to service being provided. Users with
a classification of three (3) or more will be charged a deposit equal to one
and one-half (11/2) times the estimated monthly bill. Upon a user ceasing to be
serviced by the system, any balance remaining of the deposit shall be returned
to the user upon proof of payment of all charges and fees through the date of
final use; provided, however, that the deposit shall in any event be returned
to the user upon timely payment in full of all user charges for twelve (12)
consecutive months. The rates and fees established herein may be amended or
revised in the future by a resolution passed by a majority of the full city
council. (Ord. 1077, 2010)
13.20.030: SEPTAGE DUMPING FEE:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, or other entity to deposit, dump,
place or leave septage, wastewater, or effluent from any septic tank or
cesspool, motor home, travel trailer or self-contained camper within the city
corporate limits except at an established dump station or the septage receiving
facility at the city wastewater treatment facility. There shall be no fees for
motor homes, travel trailers and self-contained campers which shall dump at the
approved site on West Fourth Street. All other dumping shall be at the
wastewater treatment facility, with a fee paid at city hall of fifteen dollars
($15.00) per dump up to one thousand (1,000) gallons. All gallons over one
thousand (1,000) on a single dump shall be assessed at the rate of three cents
($0.03) per gallon. (Ord. 978 §2, 2005: Ord. 722 §5, 1990: Ord. 655 §1, 1982:
Ord. 622 §4, 1979: prior code §23-41(C))
13.20.040: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
A.   In addition to the other fees required by this chapter or other ordinance
of the city, any industrial user of the wastewater system of the city
discharging wastewater into the system other than domestic sewage (i.e.,
restroom, lunchroom, cafeteria waste) such as cooling water, process water,
wash down water, etc., shall pay an industrial cost recovery fee, based upon
the actual cost to construct the wastewater treatment facility capacities for
flow, five (5) day BOD and TSS, applied to the estimated daily loads supplied
by the industrial user.
   1.   Based on average limits:
 
Flow      $ 1.33/gallon x flow in gallons
5 day BOD 981.40 x pounds/day
TSS       218.39 x pounds/day
 
   2.   Based on design limits:
 
Flow      $ 1.02/gallon x flow in gallons
5 day BOD 743.49 x pounds/day
TSS       163.79 x pounds/day
 
B.   Industrial users shall install a control manhole as outlined in section
 13.16.090 of this title and city personnel shall monitor the wastewater
discharge according to the following schedule: flow, record at eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. each morning. Sample for five (5) BOD and TSS every other day.
Samples shall be analyzed according to "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association. All
costs of sampling station, flow monitoring and control manhole maintenance
shall be borne by the user. Cost of analysis shall be borne by the city.
C.   This recovery fee shall be adjusted at the end of one year's continuous
operation based on the yearly average load factors developed by the sampling
and analysis required above, with refund for excess fee or an additional
billing if actual usage exceeds estimates by more than one percent (1%) of the
original fee. (Ord. 722 §5, 1990: Ord. 622 §4, 1979: prior code §23-41(D))
13.20.050: APPEAL OF CHARGES:
Any user who feels the charges imposed by the city may be in error may appeal
to the city council. The appeal, in written form, shall be made to the director
of public works and acted on by the city council within thirty (30) days from
receipt thereof. Such an appeal shall set forth in reasonable detail the source
of error being appealed and the appellant's grounds for modification thereof.
The grounds for appeal may be based on actual discharge data, to include
laboratory test results performed by a competent laboratory using sampling
techniques acceptable to the city, or recent technical information available in
the literature. (Ord. 622 §4, 1979: prior code §23-41(E))
13.20.060: REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:
The city shall annually review the user charges for wastewater collection and
treatment. Adjustments shall be made by resolution as needed to ensure that
adequate revenue will be acquired to balance expenditures for wastewater
collection and treatment and to maintain an equitable system of user charges.
(Ord. 1109, 2012)
13.20.070: CREDIT FOR INTERIM USER CHARGE:
The city shall rebate, in the form of credit on future billings, the user
charge assessed each user of the system from the effective date of the city's
interim user charge, March 20, 1979, in the amount of the difference between
the amount actually paid by the user under the interim rate system and the
amount the user would have paid had the rate structure contained in this
ordinance been in effect. (Ord. 622 §4, 1979: prior code §23-41(G))
13.20.080: REDUCTION IN CHARGES:
A.   The city shall establish by resolution at the earliest possible time a
system by which any user of the system may establish a reduction in any month's
user charge by demonstrating that all water as measured by meter, drawn by the
individual from the city's water system was not in fact returned to the
wastewater treatment plant. These regulations shall supplement existing
provisions for sprinkling rates contained elsewhere in this code, and shall be
directed toward such users who do not presently come within the sprinkling rate
provisions.
B.   Except as herein provided, no credits or reductions of charges will be
allowed for wastewater services if wastewater service is being delivered to the
property. The utility billing director or designee shall have the authority to
approve any applications necessary for the following:
   1.   Circuit Breaker Reduction: The utility billing staff shall make the
reduction provided for in the utility rate for wastewater services set by the
city council by resolution for account holders whose names appear on the
"circuit breaker exemption list of Jerome County", effective January 1 of each
year. The reduction shall be solely for the account holder's own residence.
(Ord. 1112, 2013)
13.20.090: BILLING; WATER SERVICE DISCONNECTION UPON NONPAYMENT OF DELINQUENT
CHARGES:
The city treasurer shall bill each sewer user at the same time each such user
is billed for domestic water consumption and such charge shall be included on
such water bill and shall show the amount due for sewer service for the
preceding month. If any person neglects to pay his sewer charge within the time
provided for payment of water bills as provided by
chapter 13.28 of this title, the city shall cause the water supply to such
person by the city to be turned off from the premises being served, and before
the water shall be again turned on all delinquent sewage charges must be paid
in full, together with a new deposit as required by section
13.28.410 of this title, and late penalties required by
 chapter 13.40 of this title. (Ord. 1142, 2015)
13.20.100: SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTED CLAIMS:
Dispute as to the amount of a bill shall not justify the user in refusing to
pay the bill when due; in case of dispute the user shall give written notice to
the city clerk at the time of payment that the bill is disputed, stating the
amount and reasons for the dispute. The city will investigate the complaint and
afford the user a hearing before the mayor and council and if, following such
investigation and hearing, the city shall determine that the user's objections
are well founded then the city shall refund the amount of the overpayment, or
credit it upon the next monthly bill of the consumer. (Prior code §23-43)
13.20.110: DISCONNECTION OF SEWER SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT PERIOD:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the city,
including all property owned or occupied by the United States, the county, and
the state, and in case of nonpayment or delinquency of any sewer charge, the
superintendent is authorized and directed, upon ten (10) days' notice to the
owner, occupant or person in charge of the property, to disconnect and plug the
sewer connection of such delinquent persons with the sewer system of the city.
(Prior code §23-44)
13.20.120: PROPERTY LIEN FOR COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES:
All charges or fees as provided by this chapter, not paid within thirty (30)
days of the date when due, shall become delinquent and shall be, and the same
are hereby imposed as, a lien upon and against the property or premises against
which charge or fee is levied and assessed, and the city clerk shall, at the
time of certifying the city taxes, certify such delinquencies, together with
all penalties, to the tax collector of the county, and when so certified the
same shall be a lien upon the property and collectible as other charges. The
lien provided for in this section shall be an additional remedy available to
the city over and above any and all other remedies herein provided for the
enforcement of the fees and charges provided for in this chapter. (Prior code
§23-45)
CHAPTER 13.24
WATER SERVICE; GENERALLY 1
SECTION:
13.24.010: Definitions
13.24.020: Rates For Water And Wastewater Treatment Service Where Domestic
Water Is Not Returned To The Wastewater Treatment System
13.24.030: Reduction In Charges
13.24.035: Water Rates And Fees
13.24.040: Payment Of Charges By Governmental Units
13.24.050: Enforcement Authority
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§50-323, 50-1030.
13.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   CONSUMER: When used in these rules and regulations or in the application for
service, means the person using or desiring to use water service.
   DELIVERY OF WATER SERVICE: The maintenance by the city at the point of
delivery of service pipes at the approximate pressure in the form specified in
the application.
   EXTENSION: A branch from, or continuation of, an existing main or service
pipe, or both, including any increase of capacity of any existing extension, or
the changing of any main or service now installed.
   HAULERS AND CARRIERS: When used in these rules and regulations, and in the
application for service, refers to any person receiving water from any
"premises", as defined in this section, other than the premises so occupied by
such person, by hauling, carrying, or by any other means or device; provided,
however, that the city is at all times ready and willing to serve the premises
occupied by the haulers and carriers under the rules and regulations set out in
this chapter.
   MONTH: Except where the calendar year is stated means the approximate
monthly period intervening between meter readings, upon which the consumer's
demand and consumption are computed and bill rendered.
   OWNER: The person or entity who owns the fee simple title of real property
being provided water service.
   POINT OF DELIVERY: The point where the city's taps or pipes are connected
with those of the consumer. Unless otherwise specified in the application for
service, or in the city's schedules, such connection will be at the property
line of consumer's premises.
   PREMISES: As contemplated in these rules, means a property which cannot be
completely divided in its present utilitarian condition through sale; as:
   A.   A building under one roof, owned by one party and occupied as one
business or residence; or
   B.   A combination of buildings owned by one party or one common enclosure,
occupied by one family or business; or
   C.   The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall;
or
   D.   A building owned by one party, of more than one apartment, and using in
common one hall and one entrance; or
   E.   A building owned by one party having a number of apartments or offices,
and using in common one hall, and one or more means of entrance.
   RULES ON FILE: These rules and regulations are obtainable at the offices of
the city, and are a part of the schedules, rates and tariffs of the city, and
apply without modification or change to the city and each and every consumer
whom the city serves, and are subject to change only by amendment in the manner
provided by law.
   WATER SERVICE: The furnishing of water for the purpose specified in the
application for service.
   YEAR: Except where the calendar year is stated means each year, the period
intervening between the date corresponding to the effective date of the
contract and the same day the following calendar year. (Ord. 1076, 2010)
13.24.020: RATES FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT SERVICE WHERE DOMESTIC
WATER IS NOT RETURNED TO THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM:
A.   For the purposes of this section, the term "billing period" shall refer to
the period of time between readings of the water meter of a particular
consumer, or in a case where a reading of the water meter is physically or
environmentally impossible, the period between which bills for water use have
been sent to a consumer by the city.
B.   Effective October 1, 2009, any customer using water for use primarily for
the sprinkling of lawns, gardens and other vegetation, and for other uses
characteristically associated with summer or any other such use wherein the
water is not returned to the Jerome wastewater treatment system, beginning with
water consumed after the meter reading in March of each year, and ending for
water consumed after the meter reading in November of each year, shall have
their wastewater user fee assessed for each period on the average of the
billings made on the last day of December, January, February and March of each
year, and the water charge shall be on the entire consumption at the rate of
one dollar forty cents ($1.40) per one hundred (100) cubic feet.
C.   Effective October 1, 2009, any customer using water in association with a
place of business, beginning with water consumed after the meter reading in
March of each year and ending for water consumed after the meter reading in
November of each year, shall have their wastewater treatment user fee assessed
for such period on the average of the billings made on the last day of
December, January, February, and March of each year, and the water charge shall
be on the entire consumption at the rate of one dollar forty cents ($1.40) per
one hundred (100) cubic feet.
D.   Any consumer who has no actual average consumption rate available for the
four (4) billing periods immediately preceding the meter reading date closest
to March 1 of a particular year shall be assigned an average "in home" use with
respect to the following scale:
Number In Household Cubic Foot Average
Number In Household Cubic Foot Average
1                   200
2                   400
3                   600
4                   800
5                   1,000
6                   1,200
Over 6              1,400
 
(Ord. 1078, 2010)
13.24.030: REDUCTION IN CHARGES:
A.   No reduction in the rates, fees, tolls or charges fixed, established,
levied or otherwise prescribed in this chapter shall be made so long as any
bond is outstanding of the "city of Jerome water revenue bond, series September
15, 1956", unless there is a compliance with the conditions prescribed by
paragraph F of section 13, ordinance 306, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk. The city may otherwise amend this chapter so long as
the security and other provisions for the redemption of such bonds are not
adversely affected to any material extent and so long as such amendment does
not contravene any provision in ordinance 306, in the revenue bond act of the
state, or any other contractual provision between the city and the holder or
holders from time to time of such bonds.
B.   Except as herein provided, no credits or reductions of charges will be
allowed for water services if water is being delivered to the property. The
utility billing director or designee shall have the authority to approve any
applications necessary for the following:
   1.   Circuit Breaker Reduction: The utility billing staff shall make the
reduction provided for in the utility rate for water services set by the city
council by resolution for account holders whose names appear on the "circuit
breaker exemption list of Jerome County", effective January 1 of each year. The
reduction shall be solely for the account holder's own residence. (Ord. 1111,
2013)
13.24.035: WATER RATES AND FEES:
Effective August 17, 2021:
A.   Volume Water Rates: The following schedule rates, fees, tolls and charges
for the water, facilities and services furnished by or through, or for the use
of, the municipal water system, which rates, fees, tolls and charges are hereby
found and declared to be reasonable and just, taking into account the cost of
maintaining and operating the system, therefore, be, and the same hereby are
fixed, established, levied and otherwise prescribed, as follows:
SCHEDULE 1:   GENERAL RATES TO ALL CONSUMERS
 
All water per 100 cubic feet, to be billed monthly $1.57
 
SCHEDULE 2:   PRIVATE FIRE USE
 
For 2 inch service, per month, per service $3.30
For 3 inch service, per month, per service 3.85
For 4 inch service, per month, per service 4.40
For 6 inch service, per month, per service 5.50
 
SCHEDULE 3:   WATER USED BY THE CITY OR ANY OTHER PERSONS FOR STREET
SPRINKLING, FLUSHING, OR OTHER PURPOSES TAKEN FROM THE CITY'S FIRE HYDRANTS
 
3,300 cubic feet, per month, minimum charge                  $30.00
All water per 100 cubic feet over 3,301 cubic feet per month 1.40
 
B.   Base Rates: The following rates, fees, tolls and charges for the water,
facilities and services furnished by or through, or for the use of, the
municipal water system, which rates, fees, tolls and charges are hereby found
and declared to be reasonable and just, taking into account and consideration
the cost and value of the system, and the proper and necessary allowances for
the depreciation thereof, and the amounts necessary for the retirement of all
debt and/or bonds payable from the revenues of the system, the accruing
interest on all such debt and/or bonds and reserves therefor, be, and the same
hereby are fixed, established, levied and otherwise prescribed, as follows:
The following accounts and base rates are hereby established:
   1.   Debt Service: An account is hereby created in the water fund to be used
exclusively for the payment of all debt service of the water fund and a monthly
base rate is hereby established and shall be credited into the debt service
account for each of the following sized meters as follows:
 
3/4 inch meter  $ 4.31
1 inch meter    7.66
11/2 inch meter 17.24
2 inch meter    30.65
3 inch meter    68.97
4 inch meter    122.61
6 inch meter    275.87
 
   2.   Capital Reserve: An account is hereby created in the water fund to be
used exclusively for the payment of capital projects of the water fund and a
monthly base rate per account for each of the following sized meters, is hereby
established and shall be credited into the capital reserve account. No more
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall be accumulated in the capital
reserve account fund at any one time.
 
3/4 inch meter  $ 8.08
1 inch meter    14.37
11/2 inch meter 32.32
2 inch meter    57.46
3 inch meter    129.30
4 inch meter    229.86
6 inch meter    517.18
 
   3.   Operating Reserve: An account is hereby created in the water fund to be
used exclusively for the payment of all operation and maintenance costs of the
water fund should established rates fail to fund such costs and a monthly base
rate per account for each of the following sized meters, is hereby established
and shall be credited into the operating reserve account.
 
3/4 inch meter  $ 5.21
1 inch meter    9.26
11/2 inch meter 20.84
2 inch meter    37.05
3 inch meter    83.37
4 inch meter    148.21
6 inch meter    333.48
 
No more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be accumulated in
the operating reserve account fund at any one time.
C.   Monthly Payment Of Base Rates: All users of the city water system shall be
assessed a base rate determined under subsection B of this section on a monthly
basis. This assessment shall be in addition to fees assessed under subsection A
of this section.
D.   Surcharge Base Rates.
   1.   The monthly surcharge base rate to be used exclusively for the payment
of all debt service of the water fund shall be four dollars and sixty-one cents
($4.61); the monthly surcharge base rate to be used exclusively for the payment
of capital projects of the water fund shall be eight dollars and sixty-five
cents ($8.65); and the monthly surcharge base rate to be used exclusively for
the payment of operation and maintenance costs of the water fund shall be five
dollars and fifty-seven cents ($5.57).
   2.   The foregoing rates shall be based on a three-fourths inch (3/4")
diameter water connection equivalent. Basic rates for all other services
different than three-fourths (3/4") inch diameter water connection shall be
calculated by the following formula:
   Monthly Base Rate = 1.778 x BR x D2 x 1.07
   Where:   BR = The standard base rate for a 3/4-inch diameter water
connection;
         D = Diameter of water connection in inches.
Surcharge Base Rates
 Debt Service Capital Reserve Operating Reserve
Surcharge Base Rates
           Debt Service Capital Reserve Operating Reserve
¾" Meter  $ 4.61       $ 8.65          $ 5.57
1" Meter   $ 8.20       $ 15.37         $ 9.91
1 ½" Meter$ 8.45       $ 4.59          $ 22.30
2" Meter   $ 32.80      $ 61.49         $ 39.65
3" Meter   $ 73.80      $138.35         $ 89.21
4" Meter   $131.19      $245.95         $158.59
6" Meter   $295.19      $553.39         $356.83
 
E.   Future Rate Modifications: All rates and fees established under section
13.24.020 of this chapter and this section may be amended or revised in the
future by a resolution passed by a majority of the full city council. (Res. 08-
21, §§ 3,4,5, 2021: Ord. 1068 §§1, 2, 3, 2009: Ord. 1067 §§4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 2009:
Ord. 1066 §§3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 2009: Ord. 1017 §2, 2006: Ord. 949 §2, 2003: Ord.
799 §§2, 5 - 7, 1996)
13.24.040: PAYMENT OF CHARGES BY GOVERNMENTAL UNITS:
No free service shall be furnished by the municipal water system, and
governmental units, departments or agencies, as well as other consumers,
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the state and its
subdivisions, shall pay the applicable rates, fees, tolls and charges, copies
of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. Any use by the city, or
any department thereof, of the system or of water, facilities and services
furnished by or through the system, will be paid for from the city's general
fund or other available revenues at the reasonable value of such use as
prescribed in this chapter. (Prior code §27-4)
13.24.050: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The officers of the city are authorized and directed to take all action
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. (Prior
code §27-5)
CHAPTER 13.28
WATER SERVICE; RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13.28.010: Rules Generally
13.28.020: Rule 1; Relocation Of Service Pipe
13.28.030: Rule 2; Unauthorized Interference With City Property
13.28.040: Rule 3; Unauthorized Turn On Or Turnoff Of Water
13.28.050: Rule 4; Owner Has Responsibility For Water Service Charges
13.28.060: Rule 5; Reservation Of Right To Shut Off Water Service
13.28.070: Rule 6; Pressure Relief Valve Requirement
13.28.080: Rule 7; Private Installation Of Plumbing
13.28.090: Rule 8; City Not Liable For Damage Due To Freeze Up
13.28.100: Rule 9; City Not Obligated To Assist In Thawing Pipes
13.28.110: Rule 10; Public Works Director Right Of Access
13.28.120: Rule 11; Maintenance Of City Fixtures
13.28.130: Rule 12; Ground Wire Attachment To Plumbing Prohibited
13.28.140: Rule 13; City And Consumer Liability Limitations
13.28.150: Rule 14; Written Notice Requirements
13.28.160: Rule 15; Representations Not Binding Unless In Writing
13.28.170: Rule 16; Water Service Resale Prohibited
13.28.180: Rule 17; Extension Within Corporate Limits
13.28.190: Rule 18; Abandonment Of Service
13.28.200: Rule 19; Enlargement Of Tap And Service Pipe
13.28.210: Rule 20; Fire Hydrant Service Extension; Generally
13.28.220: Rule 21; Private Hydrant Service Extension
13.28.230: Rule 22; Extraterritorial Service Extension
13.28.240: Rule 23; Fire Hydrant Charges
13.28.250: Rule 24; Gate Valve Installation On Fire Hydrants
13.28.260: Rule 25; Unauthorized Opening Of Hydrants
13.28.270: Rule 26; Private Fire Hydrants Generally
13.28.280: Rule 27; Haulers And Carriers
13.28.290: Rule 28; Fee For Consumer Supplying Premises Of Another
13.28.300: Rule 29; Community Hydrant
13.28.310: Rule 30; Meters; Generally
13.28.320: Rule 31; Meter; Installation
13.28.330: Rule 32; Meter; Reading
13.28.340: Rule 33; Meter; Rate Prior To Installation
13.28.350: Rule 34; Meter; Testing
13.28.360: Rule 35; Meter; Rate Estimate In Event Of Failure
13.28.370: Rule 36; Meter; Maintenance Requirements
13.28.380: Rule 37; Turn On Requirements
13.28.390: Rule 38; City Noncompliance To Telephonic Requests
13.28.400: Rule 39; Cash Deposit; Required
13.28.410: Rule 40; Cash Deposit; Rates
13.28.420: Rule 41; Cash Deposit; Application To Amounts Due
13.28.430: Rule 42; Bills; Billing Intervals
13.28.440: Rule 43; Bills; Net Rates
13.28.450: Rule 44; Bills; Disputed Amounts
13.28.460: Rule 45; Bills; Delinquent (Rep. by Ord. 1077, 2010)
13.28.470: Rule 46; Bills; Violation Of Regulations Deemed Delinquency
13.28.480: Rule 47; Bills; Discontinuance Of Account
13.28.490: Rule 48; Bills; Meter Reading Dates
13.28.500: Rule 49; Bills; Excess Water Charge Adjustment
13.28.510: Rule 50; Bills; Credit For Interruption Of Service
13.28.520: Rule 51; Bills; Exceptions To Minimum Charges
13.28.530: Rule 52; Bills; Service Restoration Charges
13.28.540: Rule 53; Tap Or Service Pipe Size Fixing
13.28.550: Rule 54; Service Pipe Extension
13.28.560: Rule 55; Stop And Waste Valve Installation
13.28.570: Rule 56; Applicant Responsibility For Violation
13.28.580: Rule 57; Service Application To Constitute Contract
13.28.590: Rule 58; Turn Off For Violation
13.28.600: Penalty
13.28.010: RULES GENERALLY:
The following rules and regulations concerning the municipal water system are
prescribed as set forth in this chapter. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.020: RULE 1; RELOCATION OF SERVICE PIPE:
Whenever it is necessary to change the location of the service pipe for any
premises, due to a relocation of the city's mains, or in order to effect
economy, the city will install such service pipe in like size, furnish all
material and perform all work at its own expense, inside the property line of
the premises served, necessary to connect with the service in the new location,
whenever the conditions in such instances make any other arrangement unjust and
inequitable. Nothing in this rule shall be construed, however, as to estoppel
to the changing or relocating of the city's mains as the city elects. (Prior
code §27-6)
13.28.030: RULE 2; UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE WITH CITY PROPERTY:
No mechanic, plumber, person or persons, not authorized agents of the city,
shall in any way tamper with, interfere with, or make repairs, connections or
replacements to any of the city's property. If a change or relocation of the
city's property is desired, the city must be notified of such a change, and if
the request for change is granted or approved, the change or relocation will be
made by the city's authorized agent at such time as is most convenient for the
city. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.040: RULE 3; UNAUTHORIZED TURN ON OR TURNOFF OF WATER:
No mechanic, plumber, person or persons, other than employees of the city,
shall be permitted or authorized to turn on or off the water the city has shut
off under any circumstances, for any premises, without permission of the city;
provided, however, that turnoffs may be made by persons other than city
employees in case service pipe or plumbing has burst and damage is resulting to
other property either of the city or the consumer. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.050: RULE 4; OWNER HAS RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE CHARGES:
Owners of real property being provided domestic water service by the city shall
be responsible for all deposits, fees and charges for such services,
irrespective of whether the owner is the occupant of the real property or is
otherwise a consumer as referenced in this chapter. All applications for
domestic water service must be made by the owner of the real property to be
provided the services. Monthly bills shall be sent to the owner who has made
the application for domestic water service. If the account has become
delinquent, the owner of the real property to which the services have been
provided shall be mailed a notice of termination of services at least ten (10)
days prior to actual termination, which notice must also set forth the amount
of all delinquent charges and fees. All fees and charges not paid by the date
of termination shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property.
(Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.060: RULE 5; RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER SERVICE:
A.   The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water supply for
repairs, extensions, nonpayment of bills and other reasons. Notice of such
shutoff, in case of repairs and extensions, will be given when convenient and
if time permits. Not less than twenty four (24) hours' notice will be given
when shutoff is to be made for nonpayment of bills or violations of rules of
the city.
B.   The city shall use reasonable diligence to provide sufficient and
continuous service, and, having used reasonable diligence, shall not be liable
to the consumer for failure or interruption of such service, but shall remove
the cause thereof with all reasonable diligence. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.070: RULE 6; PRESSURE RELIEF VALVE REQUIREMENT:
A.   All persons having boilers, water tanks or other equipment supplied by
direct pressure from the city's mains, shall install a pressure relief valve,
or other device to serve the same purpose, so as to prevent excess pressure
forcing hot water and steam back into the water meter or mains of the city.
B.   The consumer failing to equip and install properly the necessary pressure
relief valve, or other device on the premises connected with the city water
meter and mains in such a way as to avoid steam or hot water being forced back
into such meter and mains belonging to the city, will be responsible for the
damage resulting therefrom and the city will bill the consumer for such damage.
If such damage results on two (2) or more occasions to the city's property on
or at the same premises, the city may discontinue all service until the
necessary correction is made so as to prevent a recurrence. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.080: RULE 7; PRIVATE INSTALLATION OF PLUMBING:
The consumer must install and maintain at his own expense all pipes and other
plumbing within the boundary line of his premises. Installation of plumbing,
pipe fittings or repairs to plumbing on private property is not a part of the
city's business or service. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.090: RULE 8; CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGE DUE TO FREEZE UP:
The city shall not be responsible for damage resulting from freeze ups on any
part of the water pipes or other equipment inside the property lines of the
premises. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.100: RULE 9; CITY NOT OBLIGATED TO ASSIST IN THAWING PIPES:
The city is not obligated to perform any service in thawing of pipes, locating
leaks or other trouble inside the property line of any of its consumers. It
shall however, endeavor to assist the consumer in finding the cause of trouble
upon his premises whenever conditions will permit. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.110: RULE 10; PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR RIGHT OF ACCESS:
The public works director and employees duly designated by him, shall have
reasonable access to all real property supplied with water by the city's
delivery system for the purposes of installing water meters and reading the
same, and shall further inspect city property installed on said real property
which comprises part of the delivery or meter system, as required in this
chapter. (Ord. 627(SSS), 1980: prior code §27-6)
13.28.120: RULE 11; MAINTENANCE OF CITY FIXTURES:
Mains and pipes, apparatus, instruments, meters and materials supplied by the
city, shall remain its property, and shall be returned to it by the consumer in
the same condition as when received by the consumer, except for ordinary wear
and depreciation, and the city may at any time examine, change or repair its
property on the premises of the consumer, and may remove all such property at
the termination of service, or at any time thereafter. All damages or injury to
pipes, apparatus or materials of the city on the consumer's premises, caused by
an act or neglect of the consumer, shall be made good by the consumer. (Prior
code §27-6)
13.28.130: RULE 12; GROUND WIRE ATTACHMENT TO PLUMBING PROHIBITED:
All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any ground wire or wires to any
plumbing which is or may be connected to any service connection or main
belonging to the city. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.140: RULE 13; CITY AND CONSUMER LIABILITY LIMITATIONS:
Neither the city nor the consumer shall be liable to the other for any act or
omission caused directly or indirectly by strikes, labor troubles, accident,
litigation, United States, state or municipal interference, or other causes not
due to negligence, but the cause producing such an act or omission shall be
removed with all reasonable diligence. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.150: RULE 14; WRITTEN NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Whenever by any rule, written notice is required to be given, such notice
shall be deemed to be completed:
   1.   If given to the city, when delivered to the city clerk's office in the
city, to any person regularly employed in such office; if deposited in the post
office, postage prepaid, and registered, addressed to the city at such office;
   2.   If given to the consumer personally, or by delivery to some person
regularly employed in or residing at the place where service is rendered; or
deposited in the post office, postage prepaid, and registered, addressed to the
consumer at such place.
B.   If notice is served by mail, the usual time for transmission of the mail
between point of deposit and the place of delivery, but in no case to exceed
three (3) days, shall be added to the time within which notice, as prescribed
by the rules, is to become effective. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.160: RULE 15; REPRESENTATIONS NOT BINDING UNLESS IN WRITING:
No promises, representations or advice of any employee of the city shall be
binding unless made in writing over the signature of the mayor and city clerk.
(Prior code §27-6)
13.28.170: RULE 16; WATER SERVICE RESALE PROHIBITED:
In no case will water service be furnished for resale purposes where the city
itself furnishes retail service of the same class or classes. (Prior code §27-
6)
13.28.180: RULE 17; EXTENSION WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS:
A.   Extension, as contemplated in these rules, is as follows:
   1.   A branch from or continuation of an existing main or service pipe, or
both, to serve new business;
   2.   The changing of any main or service now installed to meet the
consumer's requirements;
   3.   Any increase of capacity of any existing extension. It may consist of
mains, service pipes, meters, connections and other materials; provided,
however, that extensions within the meaning of this rule shall not include
connection lines, pipes, taps and service lines on private property, which are
required to be installed and maintained at the consumer's expense pursuant to
rule 7 and all rules supplemental thereto.
B.   Whenever an applicant for service is not on an existing main, or a
consumer's operations are not located upon a completed main of such capacity as
to enable the city to furnish the service desired by the consumer, extensions
from the nearest available main to the applicant's or consumer's place of
operation will be made upon the following conditions:
   1.   The city shall not construct nor pay for the construction of water
distribution lines or laterals or other extensions which are not shown and
described in the maps, plans and specifications concerning the system now on
file in the office of the city clerk;
   2.   Any such lines or laterals or other extensions when needed shall be
constructed by the applicants for water service through or from the system, and
at their expense, including, but not limited to, a reasonable charge by the
city for city engineering, supervision and inspection, in accordance with the
specifications prescribed by the city engineer;
   3.   Any such lines or laterals or other extensions upon their connection to
the system shall become a part of the municipal water system owned, operated
and maintained by the city; provided, however, that except in the case of
subdivisions which are subject to the city's subdivision ordinance, copies of
which are on file in the office of the city clerk, extensions may be made at
city expense, either in whole or in part, in those cases where in the judgment
of the city exercised prior to commencement of construction thereof, such
extension will be in the best interests of the city.
13.28.190: RULE 18; ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
When the owner, at any time after the first year of service, entirely suspends
operations, with the intention to permanently abandon them, he may procure
cancellation of the contract upon written application to the city, made not
less than sixty (60) days before the effective date of such proposed
cancellation. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.200: RULE 19; ENLARGEMENT OF TAP AND SERVICE PIPE:
Where the owner desires the enlargement of his tap and service pipe because of
inadequacy and was not restricted in size by the city at the time of
installation, such enlargement will be made only at the owner's cost and
expense. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.210: RULE 20; FIRE HYDRANT SERVICE EXTENSION; GENERALLY:
Extensions and installations for fire hydrant service shall be as provided for
and set out under schedule 5, on file in the office of the city clerk. (Prior
code §27-6)
13.28.220: RULE 21; PRIVATE HYDRANT SERVICE EXTENSION:
A.   All installations or extensions for private fire hydrants or service as
provided for under schedule 2, on file in the office of the city clerk, shall
be as follows: All expenses for installation shall be paid for in cash by the
applicant before installation is made. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.230: RULE 22; EXTRATERRITORIAL SERVICE EXTENSION:
In all territory located outside of the corporate limits of the city, where the
city has a sufficient source of water and sufficient capacity in its mains
running parallel with the property for which service is desired, the city may
permit a connection thereto in the manner herein prescribed for property within
its corporate boundaries. An owner will be required to effect a satisfactory
conveyance of the fee title or an appropriate right of way as easement to any
not owned by the owner on which any connection is situated free of all liens
and encumbrances. All connections to and users of the water system outside the
corporate boundaries of the city are subject to the prior right of the city and
its inhabitants to the complete and full use of the system to the exclusion of
all present or future connectors or users. Water shall be used outside the
corporate limits only when it is above that necessary for the city's present
needs, and determination of the needs and requirements of the city and its
inhabitants with respect to water from its system is a fact to be determined by
the city council in its own sound discretion to be exercised from time to time
as occasion may require. While it is the purpose of the city to maintain a
water supply adequate to meet the needs of both the city and owners outside its
corporate limits and within the metropolitan area, there are many elements
which make it uncertain whether the supply can always be adequate for all, and
therefore in times of shortage, water service outside the city will be
curtailed on an equitable basis to be determined by the city council. (Ord.
1093, 2012)
13.28.240: RULE 23; FIRE HYDRANT CHARGES:
Charges for fire hydrants which are at this time installed, and future
installations shall be as provided for under schedule 5, on file in the office
of the city clerk. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.250: RULE 24; GATE VALVE INSTALLATION ON FIRE HYDRANTS:
Gate valves will be installed by the city upon all fire hydrants, standpipes
and other similar structures, whether public or private, so as to permit them
to be turned off without disconnecting service on any main. It is not intended
by this rule to require gate valves to be installed immediately on all
hydrants, standpipes and other similar structures now existing, but that the
valves shall be installed from time to time as the equipment referred to is
replaced or new installations are made. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.260: RULE 25; UNAUTHORIZED OPENING OF HYDRANTS:
No person, acting either for himself or as the agent of any person, persons,
firm, corporation or municipality, not authorized by the city, shall take any
water from any hydrant. Members of the fire department shall have authority to
open hydrants only for purposes in connection with firefighting or fire
protection operation. In the event water is desired from a fire hydrant, for
other than firefighting or fire protection operations, permission must be
obtained from the city to draw water from such fire hydrant. Such consent shall
not be given by the city until satisfactory arrangements have been made
concerning the condition and limitations for the service and the payment
thereof as provided for in schedule 4, on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Prior code §27-6)
13.28.270: RULE 26; PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS GENERALLY:
The use of water through an unmetered private fire service or tap, except for
testing purposes, is not allowed. The city may, at its option, seal the valves
on such fire lines, which seals may be broken only in case of fire. In the
event a test of the fire line is desired, the city must be notified and the
seals broken only in the presence of the city's agent. Any violation of this
regulation shall be sufficient cause for the city to discontinue the service.
Such service will not again be granted until satisfactory arrangements have
been made with the city concerning payment for water drawn from such fire
hydrant or service in the past and up until the time of disconnection, and then
only on a metered basis at the rate applicable. Nothing in this rule is to be
construed as an estoppel to the city metering the private fire service whenever
it desires, but the metered rate shall not apply in such case unless improper
use of water from such private fire service is disclosed by the meter. The city
may, with consent of the property owner, connect to the private fire service
for any premises, lines supplying domestic service for the same premises or
building. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.280: RULE 27; HAULERS AND CARRIERS:
No tap or service upon any premises shall be used by any other person, persons,
firm or corporation except those occupying or in charge of the premises to
which such tap or service is extended, unless provision is made for haulers and
carriers at the time of the signing of the regular application for service.
(Prior code §27-6)
13.28.290: RULE 28; FEE FOR CONSUMER SUPPLYING PREMISES OF ANOTHER:
Whenever any consumer (tap or service), coming within schedule 1, on file in
the office of the city clerk, shall permit any other person or persons, firm or
corporation, to take water from such consumer's premises without written
consent of the city, a charge of one dollar ($1.00) per month shall be made
against such consumer for each additional premises receiving, by carrier or
otherwise, water from such consumer's premises. Such charge is to be made
monthly in accordance with schedule 1, and the consumer, refusing to pay such
additional charge, shall be deemed a delinquent consumer, and dealt with
according to the rules of the city. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.300: RULE 29; COMMUNITY HYDRANT:
The city at all times shall maintain at least one hydrant or standpipe, more or
less centrally located, in the city, where water can be had in cans, barrels or
tank lots during regular business hours, as provided for in schedule 6, on file
in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.310: RULE 30; METERS; GENERALLY:
Meters will be installed between the curbing and the sidewalk, or in the
sidewalk in front of the premises to be served, whenever possible. The city
reserves the right to install the meter at any other location it may deem
advisable. Whenever a meter is installed in the basement of the premises of a
consumer, or upon any other part of the consumer's premises, the city shall
secure the consent of such consumer for such installation, and when such
installation has been properly made the city shall not be held liable for any
damage resulting directly or indirectly from such installation unless
negligence is shown. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.320: RULE 31; METER; INSTALLATION:
In any building where the meter is to be installed in the basement, the
incoming water pipe must be so installed that it enters the basement at least
sixteen inches (16") from the riser in order that a meter can be set in a
horizontal position. All pipes to the different parts of the buildings or
grounds must take off from the consumer's service pipe at least one foot (1')
from the installed meter. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.330: RULE 32; METER; READING:
All water delivered by the city shall, except as specifically provided for in
schedules 2 and 5, on file in the office of the city clerk, be paid for
according to the measurement by meter or other measurements. For the purpose of
determining the amount of water delivered, the reading of each meter installed
shall be deemed conclusive as to the amount of water delivered through it,
unless upon being tested, such meter shall be found to register inaccurately,
in which event the provisions of these rules and regulations applicable
thereto, and as hereinafter provided, shall govern. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.340: RULE 33; METER; RATE PRIOR TO INSTALLATION:
Any service which is now installed, or which may hereafter be installed,
without a meter, is to be charged for on the minimum rate for such service as
may be described in any of the city's schedules until such time as a meter is
regularly installed. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.350: RULE 34; METER; TESTING:
A.   The city reserves the right to test any meter, at any time when it deems
it necessary, at its own expense.
B.   Whenever a meter, at the request of a consumer or at the option of the
city, has been tested within the eighteen (18) month period immediately
preceding a consumer's request for the testing of the meter, the consumer shall
be required to deposit the sum of one dollar ($1.00) with the city, and the
city's meter will be tested at the consumer's premises. The consumer will be
notified in advance and may be present or represented at such test. If upon
examination and the test, the meter is found to overregister more than three
percent (3%), another meter will be substituted therefor. The fee of one dollar
($1.00) so deposited in such cases will be repaid to the depositor and the
water bills adjusted to correct the error discovered, but in no case shall
adjustment of such error be made for a greater period than three (3) months. If
the meter shall be found to register less than three percent (3%) in excess of
the actual flow, or to register less than the actual quantity of water passing
through it, the fee of one dollar ($1.00) so deposited by the consumer will be
retained by the city, as compensation for the time required in making such
test. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.360: RULE 35; METER; RATE ESTIMATE IN EVENT OF FAILURE:
Should a meter fail to register, the water used will be estimated at:
A.   That of the same month of the previous year; or
B.   The average of the several preceding months on record. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.370: RULE 36; METER; MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Where a meter is installed upon the premises of a consumer, such consumer
shall, at all times, make it possible for the city or its representative to
read, test or repair such meter. Such consumer shall be liable to the city for
damages resulting to said meter, where such damage is directly caused by the
consumer, the immediate members of his family, his agents or employees. Where a
meter is installed in the sidewalk or curbing, the consumer will use every
effort to protect such meter from wilful or malicious destruction, together
with all other exposed property which may belong to the city, and which has
been used for the installation of such consumer's service. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.380: RULE 37; TURNON REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The city is not obligated to turn the water on for any person at any
premises until an "application for service" has been signed at the office of
the city, and schedule of service selected by the responsible party or his
agent, and the rules of the city providing for the payment of future water
bills, as set out by the rules hereinafter provided for, have been complied
with.
B.   No rate contract or application is assignable from one user to another,
except upon a written agreement of all parties concerned. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.390: RULE 38; CITY NONCOMPLIANCE TO TELEPHONIC REQUESTS:
The risk of noncompliance by the city to telephonic requests to have water
turned off or on at any premises, or for other purposes, is entirely assumed by
the person ordering. The failure of the city to perform work when so requested
will in no case be a reason for adjustment. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.400: RULE 39; CASH DEPOSIT; REQUIRED:
Upon signing the application for service, all owners of every kind and
description, excepting federal, state, county, municipal, religious and
charitable institutions, shall make a cash deposit securing the credit and the
payment for the service rendered by the city. The owners above exempt from
making said cash deposit shall be considered to have already established their
credit, but such owners are not exempted from the requirements of the other
rules of the city pertaining to an owner's credit, its establishment and
continuation. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.410: RULE 40; CASH DEPOSIT; RATES:
The city shall require deposit from all owners, except those referred to in
section
13.28.400, "Rule 39; Cash Deposit; Required", of this chapter, to secure the
payment of all bills as they mature. Such required deposit for owners shall be
a sum as fixed from time to time by resolution of the council. Deposits shall
not exceed the amount of an estimated ninety (90) days' bill of the owner. Upon
a user ceasing to be serviced by the system, any balance remaining of the
deposit shall be returned to the user upon proof of payment of all charges and
fees through the date of final use. The deposit shall also be returned to the
user upon timely payment in full of all user charges for a twelve (12)
consecutive month period. In the event the water service to an account is shut
off for reason of nonpayment and the deposit has already been returned, a new
deposit shall be required at the time services are restored. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.420: RULE 41; CASH DEPOSIT; APPLICATION TO AMOUNTS DUE:
The city shall have the right to apply such deposit to the payment of all
amounts due and owing from the owner, and if the owner shall fail to restore
any such deposit, upon ten (10) days' notice in writing, delivered personally
or by mail, the time of notice to be computed from the date of personal
delivery or date of mailing, the city, without further notice, may discontinue
service until the deposit is restored. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.430: RULE 42; BILLS; BILLING INTERVALS:
Bills are due on the date of bill, which, normally, will be rendered as nearly
as practicable at monthly intervals for all water service furnished during the
preceding month, as herein defined; but the city, at its option, may render
bills to regular owners at other, but in the case of residence owners, not
shorter, intervals; provided, that any owner may be billed at termination of
service. Temporary owners of any class may be billed at any time at the option
of the city. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.440: RULE 43; BILLS; NET RATES:
Net rates, if provided for in the schedule, are allowed on monthly bills only
when bill is paid in full at the city's office within ten (10) days after date
of bill, and on bills rendered at more frequent intervals, when paid within
three (3) days after date of bill, unless otherwise provided in the schedule
under which service is rendered, and when no previous bill for service remains
unpaid, unless disputed under section
13.28.450, "Rule 44; Bills; Disputed Amounts", of this chapter. Failure to
receive bill will not excuse failure to pay so as to entitle the consumer to
the net rate. When the last day of the application of net rate falls on a legal
holiday, the net rate will be allowed on the next business day. When
remittances are made by mail, the bills shall be deemed paid on the date of
mailing as shown by the postmark. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.450: RULE 44; BILLS; DISPUTED AMOUNTS:
A dispute as to the amount of a bill, or the credits to be allowed against the
same, shall not justify the owner in refusing to pay the bill when due, but if
the owner shall give written notice at the city's office, at the time of
payment (which must be before the delinquent date) that the bill is disputed,
stating the amount and reasons of the dispute, the city will forthwith
investigate such complaint and if such investigation shall disclose that the
owner's objections are well founded, the city will refund the amount of the
overpayment, or credit it upon the next monthly bill of the owner. (Ord. 1093,
2012)
13.28.460: RULE 45; BILLS; DELINQUENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1077, 2010)
13.28.470: RULE 46; BILLS; VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS DEEMED DELINQUENCY:
If a violation has resulted in the user or owner securing water without paying
for it, as provided for in these schedules, rates, rules and regulations, the
city shall estimate the amount of water so used and the service of such owner
shall be considered delinquent, and is not to be reconnected or continued until
after this estimated bill has been adjusted. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.480: RULE 47; BILLS; DISCONTINUANCE OF ACCOUNT:
Accounts will be continued and water bills rendered regularly until the city
has been duly notified in writing, or in person, at the office of the city
clerk, during office hours, to discontinue service. Failure of the city to
close any account or discontinue service when such order is not given as above,
shall not be grounds for adjustment of charges rendered in accordance herewith.
(Prior code §27-6)
13.28.490: RULE 48; BILLS; METER READING DATES:
Meter readings are assumed to be made as of the twentieth day of the month, or
date nearest thereto, which is possible for the reading to be made. (Prior code
§27-6)
13.28.500: RULE 49; BILLS; EXCESS WATER CHARGE ADJUSTMENT:
Where there has been a substantial registration of water as shown by the meter
reading over the normal average of the owner affected, and such excess has been
caused by defect or defects on the premises occupied by such owner, and which
are repaired immediately upon discovery, the city will make settlement of the
charge of the excess water over the normal average as is fair and just under
all the facts and circumstances as shall be found to exist. No adjustment
whatever will be made unless due diligence is used on the part of the owner in
taking care of plumbing and repairing defects immediately upon discovery or
advice by the city that leaks are apparent. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.510: RULE 50; BILLS; CREDIT FOR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
For any failure or interruption of service, such interruption being continuous
for twelve (12) hours or longer due to causes not the fault of the owner, the
city will credit the owner with the proportions of the service charge which
would otherwise accrue to the city during the period of failure or
interruption, but such credit will be made only when claim therefor is made in
writing at the city's office within forty eight (48) hours after any such
interruptions occur. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.520: RULE 51; BILLS; EXCEPTIONS TO MINIMUM CHARGES:
Excepting application providing for term minimum guarantee, based on special
investment made to serve consumer has been made, no water bill shall be less
than the minimum charge for a full month for service applied for under the
following conditions:
A.   Where the water is turned off within thirty (30) days after being turned
on;
B.   Where the water is turned on for the same consumer in the same premises
within twenty (20) days after being turned off. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.530: RULE 52; BILLS; SERVICE RESTORATION CHARGES:
Where service is terminated for nonpayment of delinquent bills, the city, as a
condition of restoring the service, shall charge the responsible party as
provided in other provisions of this title, the delinquent amount past due as
of the fifteenth of the same month of service termination. No employee or
officer of the city shall have the right to waive the charge provided for in
this rule. (Ord. 1142, 2015)
13.28.540: RULE 53; TAP OR SERVICE PIPE SIZE FIXING:
The city reserves the right to fix the size of the service pipe or tap and
meter to be installed at any premises. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.550: RULE 54; SERVICE PIPE EXTENSION:
Where it is necessary to extend the service pipe at the time of installation
through any basement or foundation wall, the applicant, at no expense to the
city, must provide and make the opening through such wall to accommodate the
introduction of the water pipe. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.560: RULE 55; STOP AND WASTE VALVE INSTALLATION:
A.   Stop and waste valves must be installed at the owner's expense, on all
taps in a place always accessible and so located so as to permit shutting off
the water for the entire premises with the least possible delay, and all
persons on the premises should become familiar with its location and use. Such
stop and waste valves shall be in addition to any which may be installed by the
city.
B.   It is not intended by this rule to require stop and waste valves to be
installed immediately upon all services heretofore installed, but that said
stop and waste valves shall be installed from time to time as services are
installed, repaired or replaced. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.570: RULE 56; APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATION:
The person making the application for service is held responsible for any
violation of any of the rules hereinbefore set forth, even though the breach is
continued by someone employed either directly or indirectly by such person or
caused or continued by an immediate member of the family occupying the premises
covered by the application for service. (Prior code §27-6)
13.28.580: RULE 57; SERVICE APPLICATION TO CONSTITUTE CONTRACT:
All applications for service, when accepted by the city, together with the
schedules, rates, rules and regulations and all amendments thereof or
supplemental thereto, shall constitute the entire contract between the city and
owner unless provided for by separate agreement; such agreement to be approved
as to contents and form by the city council. (Ord. 1093, 2012)
13.28.590: RULE 58; TURN OFF FOR VIOLATION:
For any violation of the preceding rules and regulations by any individual, the
water service to said individual will be turned off as provided for, and will
not be reconnected until adequate assurances have been given the city that the
violations will cease and that the conditions in section
13.28.530, "Rule 52; Bills; Service Restoration Charges", of this chapter under
credit and billings have been complied with. A one hundred dollar ($100.00)
reconnect fee shall be assessed any individual found to have been a repeat
violator of the unauthorized water turn on provisions of this code. Penalties
provided for herein shall be in addition to whatever other penalties may be
provided for a violation of an individual portion of this chapter. (Ord. 710
§1, 1989: prior code §27-6)
13.28.600: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of a violation of section
13.28.030 or section
13.28.040 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or incarceration in jail
for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 710 §2, 1989)
CHAPTER 13.29
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
SECTION:
13.29.010: Definitions
13.29.020: Cross Connections Prohibited
13.29.030: Discontinuance Of Water Service
13.29.040: Water Supply Protection
13.29.050: Duty To Install And Inspect Annually
13.29.060: New Construction
13.29.070: Existing Equipment
13.29.080: Repair And Maintenance Of Equipment
13.29.090: Access For Inspection
13.29.100: Certified Backflow Technician
13.29.110: Notification Of Public
13.29.120: Records
13.29.130: Violations
13.29.010: DEFINITIONS:
   BACK PRESSURE: A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a
pump, elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
   BACK SIPHONAGE: The flowing back of used water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a public drinking water supply system
from any source other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of
pressure in the public drinking water supply system.
   BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water in a public drinking
water distribution system as a result of cross connection.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device, assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow, designed to meet the standards for such desires as required by the
uniform plumbing code or similar nationally recognized code as adopted by the
city of Jerome.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or structural
arrangement between a public or consumer's potable water system and any other
source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the
potable system used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the
intended potable water with which the system is supplied, including, but not
limited to, any bypass arrangement, jumper connection, removable section,
swivel, changeover device, or any other temporary or permanent device because
of which backflow occurs.
   DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.020: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
The installation or maintenance of a cross connection within the area provided
potable water by the city is hereby prohibited. Any such cross connection now
existing is declared a nuisance and shall be removed or abated upon order of
the director. Failure to remove a cross connection or to install a backflow
prevention device approved by the Idaho department of health and welfare, as
the director may order, within ten (10) days of the order, shall result in the
discontinuation of potable water service until compliance with this chapter is
made. (Ord. 634 §2, 1980)
13.29.030: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
Where a cross connection exists, future extension of potable water service
through the city water system shall be contingent upon the removal of the cross
connection, or the maintenance of an adequate backflow prevention device, in
accordance with the order of the director. (Ord. 634 §3, 1980)
13.29.040: WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION:
No potable water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the city, unless the water supplying the premises is protected as
required by this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
occupiable premises to effect installation and inspections as required herein,
and to immediately give notice to the director. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.050: DUTY TO INSTALL AND INSPECT ANNUALLY:
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property where drinking water
is consumed to purchase, install, test and maintain backflow prevention devices
or assemblies commensurate with the degree of hazard wherever it will be
possible for a cross connection to exist. Each owner shall have a certified
inspection and operational test made at least once a year at the owner's
expense. Where the city deems the hazard to be especially significant, the city
may require the owner to have such inspections and tests at a more frequent
interval. All such tests shall be made according to the standards set forth by
the state of Idaho department of environmental quality. Test reports will be
made in triplicate, with copies going to the owner, the director and to the
inspector. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.060: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The director will review all plans and inspect new construction to ensure that
unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the owner's water
system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, protection will be
required. Installation of an air gap or other approved backflow prevention
device in accordance with the uniform plumbing code or other similar nationally
recognized code as then adopted by the city shall be required. The owner shall
provide the director with verification of a certified test of the backflow
prevention device before a certificate of occupancy is issued. (Ord. 1025,
2007)
13.29.070: EXISTING EQUIPMENT:
All backflow prevention devices existing, which do not meet the requirements
hereof shall nonetheless be required to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Backflow prevention devices that are deemed by the director to be
nonetheless adequate for the purposes intended may be allowed, in which event
compliance with any particular provision hereof may be waived in writing by the
city. Such previously existing devices shall be subject to the periodic
inspection and testing requirements of this chapter. Whenever an existing
backflow prevention device is moved to another location, or requires more than
minimum maintenance, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device
meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.080: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The maintenance, including necessary repairs, of all backflow prevention
devices required by this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner of
property where such a device is installed. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.090: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
All water systems connecting to the city public drinking water system shall be
open for inspection at all reasonable times by authorized representatives of
the city in order to determine whether cross connections or other structural or
sanitary hazards including violations of this chapter exist. In order to make
such determination, the inspection shall include access to above ceiling areas,
pits, paneled interior areas, or their locations where cross connections might
exist. Each owner and/or any occupant shall be responsible to provide a route
of access across the property for inspection purposes that is free from litter,
overgrowth, the threat of a vicious animal, or other hindrance that may be
detrimental to the safety of the inspector or obstructive to ease of access.
(Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.100: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:
All tests of backflow prevention devices shall be conducted by a certified
backflow technician, certified in accordance with rules and regulations of the
Idaho department of environmental quality, who will be responsible for the
competence and accuracy of all tests and reports. Such technician shall be
responsible to:
A.   Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for the
testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention devices.
B.   Make reports of such testing and/or repair within required times to the
owner and the director on a form approved for such use by the city.
C.   Include in all reports, a list of any materials or replacement parts used.
D.   Assure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts and
that any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or
operational characteristics of the assembly.
E.   Maintain their license in current condition and all testing equipment in
proper operating condition.
F.   Be equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges, and
other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow prevention
devices.
G.   Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure
backflow assembly or other backflow prevention device showing the serial
number, date tested, and by whom, together with the technician's license
number.
H.   Inspect high hazard air gap assemblies.
I.   Comply with all OSHA standards on confined spaces, including procedures
for entering such spaces and required safety equipment. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.110: NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC:
The city shall use reasonable means to notify its customers of the hazards of
cross connections and the need for annual inspection of backflow prevention
devices. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.120: RECORDS:
The city shall keep records of known cross connections and the condition of
backflow prevention devices, including those records required by state and
federal agencies. (Ord. 1025, 2007)
13.29.130: VIOLATIONS:
Service of water to a consumer on property found to be in violation of this
chapter shall be discontinued by the city after written notice of the violation
to both the owner and/or consumer, in accordance with other applicable
provisions of this code. A violation exists if:
A.   Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter for control of cross
connections are not installed, tested, or maintained, as required herein.
B.   It is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed.
C.   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises of the owner.
D.   The periodic system inspection required herein has not been conducted.
E.   A false report or false information is provided to the city by or on
behalf of the owner or consumer, with regard to a cross connection or backflow
prevention device.
Where written notification of a deficiency is provided by the city, and the
owner fails to take the required corrective action within ten (10) days after
the date of mailing such notice, the city shall immediately commence
proceedings to discontinue water service unless the city, at the request of the
owner, authorizes a longer time for completion. Except that owners of existing
backflow devices that were installed prior to March 1, 2008, will have sixty
(60) days in the first year to correct deficiencies. Water service will not be
restored until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. (Ord. 1025,
2007)
CHAPTER 13.30
WATER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
13.30.010: Connection Charges
13.30.020: Meter And Equipment Cost
13.30.030: Optional Installation Requirements
13.30.040: Exemption From Street Cut Fee
13.30.010: CONNECTION CHARGES:
A connection fee to each new customer service shall be paid by every new
customer connecting to the water system as follows:
FEE SCHEDULE 1
Diameter Of Connection (Inches) Fee
Diameter Of Connection (Inches) Fee
3/4                             $500.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
1                               $889.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
1.5                             $2,000.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
2                               $3,556.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
3                               $8,001.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
4                               $14,224.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
6                               $32,004.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
 
FEE SCHEDULE 2
Diameter Of Connection (Inches) Fee
Diameter Of Connection (Inches) Fee
3/4                             $200.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
1                               $356.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
1.5                             $800.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
2                               $1,422.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
3                               $3,200.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
4                               $5,690.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
6                               $12,802.00 plus actual cost of meter to city
 
Any service greater than six inches (6") in diameter will require a fee
determined by the following formula: $1.788 x BR (where BR is either $500.00 or
$200.00, depending on which fee schedule is used) multiplied by D2 (where D2 is
the diameter of the connection squared), plus the actual cost of the meter to
the city.
Fee schedule 1 will be used where the city has provided the works allowing a
connection of the individual water service to the main city line and schedule 2
shall be used where the works allowing the connection have been provided by the
owner of the property to which the connection will be provided or third
parties. (Ord. 954 §1, 2004: Ord. 803 §1, 1996: Ord. 675 §§1, 2, 1984)
13.30.020: METER AND EQUIPMENT COST:
In addition to the connection fee imposed by section
13.30.010 of this chapter, every new customer connecting to the water system
must pay the city the cost of the water meter and related equipment required
for the connection. (Ord. 803 §2, 1996)
13.30.030: OPTIONAL INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
At the option of the city, any person seeking connection to the city water
system may purchase and install a meter and other required equipment to effect
the connection. Upon the connection, the meter and other equipment installed
will become the property of the city. In such event, the city will provide
inspection of the work as it is performed, and all work done will be subject to
the city's approval. The provisions of this section shall apply only to persons
whose property to be served is within a subdivision not approved by the city as
of the date of passage hereof. (Ord. 675 §3, 1984)
13.30.040: EXEMPTION FROM STREET CUT FEE:
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or portion of this code to the contrary,
any person complying with the provisions of this chapter shall not be assessed
a separate street cut fee. (Ord. 675 §4, 1984)
CHAPTER 13.32
IRRIGATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
13.32.010: Irrigation System Under Municipal Control
13.32.020: Water Commissioner Appointment And Duties
13.32.030: Delivery Devices To Be Furnished By City
13.32.040: Assessment And Collection Of Expenses
13.32.050: Fund Established
13.32.060: Unlawful Interference With Ditches And Equipment
13.32.070: Placement Of Earthen Dams Or Injury To Ditches Prohibited
13.32.080: Irrigation Schedule; Penalty For Violation
13.32.010: IRRIGATION SYSTEM UNDER MUNICIPAL CONTROL:
Whereas the city is the holder of legal title to more than a majority of the
shares of the capital stock of North Side Canal Company, Limited, which
represents the water right appurtenant to the lands and lots within the city,
it is declared that the distribution and apportionment of irrigation water to
the inhabitants of the city, the conveyance of irrigation water through the
public streets, avenues and alleys of the city, and the construction,
maintenance and operation of the irrigation works within the city, are subject
to regulation, control and supervision by the mayor and council of the city.
(Prior code §27-7)
13.32.020: WATER COMMISSIONER APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES:
A.   The mayor and council shall at the beginning of each irrigation season
appoint a water commissioner, fix his term of service and his compensation,
which shall be paid out of the "irrigation fund" provided in section
13.32.050 of this chapter. He shall be removable at the pleasure of the mayor
and council.
B.   It shall be the duty of the water commissioner to keep the irrigation
works in good repair and operating condition, and to keep the ditches clean and
free from obstructions.
C.   It shall be his duty to supervise and control, under such general
regulations as the mayor and council may adopt, the distribution and
apportionment of all irrigation water to the inhabitants of the city in
proportion to the amount of land to be irrigated, and he shall have sole
control and regulation of all head gates, weirs, delivery boxes, and other
measuring and delivery devices, and shall see that water is used only in due
turn and rotation, and at the allotted times.
D.   He shall issue certificates to or otherwise inform the water users of the
quantity of water they are to receive, and the times and the duration of the
delivery thereof. (Prior code §27-8)
13.32.030: DELIVERY DEVICES TO BE FURNISHED BY CITY:
Head gates, weirs, delivery boxes or other measuring or delivery devices for
the delivery or measurement to individual users of irrigation water shall be
paid for by the city. Installation of the irrigation measuring or delivery
devices shall be paid for by the city of Jerome, and the city of Jerome shall
be responsible to keep the irrigation measuring or delivery devices in repair.
The duty of the city to keep the measuring and delivery devices in repair shall
not prevent the city from seeking recovery of the costs of repairs from
responsible parties who may intentionally or negligently damage those devices.
In the event a property owner fails to repair head gates, weirs, delivery boxes
or other measuring or delivery devices intentionally or negligently damaged by
the property owner, his family, contractors or invitees, the city shall refuse
to deliver irrigation water to such property owner until the necessary repairs
have been made by the property owner. (Ord. 941 §1, 2003: prior code §27-9)
13.32.040: ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF EXPENSES:
A.   The annual cost of the conveyance, distribution and apportionment of
irrigation water, the construction, maintenance and repair of the irrigation
works, and the charges of the North Side Canal Company, Limited, for the
delivery of water from its system, shall be defrayed by assessment against each
lot and parcel of land whereon irrigation water is, may be, or can be used or
delivered out of the irrigation system, in proportion to the amount of water
allotted to such lot and parcel of land.
B.   The mayor and council shall cause to be prepared in the month of July in
each year an assessment roll showing the amount assessed for the purposes
aforesaid in that year against each lot, piece or parcel of real estate served
by the irrigation system and subject to assessment for such purposes, and file
the same in the office of the city clerk.
C.   The city clerk shall publish in one issue of a newspaper printed and
published in the city a notice stating that the assessment roll has been filed
in his office and a time and place at which the mayor and council will hear and
consider protests against any assessment made therein.
D.   The assessment roll, as modified or confirmed by the mayor and council,
shall be certified to the proper county officer for inclusion in and collection
with the general state and county taxes of that year. (Prior code §27-10)
13.32.050: FUND ESTABLISHED:
All collections of the assessments made under section
13.32.040 of this chapter shall be placed in a separate fund, to be known as
the irrigation fund, out of which shall be paid the annual cost of the
conveyance, distribution and apportionment of irrigation water, the
construction, maintenance and repair of the irrigation works, and the charges
of the North Side Canal Company, Limited, and no other charges. (Prior code
§27-11)
13.32.060: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH DITCHES AND EQUIPMENT:
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change, alter, destroy, disturb,
meddle, tamper or interfere with, any head gate, dam, weir, water box or other
measuring or delivery device, placed, used or regulated by the water
commissioner when such device is being used for the measurement or delivery of
irrigation water, or to meddle, tamper or interfere with the dam or turn
irrigation water so as to disarrange the schedule of distribution of the
municipality and thereby deprive any user or landowner from the uninterrupted
use and benefit of his turn and rotation of such water. (Prior code §27-12)
13.32.070: PLACEMENT OF EARTHEN DAMS OR INJURY TO DITCHES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person:
A.   To place in any ditch earthen dams or checks;
B.   To injure, damage or destroy ditches, laterals, pipes, flumes, culverts or
other devices within the city by which irrigation water is conveyed or
distributed to the inhabitants thereof, or to permit livestock of any kind
owned by him or in his charge to trample down, damage, injure or destroy the
same. (Prior code §27-13)
13.32.080: IRRIGATION SCHEDULE; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A.   An irrigation schedule shall be adopted by the city for each irrigation
season. The irrigation schedule shall be adopted by the city administrator in
consultation with employees of the irrigation department. The irrigation
schedule shall designate the days and times where each property owner may use
irrigation water delivered to that property. The irrigation schedule for that
irrigation season shall be put in writing and delivered to each property owner
by personnel of the city prior to the commencement of each irrigation season.
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use irrigation water provided
through the city of Jerome irrigation system in any manner not in compliance
with the irrigation schedule for that property.
C.   Any of the provisions of subsection B of this section shall be considered
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 947 §1, 2003: Ord. 594, 1977)
CHAPTER 13.36
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
13.36.010: Definitions
13.36.020: Admission Of Industrial Wastes Into Public Sewers; Approval Required
13.36.030: Admission Of Industrial Wastes Into Public Sewers; Pretreatment
13.36.040: Admission Of Industrial Wastes Into Public Sewers; Submission Of
Information
13.36.050: Prohibited Discharges; Sanitary Sewers
13.36.060: Prohibited Discharges; Combined And Storm Sewers
13.36.070: Prohibited Discharges; Enumerated
13.36.080: Special Agreements
13.36.090: Control Of Admissible Wastes; Submission Of Basic Data
13.36.100: Control Of Admissible Wastes; Time Extension For Compliance
13.36.110: Industrial Waste Sewer Service Charges
13.36.120: Flow Measurement And Sampling Facilities
13.36.130: Analyses
13.36.140: Billing Periods
13.36.150: Payment
13.36.160: Delinquency
13.36.170: Discontinuance Of Service
13.36.180: Restoration Of Service
13.36.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings set out below:
   APPROVING AUTHORITY: The public works director of the city; or his duly
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (Abbreviated As BOD): The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in parts per million required for the aerobic biological oxidation of
organic solids in waste or sewage under laboratory conditions of five (5) days'
incubation at a temperature of twenty degrees centigrade (20°C). The laboratory
determination shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
definition of "Standards Methods" of this section.
   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT: The amount of chlorine in pounds required to meet the
chlorine demand and still produce a specified residual chlorine content.
Chlorine residual shall be expressed in parts per million, and shall be
determined in accordance with procedures outlined in the definition of
"Standard Methods" of this section.
   CITY: The city of Jerome, Idaho.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater.
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING: All buildings or premises used for any purpose other
than a dwelling unit, but not an industrial waste contributor.
   DWELLING UNITS: Buildings and structures that are constructed and used
primarily for residential purposes. Any building or structure which has been
constructed or altered to provide for two (2) or more families or households,
or which has been constructed or altered to accommodate travelers or
transients, shall also be considered a dwelling unit(s).
   GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation and dispensing of food, and from
the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
   GROUND GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
   INDUSTRIAL USER: All sewer users which discharge an industrial waste as
defined by the definition of "Industrial Waste" of this section.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any flow discharged to the sewer wastewater treatment
facilities containing one or more of the following:
   A.   A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of suspended solids in any one
day.
   B.   A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of BOD in any one day.
   C.   A total flow of more than 0.025 million gallons per day in any one day,
or a flow that will average more than 0.025 million gallons per day for a
monthly period.
   PARTS PER MILLION: A weight to weight ratio. The formula PPM times 8.345
times million gallons per day shall be used to compute organic and solids
loading for purposes of the definition of "Industrial Waste" of this section.
   PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of
the procedures outlined in the definition of "Standard Methods" of this
section.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary or
combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with city funds.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys domestic, commercial, or industrial
wastes, or a combination of the three (3), and into which storm, surface, and
ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SERVICE CHARGE: The assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying wastewater or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
   SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of wastewater and industrial wastes.
   SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
   STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water, Sewage,
And Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage
and Industrial Wastes Association.
   STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage,
but excludes domestic, commercial, and industrial wastes.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, domestic, commercial, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
definition of "Standard Methods" of this section.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER OR LIQUIDS: Any water or liquid containing none of the
following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalies; substances that
may impart taste and odor or color characteristics; toxic or poisonous
substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; odorous or otherwise
obnoxious gases. It shall contain not more than thirty (30) parts per million
each of suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand. Analytical
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
definition of "Standard Methods" of this section.
   WASTEWATER: The water carried human, animal, or household wastes in a public
or private drain, and may include ground water infiltration, surface drainage,
and industrial wastes.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: An assemblage of devices, structures, and
equipment for treating domestic, commercial, and industrial waste.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating, and disposing of domestic, commercial, and industrial waste, and it
includes sewers as well as the waste treatment facilities. (Ord. 722 §6, 1990:
Ord. 620 §2, 1978: Ord. 586 §§101-128, 1976)
13.36.020: ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS; APPROVAL
REQUIRED:
Review and acceptance of the approving authority shall be obtained prior to the
discharge into the public sewers of any water or wastes having any one or more
of the following characteristics:
A.   A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of suspended solids in any one
day;
B.   A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of five (5) day BOD in any one
day;
C.   A total flow of 0.025 million gallons in any one day or a flow that will
average more than 0.025 million gallons a day for a monthly period. (Ord. 722
§6, 1990: Ord. 620 §2, 1979: Ord. 586 §201, 1976)
13.36.030: ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS; PRETREATMENT:
A.   Where required, in the opinion of the approving authority, to modify or
eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structure, processes or operation of
the wastewater treatment works owned by the city, the user shall provide at his
sole expense, such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be
necessary to render waste acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
B.   All wastes containing soil, dirt and/or sand shall be settled a minimum of
two (2) hours in an acceptable basin before discharge to a sewer.
C.   All industrial wastes must be passed through approved self- cleaning 20-
gauge mesh screens unless otherwise allowed by the approving authority.
D.   All waste containing floating solids, greases, waxes, slurries or the like
in small or trace amounts must be passed through a suitable trap before
discharge into the sewerage system. (Ord. 620 §2, 1979: Ord. 586 §202, 1976)
13.36.040: ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES INTO PUBLIC SEWERS; SUBMISSION OF
INFORMATION:
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for approval to the
approving authority prior to the start of their construction if the effluent
from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. (Ord. 586
§203, 1976)
13.36.050: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; SANITARY SEWERS:
No person shall cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface drainage,
subsurface drainage, ground water, roof runoff, cooling water, or unpolluted
water into any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 586 §301, 1976)
13.36.060: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; COMBINED AND STORM SEWERS:
Stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, ground water, roof runoff,
cooling water, or unpolluted water may be admitted to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers and which have
adequate capacity for their accommodation. No person shall use such sewers
without first having obtained the consent of the approving authority. (Ord. 586
§302, 1976)
13.36.070: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; ENUMERATED:
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge into the public
sewers:
A.   Any solids, liquids, or gases which may, by themselves or by interaction
with other substances, cause fire or explosive hazards, or in any other way be
injurious to persons, property, or the operation of the wastewater treatment
works;
B.   Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which either singly,
or by interaction with other substances, are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance or repair;
C.   Any solids, greases, waxes, slurries, or viscous material of such
character or in such quantity that, in the opinion of the approving authority,
may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer, or otherwise interfere with
the proper functioning of the wastewater treatment works;
D.   Any toxic substance, chemical elements, or compounds in quantities
sufficient to impair the operation or efficiency of the wastewater treatment
facilities, or that will pass through the wastewater treatment plant and cause
the effluent thereof to exceed Idaho state board of health water requirements
for the receiving stream;
E.   Any liquids having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures,
equipment, or personnel of the wastewater treatment works;
F.   Any radioactive isotopes without obtaining a special permit from the
approving authority;
G.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140°F);
H.   Any garbage that has not been ground or shredded;
I.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair, or any other solid capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with proper
operation of the wastewater treatment works. (Ord. 586 §303, 1976)
13.36.080: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the
wastewater treatment works, either before or after pretreatment, provided that
there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment works by
reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the
city without recompense by the person. (Ord. 586 §304, 1976)
13.36.090: CONTROL OF ADMISSIBLE WASTES; SUBMISSION OF BASIC DATA:
A.   Within three (3) months after passage of this chapter, each person who
discharges industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and file with the
approving authority a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the
quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the wastewater
treatment works.
B.   Similarly, each person desiring to make a new connection to a public sewer
for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with
the approving authority a report that shall include actual or predicted data
relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged.
(Ord. 586 §401, 1976)
13.36.100: CONTROL OF ADMISSIBLE WASTES; TIME EXTENSION FOR COMPLIANCE:
When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist which would create an
unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time schedule imposed by
section
13.36.090 of this chapter, a request for extension of time may be presented for
consideration of the approving authority. (Ord. 586 §402, 1976)
13.36.110: INDUSTRIAL WASTE SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
Each person discharging industrial wastes to a public sanitary sewer with a
daily total loading in excess of thirty (30) pounds per day suspended solids,
thirty (30) pounds per day of five (5) day BOD, or any average total flow in
excess of 0.025 million gallons per day shall, when directed by the city
administrator, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative,
construct and maintain approved measurement and sampling facilities for all
waste entering the sanitary sewer. These facilities shall be used to obtain
flow, BOD, and suspended solids data for use as a basis to the industrial waste
service charges on a monthly basis. (Ord. 722 §6, 1990: Ord. 620 §2, 1979: Ord.
586 §403, 1976)
13.36.120: FLOW MEASUREMENT AND SAMPLING FACILITIES:
A.   Installation And Maintenance: If so directed by the approving authority,
all devices, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the
person discharging the waste at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so
as to be in a safe and proper operating condition at all times, and readily
accessible to city forces during his operating day.
B.   Types Of Devices: The flow measurement device can be a Parshall flume,
weir, venturi, nozzle, magnetic flow meter, or any other type of device
providing accurate and continuous flow indication recorded on a chart or
totalizer in million gallons a day. Pump timers or other indirect measurement
devices will not be accepted.
C.   Composite Sampler: If so directed by the approving authority, an automatic
sampler, capable of collecting no less than two (2) quarts of sample in a
twenty four (24) hour period shall be installed and maintained by the person
discharging the waste, at his expense. The sampler must be capable of
maintaining sample at a temperature of less than forty degrees Fahrenheit
(40°F).
D.   Plans; Location Of Sampling Station: The flow measurement and sampling
station shall be located and constructed in a manner acceptable to the city.
Complete plans on all phases of the proposed installation, including all
equipment proposed for use shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to
construction.
E.   Records; Maintenance And Operation: The person discharging the waste shall
keep flow records as required by the city and shall provide qualified personnel
to properly maintain and operate the facilities. (Ord. 586 §404, 1976)
13.36.130: ANALYSES:
The waste samples will be analyzed by city forces. Laboratory procedures used
in the examination of industrial wastes shall be those set forth in "standard
methods". However, alternate methods for certain analyses of industrial wastes
may be used. (Ord. 586 §405, 1976)
13.36.140: BILLING PERIODS:
Industrial waste charges shall be assessed monthly in accordance with this
code. (Ord. 620 §2, 1979: Ord. 586 §501, 1976)
13.36.150: PAYMENT:
Industrial waste sewer service charges shall be payable at the city hall. (Ord.
586 §502, 1976)
13.36.160: DELINQUENCY:
Such sewer service charges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be a
debt due to the city and shall be a lien upon the property. If this debt is not
paid within thirty (30) days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be
deemed delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city
against the property owner, the person, or both. (Ord. 586 §601, 1976)
13.36.170: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A.   In the event of failure to pay sewer service charges after they become
delinquent, or failure to have flow or sampling devices in proper operating
condition for more than one week, the city shall have the right to remove or
close sewer connections, and enter upon the property for accomplishing such
purposes.
B.   The expense of such removal, or closing, as well as the expense of
restoring service, shall likewise be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the
property and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against
the property owner, the person, or both. (Ord. 586 §602, 1976)
13.36.180: RESTORATION OF SERVICE:
Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including the expense of
removal, closing, and restoration, shall have been paid. (Ord. 586 §603, 1976)
CHAPTER 13.40
PUBLIC SERVICES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13.40.010: Continuous Service Agreement
13.40.020: Level Pay Plan
13.40.030: Prohibition Of Water Service
13.40.040: Penalty Of Twenty Percent Placed On Delinquent Accounts (Rep. by
Ord. 1142, 2015)
13.40.050: Late Fee Of Thirty Dollars Shall Be Placed On Unpaid Accounts
13.40.010: CONTINUOUS SERVICE AGREEMENT:
A.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code to the contrary,
"landlords", hereby defined as any person or entity owning real property within
the area serviced by the city water and/or sewer systems, which real property
is regularly leased to third parties, hereby referred to as "tenants", may
execute the form approved by the city council, a continuous service agreement.
Continuous service agreement shall be executed by landlords and shall provide,
in addition to whatever other matters the city council deems appropriate, the
following provisions:
   1.   Correct legal name of the landlord.
   2.   Landlord's phone number and address.
   3.   Space for the landlord's signature.
   4.   The correct mailing address of every parcel of real property owned by
the landlord for which the continuous service agreement is sought, together
with apartment numbers, if appropriate.
   5.   The requirement that the landlord provide immediate written notice to
the city of any changes in the landlord's telephone number, mailing address,
ownership of any of the properties desired to be subject to the agreement.
   6.   The landlord will be continuously responsible for payment of all water
and wastewater charges incurred from the date of cessation of service by a
current tenant, whether by notice and termination of service under lawfully
established procedures or by the tenant vacating the premises without notice,
and the date upon which a new tenant contacts the city and lawfully assumes
responsibility for said charges.
   7.   A provision that if any landlord defaults in the performance of a
continuous service agreement that they will be liable to the city, in addition
to all charges attributable to the landlord under the agreement, lawful
interest and attorney fees and costs incurred by the city in the collection of
the charges.
B.   A deposit in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per residential unit
covered by the continuous service agreement shall be paid by the landlord to
the city at the time the agreement is executed. The deposit shall be applied to
any delinquent charges attributable to a landlord under the continuous service
agreement. (Ord. 724 §§1, 2, 1991)
13.40.020: LEVEL PAY PLAN:
A.   Any person who has had a minimum of one year's history of payment of user
charges incurred by patronizing the city domestic water and/or public sewer
system, without default in payment, may apply to the city for "level pay"
payments of domestic water and/or sewer charges. Applications shall be made on
a form provided by the office of the city clerk.
B.   If the application is in order, and the applicant appears qualified, the
applicant shall execute an agreement, on a form to be provided by the office of
the city clerk, setting forth the obligations of the applicant and the city
with regard to the "level pay" arrangement.
C.   The "level pay" year will commence on the next July 1 occurring after the
date of the agreement. From July 1 through June 30, "level pay" parties shall
pay the average amount of billings for sewer and domestic water services as
determined by the previous twelve (12) months' billing experience. Meters will
continue to be read on the regular schedule and, for informational purposes,
the monthly statement will reflect a debit or credit balance based on current
readings. The statement issued for the last month of the level pay year shall
reflect a final credit or debit balance. Debit balances must be paid in full by
the customer with that statement. Credit balances will be reflected by credit
being granted by the city on that month's statement.
D.   Noncompliance with the "level pay" agreement by any customer executing the
same shall allow the city to immediately institute all proceedings now
established by this code for termination of service and collection of all
charges due and owing. Noncompliance with the "level pay" agreement shall also
result in that person being ineligible for "level pay" program for a minimum of
one year. (Ord. 725 §§1 - 4, 1991)
13.40.030: PROHIBITION OF WATER SERVICE:
A.   No domestic water service shall be provided to any new structure which is
constructed on prime farmland as that term is defined and identified by the
United States department of agriculture, natural resource conversation service,
if the new structure would cause the land upon which it is located and which it
is surrounded by to lose its designation as prime farmland.
B.   The foregoing restriction shall not apply to any land, however designated,
within the city limits, or on any land under the jurisdiction of the city's
newly adopted comprehensive land use plan zoning and subdivision ordinance,
which is being developed in accordance with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 833
§1, 1997)
13.40.040: PENALTY OF TWENTY PERCENT PLACED ON DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1142, 2015)
13.40.050: LATE FEE OF THIRTY DOLLARS SHALL BE PLACED ON UNPAID ACCOUNTS:
A late fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be required from the
responsible party, as provided elsewhere in this title, for late payment of a
domestic water or wastewater collection and treatment account. "Late" for
purposes of defining "late fee" shall mean payment on unpaid accounts received
after the beginning of regular business hours of the last Tuesday of each
month. The rates and fees established herein may be amended or revised in the
future by a resolution passed by a majority of the full city council. (Ord.
1142, 2015)
TITLE 14
URBAN RENEWAL
CHAPTER 14.04
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
14.04.010: Established
14.04.020: Terms Of Office
14.04.030: Qualifications
14.04.040: Powers
14.04.010: ESTABLISHED:
A board of commissioners of five (5) members is hereby established pursuant to
Idaho Code 50-2006, to exercise the powers of the Jerome urban renewal agency.
(Ord. 869 §1, 1998)
14.04.020: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Each commissioner shall serve a term of five (5) years, provided that the
initial commissioners shall serve terms as follows:
 
Seat 1 5 years
Seat 2 3 years
Seat 3 3 years
Seat 4 1 year
Seat 5 1 year
 
After the initial term of the office has been completed, all successive terms
of office shall be for a period of five (5) years. (Ord. 869 §2, 1998)
14.04.030: QUALIFICATIONS:
All commissioners shall be qualified electors of the city residing in the city
limits of Jerome. (Ord. 869 §4, 1998)
14.04.040: POWERS:
The board of commissioners shall have the ability to exercise such powers as it
may lawfully exercise under the provisions of Idaho Code 50-2001 et seq. The
board of commissioners shall have power to make reasonable rules of procedure
to govern the conduct of its business. (Ord. 869 §5, 1998)
CHAPTER 14.08
SOUTH LINCOLN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
SECTION:
14.08.010: Findings
14.08.020: Open Land
14.08.030: Housing And Economic Development
14.08.040: Approval Of Plan
14.08.050: Agreement On The Administration Of The Revenue Allocation
14.08.060: Action Against Plan
14.08.070: Copies Transmitted
14.08.080: Revenue Allocation Area
14.08.090: Council Members As Commissioners
14.08.100: Council As Board
14.08.110: Effective Date
14.08.120: Severability
14.08.130: Summary
14.08.010: FINDINGS:
It is hereby found and determined that:
A.   The project area as defined in the third amended South Lincoln plan is a
deteriorated or a deteriorating area as defined in the law 1  and the act 2
and qualifies as an eligible urban renewal area under the law and act,
including under the act a deteriorated area consisting of open land.
B.   The rehabilitation, conservation, and redevelopment of the project area
pursuant to the third amended South Lincoln plan is necessary in the interest
of public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Jerome.
C.   There continues to be a need for the agency to function in the city of
Jerome.
D.   The third amended South Lincoln plan conforms to the comprehensive plan of
the city of Jerome.
E.   Specifically the city council finds that sufficient park and recreational
facilities exist within close proximity of the project area. Certain
improvements outlined in the third amended South Lincoln plan will enhance
accessibility to those park and recreational facilities, specifically the
installation of traffic signals which allow crossing of South Lincoln and
result in greater safety for users of those park and recreational facilities
including children who reside and will reside within the South Lincoln project
area and the improvements to the public parking lots. In addition, certain park
or recreational improvements have been proposed within the project area.
F.   The third amended South Lincoln plan affords maximum opportunity
consistent with the sound needs of the city as a whole for the rehabilitation
and redevelopment of the project area by private enterprises.
G.   The third amended South Lincoln plan provides a feasible method for
relocation of any displaced families residing within the project area.
H.   The base assessment roll of the third amended project area does not exceed
ten percent (10%) of the assessed value of the city of Jerome. (Ord. 940 §1,
2003)
 
Notes
1 1. IC title 50, chapter 20.
2 2. IC title 50, chapter 29.
14.08.020: OPEN LAND:
The city council finds that the third amended project area and third amended
revenue allocation area contain certain open land, that the agency does not
intend to acquire any open land on any widespread basis, and that the third
amended project area is planned to be redeveloped in a manner that will include
both residential and nonresidential uses. Provided, however, that the city
council does find that if portions of the third amended project area and third
amended revenue allocation area are deemed "open land", the criteria set forth
in the law and act have been met. (Ord. 940 §2, 2003)
14.08.030: HOUSING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
One of the third amended South Lincoln plan objectives to increase the
residential opportunity to include affordable housing does meet the sound needs
of the city and will provide housing opportunity in an area that does not now
contain such opportunity, and that portion of the project area which is
identified for nonresidential uses is necessary and appropriate to facilitate
the proper growth and development standards in accordance with the objectives
of the comprehensive plan to overcome economic disuse, the need for improved
traffic patterns and the need for the correlation of this area with other areas
of the city. (Ord. 940 §3, 2003)
14.08.040: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
The third amended South Lincoln plan, a copy of which is attached to the
ordinance codified herein and marked as exhibit 2 and made a part hereof by
attachment and is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk, be
and the same hereby is approved. (Ord. 940 §4, 2003)
14.08.050: AGREEMENT ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE REVENUE ALLOCATION:
For any property outside the municipal boundaries of the city of Jerome, an
agreement on the administration of the revenue allocation financing provision
shall be negotiated with Jerome County and formalized by a transfer of power
ordinance as defined in the act for this chapter to be effective against that
property. (Ord. 940 §5, 2003)
14.08.060: ACTION AGAINST PLAN:
No direct or collateral action attacking the third amended South Lincoln plan
shall be brought prior to the effective date hereof or after the elapse of
thirty (30) days from and after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 940 §6, 2003)
14.08.070: COPIES TRANSMITTED:
Upon the effective date hereof, the city clerk is authorized and directed to
transmit to the county recorder, county auditor and tax assessor of Jerome
County, and to the appropriate officials of the Jerome County board of county
commissioners, Jerome County School District, Jerome highway district, College
of Southern Idaho, Jerome recreation district, and to the state tax commission,
a copy of the ordinance codified herein, a copy of the legal description of the
boundaries of the third amended revenue allocation area, and a map or plan
indicating the boundaries of the third amended revenue allocation area. (Ord.
940 §7, 2003)
14.08.080: REVENUE ALLOCATION AREA:
The city council hereby finds and declares that the third amended revenue
allocation area as defined in the third amended South Lincoln plan, includes
that portion of the third amended project area, the equalized assessed
valuation of which the council hereby determines is in and is part of the third
amended South Lincoln plan, is likely to continue to increase as a result of
the initiation and completion of urban renewal projects pursuant to the third
amended South Lincoln plan. (Ord. 940 §8, 2003)
14.08.090: COUNCIL MEMBERS AS COMMISSIONERS:
The city council hereby approves and adopts the following statement of policy
relating to the appointment of city council members as members of the agency's
board of commissioners: If any city council members are appointed to the board,
they are not acting in an ex officio capacity but rather as private citizens
who, although they are also members of the city council, are exercising their
independent judgment as private citizens when they sit on the board. Except for
the powers to appoint and terminate board members and to adopt the third
amended South Lincoln plan the city council recognizes that it has no power to
control the powers or operations of the agency. (Ord. 940 §9, 2003)
14.08.100: COUNCIL AS BOARD:
So long as any agency bonds are outstanding, the city council will not exercise
its power under Idaho Code section 50-2006 to designate itself as the agency
board. (Ord. 940 §10, 2003)
14.08.110: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage,
approval and publication, and shall be retroactive to January 1, 2003, to the
extent permitted by the act, with the effective date of the base assessment
roll covered by the original revenue allocation area remaining at January 1,
1998, and the first amended revenue allocation area remaining at January 1,
1999, and the second amended and restated revenue allocation area remaining at
January 1, 2000. (Ord. 940 §11, 2003)
14.08.120: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision of this
chapter or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is
declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 940 §12, 2003)
14.08.130: SUMMARY:
The summary of this chapter, a copy of which is attached as exhibit 3 to the
ordinance codified herein, and is available for inspection in the office of the
city clerk, is hereby approved. (Ord. 940 §14, 2003)
CHAPTER 14.12
SOUTHEAST INDUSTRIAL URBAN RENEWAL PLAN
SECTION:
14.12.010: Findings
14.12.020: Open Land
14.12.030: Growth And Development
14.12.040: Approval Of Plan
14.12.050: Action Against Plan
14.12.060: Copies Transmitted
14.12.070: Projected Increase Of Assessed Valuation Of Area
14.12.080: Statement Of Policy
14.12.090: Agency Board
14.12.100: Effective Date
14.12.010: FINDINGS:
It is hereby found and determined that:
A.   The project area as defined in the southeast industrial plan is a
deteriorated or a deteriorating area as defined in the Idaho urban renewal law
of 1965 1  ("law") and the local economic development act 2  ("act") and
qualifies as an eligible urban renewal area under the law and act, including
under the act and law a deteriorated or deteriorating area consisting of open
land.
B.   The rehabilitation, conservation, and redevelopment of the project area
pursuant to the southeast industrial plan is necessary in the interest of
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Jerome.
C.   There continues to be a need for the agency to function in the city of
Jerome.
D.   The southeast industrial plan conforms to the comprehensive plan of the
city of Jerome.
E.   The southeast industrial plan gives due consideration to the provision of
adequate park and recreation areas and facilities that may be desirable for
neighborhood improvement (recognizing the primary commercial and industrial
component of the southeast industrial plan, the need for overall public
improvements), and shows consideration for the health, safety, and welfare of
any residents or businesses in the general vicinity of the project area as
defined by the southeast industrial urban renewal plan.
F.   The southeast industrial plan affords maximum opportunity consistent with
the sound needs of the city as a whole for the rehabilitation and redevelopment
of the project area by private enterprises.
G.   The southeast industrial plan provides a feasible method for relocation of
any displaced families residing within the project area.
H.   The collective base assessment roll of the southeast industrial area and
the south Lincoln project area do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the assessed
value of the city of Jerome. (Ord. 986 §1, 2005)
 
Notes
1 1. IC title 50, ch. 20.
2 2. IC title 50, ch. 29.
14.12.020: OPEN LAND:
The city council finds that the southeast industrial project area and southeast
industrial revenue allocation area contain certain open land, that the agency
does not intend to acquire any open land on any widespread basis, and that the
southeast industrial project area is planned to be redeveloped in a manner that
will include nonresidential (primarily commercial and industrial) uses.
Provided, however, that the city council does find that if portions of the
southeast industrial project area and southeast industrial revenue allocation
area are deemed "open land", the criteria set forth in the law and act have
been met. (Ord. 986 §2, 2005)
14.12.030: GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT:
That portion of the project area which is identified for nonresidential uses is
necessary and appropriate to facilitate the proper growth and development
standards in accordance with the objectives of the comprehensive plan to
overcome economic disuse, the need for improved traffic patterns and the need
for the correlation of this area with other areas of the city. (Ord. 986 §3,
2005)
14.12.040: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
The southeast industrial plan, a copy of which is marked as exhibit 1 and
attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof by attachment,
be and the same hereby is approved. The city clerk and/or the agency may make
certain technical corrections or revisions in keeping with the information and
testimony presented at the December 6, 2005, hearing. (Ord. 986 §4, 2005)
14.12.050: ACTION AGAINST PLAN:
No direct or collateral action attacking the southeast industrial plan shall be
brought prior to the effective date hereof or after the elapse of thirty (30)
days from and after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 986 §5, 2005)
14.12.060: COPIES TRANSMITTED:
Upon the effective date hereof, the city clerk is authorized and directed to
transmit to the county recorder, county auditor and tax assessor of Jerome
County, and to the appropriate officials of the city of Jerome, Jerome County
board of county commissioners, Jerome County school district, Jerome highway
district, College of Southern Idaho, Jerome recreation district, Jerome
ambulance district and to the state tax commission, a copy of the ordinance
codified herein, a copy of the legal description of the boundaries of the
southeast industrial revenue allocation area, and a map or plan indicating the
boundaries of the southeast industrial revenue allocation area. (Ord. 986 §6,
2005)
14.12.070: PROJECTED INCREASE OF ASSESSED VALUATION OF AREA:
The city council hereby finds and declares that the southeast industrial
revenue allocation area as defined in the southeast industrial plan includes
that portion of the southeast industrial project area, the equalized assessed
valuation of which the council hereby determines is in and is part of the
southeast industrial plan and is likely to continue to increase as a result of
the initiation and completion of urban renewal projects pursuant to the
southeast industrial plan. (Ord. 986 §7, 2005)
14.12.080: STATEMENT OF POLICY:
The city council hereby approves and adopts the following statement of policy
relating to the appointment of city council members as members of the agency's
board of commissioners: If any city council members are appointed to the board,
they are not acting in an ex officio capacity but rather as private citizens
who, although they are also members of the city council, are exercising their
independent judgment as private citizens when they sit on the board. Except for
the powers to appoint and terminate board members and to adopt the southeast
industrial plan the city council recognizes that it has no power to control the
powers or operations of the agency. (Ord. 986 §8, 2005)
14.12.090: AGENCY BOARD:
So long as any agency bonds are outstanding, the city council will not exercise
its power under Idaho Code section 50-2006 to designate itself as the agency
board. (Ord. 986 §9, 2005)
14.12.100: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage,
approval and publication, and shall be retroactive to January 1, 2005, to the
extent permitted by the act. (Ord. 986 §10, 2005)
TITLE 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 1
CHAPTER 15.04
BUILDING CODES 1
SECTION:
15.04.010: Codes Adopted
15.04.020: Mobile Homes As Single Dwellings Not In Violation Of Building Code
15.04.030: Permit Requirement; Misrepresentation Of Costs Unlawful
15.04.035: Permit; Application Requirement
15.04.036: Permit; Contractor's Registration Number
15.04.040: Flood Hazard Requirements For New Construction
15.04.050: Installation Of Electrical Wiring
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-901.
1 1. IC ch. 39-41.
15.04.010: CODES ADOPTED 1 :
The approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes, as adopted
by the state of Idaho, or the Idaho building code board, are adopted as the
official building codes of the city of Jerome:
A.   International building code, including all rules promulgated by the board
to provide equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with disabilities
act accessibility guidelines;
B.   Federal fair housing act accessibility guidelines, the international
residential code, parts I through IV and IX; and
C.   International energy conservation code.
The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by
successive versions of such codes as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho
building code board effective on the date any such codes are made effective by
the Idaho building code board. (Ord. 938 §1, 2002: Ord. 910 §§2, 3, 2001: Ord.
851 §§2, 3, 1998: Ord. 820 §§2–6, 1997: Ord. 801 §§2, 3, 1996: Ord. 741 §§2, 3,
1992: Ord. 695 §1, 1986)
 
Notes
  2. Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted herein
1 but shall remain subject to placement requirements established by zoning
  regulations.
15.04.020: MOBILE HOMES AS SINGLE DWELLINGS NOT IN VIOLATION OF BUILDING CODE:
Installation and use as a single dwelling of mobile homes under the authority
of the zoning ordinance shall not be deemed to be in violation of the building
code. (Prior code §6-4.2)
15.04.030: PERMIT REQUIREMENT; MISREPRESENTATION OF COSTS UNLAWFUL:
A.   It is unlawful for any person, whether he be the owner, contractor or
employee of an owner, to start any work in connection with the erection,
building, or construction of a building, or to do any work in connection with
the repair, alteration or improvement of a building, whereby the terms of this
chapter a permit for the erection, building, repair, alteration or improvement
is required, before a building permit has been granted under the terms of this
chapter.
B.   It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent the estimated value of the
cost of any building, alteration, repair or improvement. (Prior code §6-5)
15.04.035: PERMIT; APPLICATION REQUIREMENT:
A.   Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a drawing
indicating provisions for adequate drainage away from the structure sought in
the application for building permit.
B.   Drainage shall be designated so as to alleviate flooding and to carry
water away from the contemplated structure and any adjacent property, onto a
public street or alley.
C.   Failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 640 §§1–3, 1981)
15.04.036: PERMIT; CONTRACTOR'S REGISTRATION NUMBER:
No building permit will be issued without the contractor's registration number
being presented by the contractor, except when the permit applicant provides
evidence to the satisfaction of the building official that the applicant is
exempt from the registration requirements pursuant to title 54, chapter 52 of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 991 §1, 2006)
15.04.040: FLOOD HAZARD REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION:
A.   The public works director shall review all building permit applications
for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building
site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or
substantial improvement, including prefabricated and mobile homes, must:
   1.   Be designed, or modified, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure;
   2.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage; and
   3.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage;
and
B.   The public works director shall review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new developments to assure that:
   1.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
   2.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and
   3.   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
C.   The public works director shall require new or replacement water supply
systems or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into floodwaters, and require on site waste disposal systems to be located so
as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior code §6-6.1)
15.04.050: INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL WIRING:
A.   A state of Idaho electrical wiring permit shall be obtained prior to the
installation of electrical wiring in any building or structure.
B.   The workmanship and materials used in the installation of electrical
wiring in any structure shall be inspected and approved by a licensed state
electrical inspector. (Ord. 817 §1, 1997: Ord. 663 §§1, 2, 1983)
CHAPTER 15.05
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
15.05.005: Title
15.05.010: Composition Of The Board
15.05.015: Duties Of The Board
15.05.020: Procedures For Appeals
15.05.025: Administration
15.05.030: Conflict Of Interest
15.05.035: Quorum And Voting
15.05.040: Compensation Of Members
15.05.005: TITLE:
Building Code Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as "the Board"). (Ord.
1237, 2025)
15.05.010: COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD:
The Board shall consist of 3 members appointed by the City Council, each of
whom shall have demonstrated knowledge or expertise in one or more of the
following areas: Building construction, Architecture, Engineering (structural,
mechanical, or electrical), Fire safety, and or Legal matters related to
building codes.
The City Council shall appoint members to the Board for a term of 2 years, with
no member serving more than 2 consecutive terms. (Ord. 1237, 2025)
15.05.015: DUTIES OF THE BOARD:
The Building Code Board of Appeals shall have the following duties:
A.   Hear Appeals: The Board shall hear appeals from individuals, businesses,
or organizations that contest the decisions or actions of the building
official, including but not limited to disputes over the application,
interpretation, or enforcement of the building codes.
B.   Grant Variances or Modifications: The Board may grant variances or
modifications to the strict application of the building codes, provided that:
   1.   The granting of such variance or modification does not endanger public
health, safety, or welfare.
   2.   The variance is consistent with the intent of the building code to
ensure safety, accessibility, and structural integrity.
   3.   The variance will not grant privileges to an individual or entity that
are not available to others similarly situated.
C.   Ensure Code Compliance and Safety: In granting variances or resolving
disputes, the Board shall ensure that the fundamental purpose of the building
code - protecting the public health, safety, and welfare - is upheld.
D.   Provide a Forum for Dispute Resolution: The Board shall act as a neutral
body to resolve disputes between parties, including builders, contractors,
property owners, and the City's building official, regarding the interpretation
or application of the building code. Or to review the equivalency of protection
of the code requirements. The Board shall not have the authority to waive the
requirements of the code.
E.   Provide Recommendations on Code Revisions: The Board may, at the request
of the City Council or on its own initiative, provide recommendations for
revisions or updates to the building code to reflect changes in technology,
safety standards, or construction practices.
F.   Issue Decisions: The Board shall issue written decisions on appeals, which
may include the approval or denial of variances, modifications, or other relief
sought by the appellant. Such decisions shall be final unless overturned by the
City Council. (Ord. 1237, 2025)
15.05.020: PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS:
A.   Filing an Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision or interpretation of
the building official may file a written appeal to the Board within 20 days of
the decision being rendered. The appeal shall include a statement of the
grounds for the appeal and any supporting documentation.
B.   Notice of Hearing: The Board shall schedule a hearing to consider the
appeal and shall provide written notice to the appellant, the building
official, and any other affected parties at least 5 days prior to the hearing.
C.   Hearing Procedures: The Board shall hold a public hearing and may hear
testimony from the appellant, the building official, and any other interested
parties. The Board may request additional information or documentation as
needed.
D.   Quorum Requirements and Rescheduling: A quorum of the Board shall consist
of 3 members. If a quorum of the Board is not present at the scheduled hearing,
the appellant shall be notified, and the appellant may, at their discretion,
request the hearing be rescheduled. If the appellant requests a rescheduled
hearing, the Board shall work to accommodate the appellant and set a new date
for the hearing within 14 days, unless the appellant agrees to a longer period.
If the appellant chooses not to reschedule, the Board shall proceed with the
hearing, and the decision may be made by the available members of the Board who
are present.
E.   Decision: Following the hearing, the Board shall render a decision, which
shall be communicated to the appellant and the building official in writing
within 3 days. The decision of the Board shall be binding unless reversed by
the City Council. (Ord. 1237, 2025)
15.05.025: ADMINISTRATION:
The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the board. (Ord. 1237, 2025)
15.05.030: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
Members of the Board shall disqualify themselves from participating in any case
in which they have a personal or financial interest. Any Board member who has a
conflict of interest shall recuse themselves from the matter and may be
replaced by an alternate member designated by the City Council. (Ord. 1237,
2025)
15.05.035: QUORUM AND VOTING:
A quorum of the Board shall consist of 3 members. A decision of the Board shall
require the approval of a majority of the members present at the hearing. (Ord.
1237, 2025)
15.05.040: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
Members of the Board of appeals are not required to be compensated unless
required by state law. (Ord. 1237, 2025)
CHAPTER 15.08
CURB AND GUTTER REQUIREMENT
SECTION:
15.08.010: Requirement
15.08.020: Date Of Completion
15.08.030: Contract For Installation
15.08.040: Reserved
15.08.050: Violation Declared Misdemeanor
15.08.010: REQUIREMENT:
All residential or commercial construction, including the siting of a mobile
home and/or manufactured home within the city shall be made only upon lots
containing curb and gutter on street or road frontage in accordance with city
specifications for curb and gutter. (Ord. 850 §1, 1998: Ord. 749A §1, 1993:
Ord. 608 §1, 1978)
15.08.020: DATE OF COMPLETION:
New curb and gutter required to be installed by this chapter shall be
constructed at the expense of the property owner in accordance with city
standards at the same time as all new construction or modification of existing
buildings and shall be fully and properly constructed within one hundred twenty
(120) days of the issued building permit, or a mobile home and/or manufactured
home siting permit by the city and prior to the occupancy of the facility.
Provided, however, that any building permit or mobile home siting permit issued
for the lots (bounded on at least 3 sides by public roads of the city), and
which lots lay between public roads denominated West H and West G, East H and
East G, West 7th and West 8th, or East 7th and East 8th, the period of time for
completion of the construction of the required curb and gutter shall be one
year from the date of the issuance of a building permit or mobile home siting
permit by the city. (Ord. 850 §2, 1998: Ord. 749A §2, 1993: Ord. 608 §2, 1978)
15.08.030: CONTRACT FOR INSTALLATION:
A.   At the request of the property owner and the recommendation of the public
works director the city may, at its option, enter into a written contract
deferring the installation of curb and gutter to a future date in such form as
shall be approved by the city attorney. The contract shall provide, among other
terms, for the time in which installation is to be commenced and completed and
the specifications of construction shall be in recordable form, and shall bind
the current property owner, his heirs, successors and assigns. The contract or
deferral agreement shall require approval of the city council and provide for
the collection of damages, attorney fees and costs in the event of default by
the property owner.
B.   The city public works director may recommend to defer the construction of
curbs and gutter for any one or more of the following reasons:
   1.   If the total length of the existing curb and gutter on the same side of
the street in the same block plus the length of the property in question on
which the new curb and gutter would be installed is less than forty percent
(40%) of the total length of a standard block, unless the new curb and gutter
will connect to an existing curb and gutter section which meets city acceptance
standards for line and grade.
   2.   If another unit of government with jurisdiction over the street or road
along which the curb and gutter will be installed requests that the
installation of curb and gutter be deferred.
   3.   If the street or road would require city financed repair, reshaping,
relocation, or modification in order for the curb and gutter to be installed to
line and grade in an acceptable manner, the installation may be deferred until
street or road improvements are completed.
   4.   Curb and gutter installation may be deferred if, in the opinion of the
public works director, the installation at the time of building permit issuance
would create a traffic hazard or an unusual drainage problem.
   5.   Construction of the curb and gutter has been delayed because of
weather, natural disaster or other causes beyond the control of the owner.
(Ord. 850 §4, 1998: Ord. 749A §4, 1993)
15.08.040: RESERVED:
15.08.050: VIOLATION DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 749A §5,
1993: Ord. 608 §4, 1978)
CHAPTER 15.12
PLUMBING REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
15.12.010: Inspections
15.12.020: Plumbers' Licenses; Required
15.12.030: Plumbers' Licenses; Classification
15.12.040: Plumbers' Licenses; Fees And Renewal
15.12.050: Plumbers' Licenses; Eligibility
15.12.060: Permits; Required
15.12.070: Permits; Fees
15.12.080: Violations
15.12.090: Failure To Correct Violations Declared A Nuisance
 
Notes
1 1. IC §59-2601 et seq.
15.12.010: INSPECTIONS:
Any authorized plumbing inspector duly appointed by the state plumbing board,
department of law enforcement of the state, shall perform all plumbing
inspections within the city; provided, however, that the city shall, through
its own officers, agents and employees, make inspections and grant approval of
sewer lines, sewer connections and water lines and water connections. (Prior
code §6-67)
15.12.020: PLUMBERS' LICENSES; REQUIRED:
No person, corporation, copartnership, firm or association shall engage in the
business, trade, practice or work of plumbing in the city, from and after the
passage of this section, unless such person, or a responsible person
representing such firm, copartnership, association or corporation, has been
first licensed by the city. (Prior code §6-68)
15.12.030: PLUMBERS' LICENSES; CLASSIFICATION:
There shall be three (3) classifications of plumbers, namely, plumbing
contractor, also known as master plumber, plumbing journeyman and plumbing
apprentice, each of whom shall have respectively the qualifications set forth
and provided in section 39-2716 of the Idaho Code. (Prior code §6-69)
15.12.040: PLUMBERS' LICENSES; FEES AND RENEWAL:
A.   Before a license is issued by the city for engaging in one of the
classifications of plumbing mentioned in section
15.12.030 of this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city an original and
a renewal fee as follows:
 
                    Initial Fee Renewal Fee
Plumbing contractor $100.00     $15.00
Plumbing journeyman 15.00       3.00
 
B.   All licenses shall expire on January 1 of each year and may be renewed for
a period of one year upon payment of the renewal fee above provided for.
Licenses which have expired for failure of the holder to pay the renewal fee
shall be reinstated upon the payment of the renewal fee and a penalty of ten
dollars ($10.00), in addition to such renewal fee. All licenses which have
expired for failure to pay such renewal fee and have not been reinstated within
one year shall stand revoked and no new license shall be issued except upon the
payment of the initial fee above provided for; provided, however, that all
persons who were duly licensed under the provisions of the plumbing code of the
city preceding the adoption of this chapter may be relicensed under the terms
of this section by paying the renewal fee provided for in this section, which
such license shall expire on January 1, 1963. (Prior code §6-70)
15.12.050: PLUMBERS' LICENSES; ELIGIBILITY:
Any person who has been duly licensed or issued a certificate of competency by
the state or by any city of the state, having a plumbing code substantially
equivalent to the code adopted by the city, may be licensed by the city without
taking any examination, upon the payment of the fees provided for in section
15.12.040 of this chapter. (Prior code §6-71)
15.12.060: PERMITS; REQUIRED:
A.   It is unlawful for any person whether acting as principal, agent or
employee, to do or cause or permit to be done any plumbing or drainage work in
the city until a permit is obtained, and no work shall be commenced until such
permit has been issued by the city clerk.
B.   All permits shall be void after sixty (60) days from date of issue of such
permit if the work has not been commenced within sixty (60) days after the date
of issuance of the permit.
C.   Permits shall be issued only to a person holding a valid license issued by
the city; provided, however, that a permit shall not be required for the
clearing of stoppage or repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, fixtures,
appliances or appurtenances of any plumbing system when such work does not
involve or require any functional rearrangement of pipes, valves or fixtures
comprising the plumbing system. (Prior code §6-72)
15.12.070: PERMITS; FEES:
The applicant for a permit required by section
15.12.060 of this chapter shall pay to the city clerk at the time of
application, a permit fee for each permit issued, and an inspection fee in
accordance with the schedule duly fixed and adopted by the commissioner of law
enforcement of the state, which shall be kept on file in the office of the city
clerk. (Prior code §6-73)
15.12.080: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who engages in the business, trade, practice or work of plumbing
without a license issued by the city, or performs work without a permit as
provided by section
15.12.060 of this chapter, or who violates any provision of this chapter, or
the rules or regulations made by both the commissioner of law enforcement and
the state plumbing board, or who refuses to perform any duties lawfully
enjoined upon him by this chapter, or by the state plumbing inspector within
the prescribed time, or who fails, neglects or refuses to obey any lawful order
made by the duly authorized officers or agents of the city or the state
plumbing inspector, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code §6-74)
15.12.090: FAILURE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any plumbing contractor, plumbing journeyman, or any other person who has had
notice from the plumbing inspector, or who has been found guilty of violating
this chapter by using materials not in accordance with this chapter, shall
remove any such materials or part of plumbing system not complying with this
chapter within ten (10) days following notice of such violation and any
violation of the provisions of this section are declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior code §6-75)
CHAPTER 15.16
GAS CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 965 §1, 2005)
CHAPTER 15.20
FIRE LIMITS 1
SECTION:
15.20.010: Established And Described
15.20.020: Tracts Excluded
 
Notes
1 1. IC §50-309(B).
15.20.010: ESTABLISHED AND DESCRIBED:
The fire limits of the city, encompassing the area hereinafter known as the
fire district, shall be the outside limits of the combined business use
district and manufacturing and industrial use district, determined from the
intersection of Main Street and Lincoln Avenue in the city, and the fire
district shall encompass all of both such use districts as such use districts
are presently defined by title 17 of this code, or as such use districts may in
the future be altered, revised, or changed by appropriate ordinance of the city
council or mayor of the city, such alteration, revision or change in such use
districts automatically altering the fire limits and fire district so that the
fire limits and fire district shall at all times include all territory,
streets, intersections and alleyways included inside the business and
manufacturing and industrial use districts. (Prior code §6-7)
15.20.020: TRACTS EXCLUDED:
The following tracts are excluded from the fire limits or districts:
A.   Lots 6 through 12, both inclusive, in Block 49;
B.   All of Blocks 50, 51 and 52;
C.   Blocks A-255, A-256, A-259 and A-260;
D.   Tax One (1) of Block A-261;
E.   Tax One (1) of Block A-262;
F.   All Jerome Townsite; and
G.   That part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4 SE 1/
4) of Section Eighteen (18), Township Eight (8) South, Range Seventeen (17)
East, Boise Meridian, described as follows: Beginning at a point on the west
boundary line of SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of Section 18 which point lies north a distance
of 40 feet from the center line of State Highway No. 25 and which point is also
a point on the north boundary line of Highway No. 25, thence South 88°37' East
along the north boundary line of State Highway No. 25 a distance of 325 feet,
thence north parallel with the west boundary line of such SE 1/4 SE 1/4 a
distance of 516 feet, thence North 88°37' West a distance of 325 feet to a
point on the west boundary of SE 1/4 SE 1/4, thence south on the west boundary
line a distance of 516 feet, to the point of beginning. (Prior code §6-7.1)
CHAPTER 15.24
TRAILERS AND TRAILER COURTS
SECTION:
15.24.010: Definitions
15.24.020: Board Of Investigators
15.24.030: License; Required
15.24.040: License; Application; Contents
15.24.050: License; Inspection Prerequisite To Issuance
15.24.060: License; Fee And Expiration Date
15.24.070: Periodic Inspection By Board Of Investigators; Revocation For
Violation
15.24.080: Mobile Home Park Design And Land Use
15.24.090: Mobile Home Lot Facilities
15.24.100: Mobile Home Accessory Buildings And Structures
15.24.110: Cabanas
15.24.120: Awnings Or Carports
15.24.130: Ramadas
15.24.140: Porches Or Patios
15.24.150: Fences And Windbreaks
15.24.160: Mobile Home Park Permanent Buildings
15.24.170: Mobile Home Park Plumbing Systems
15.24.180: Sewage Disposal
15.24.190: Mobile Home Park Safety Regulations
15.24.200: Noncompliance
15.24.300: Placement Of Mobile Homes Or Manufactured Homes In Parks
15.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section:
   CABANA: A room enclosure erected or constructed adjacent to a mobile home
for residential use by the occupant of the mobile home.
   LICENSE: A document issued annually by the city permitting a mobile home
park to be operated under this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures generally
constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service
connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on their
own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or
without a permanent foundation. The term "manufactured home" shall have the
meaning found at section
17.03.480 of this code.
   MOBILE HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land under
single ownership, upon which six (6) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes
are located, either free of charge or for revenue purposes; and shall include
any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use
as a part of the facilities of such park. For purposes of this chapter the
terms "mobile home park" and "manufactured home park" shall be synonymous.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for
the accommodation of one mobile home.
   PORCH OR PATIO: An outside walking area having the floor elevated above
grade.
   RAMADA: Any freestanding roof or shade structure installed or erected above
an occupied mobile home or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2009: Ord. 1060
§§1, 2, 2009: Ord. 945 §§1, 2, 3, 2004: Ord. 628 §1, 1980)
15.24.020: BOARD OF INVESTIGATORS:
The board of investigators required by this chapter shall consist of the chief
of police and the building official. The building official will serve as
chairman. The board of investigators shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and recommend to the proper city officials, the
issuance, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 1060 §3, 2009)
15.24.030: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or alter
any mobile home park within the city or its area of impact, as agreed upon by
the proper city and county officials, unless he owns a valid license issued
annually by the city, in the name of such person for the specific park
authorized to be operated and maintained. (Ord. 628 §3, 1980)
15.24.040: LICENSE; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
All applications for license pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the
proper city officials and shall show a complete plan of the mobile home park
including the following:
A.   The site plan area used for motor home park purposes;
B.   Roadways and driveways, including the width and type of surface;
C.   Location of sites for motor homes;
D.   Location and number of auxiliary structures;
E.   Method and plan of garbage and refuse collection and removal;
F.   Plan for all utilities;
G.   Plan for outdoor lighting. (Ord. 628 §4, 1980)
15.24.050: LICENSE; INSPECTION PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
No license shall be issued without the recommendation of the board of
investigators and such board shall inspect and approve, by majority vote, the
mobile home park plan demonstrating full compliance with all provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1060 §4, 2009)
15.24.060: LICENSE; FEE AND EXPIRATION DATE:
An annual license fee, to be determined from time to time by resolution of the
city council, shall be required for the initial issuance of any license under
this chapter. Initial license fees shall be paid at the time of the filing of
the initial application. Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
expire on June 30 of each year, commencing with the year of its issuance. The
initial licensing fee for a partial year may be prorated to the percentage of
the fee attributable to the remaining portion of the calendar year in which the
initial license is issued. Thereafter, an annual renewal license fee shall be
paid by every owner of a mobile home park. (Ord. 1061 §2, 2009)
15.24.070: PERIODIC INSPECTION BY BOARD OF INVESTIGATORS; REVOCATION FOR
VIOLATION:
A.   The board of investigators is authorized and directed to make inspections
to determine the conditions of mobile home parks in the city or area of impact
in order to perform its duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants
of mobile home parks and the general public.
B.   If the board, or any member thereof finds conditions or practices existing
which are in violation of any provisions of this chapter, the board shall give
notice in writing to the person to whom the license is issued and unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within thirty (30) days, the board shall
recommend to the proper city officials that such license be revoked, and the
proper city officials shall order a hearing to show cause why the license of
such person should not be revoked.
C.   At least thirty six (36) hours' notice must be given the person of such
hearing, advising him that he has an opportunity to appear with counsel to show
cause why his license should not be canceled. If, on such hearing, the proper
city officials find that such person has been guilty of the violation specified
in the notice served by the board of investigators, and in the order to show
cause, they shall revoke such license and such person shall thereupon cease
operation of such mobile home park. (Ord. 628 §7, 1980)
15.24.080: MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN AND LAND USE:
A.   A mobile home shall not be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from any
other mobile home or permanent building within the mobile home park. A mobile
home accessory building shall not be closer than five feet (5') from a mobile
home or building on an adjacent site.
B.   Each mobile home space within a mobile home park shall have direct access
to a park street.
C.   Park streets shall be of adequate width to accommodate the contemplated
parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street. Traffic lanes
shall be ten feet (10') minimum width. Lanes for parallel parking shall be
eight feet (8') minimum width. Collector streets, with guest parking
allowances, shall be thirty six feet (36') minimum width. Collector streets and
all other streets without parking allowances shall be thirty feet (30')
minimum. All street turns and approaches shall accommodate mobile homes as well
as emergency and service vehicles.
D.   Streets and walkways designed for the general use of the mobile home park
residents shall be lighted during all hours of darkness. Such lighting shall
not be under the control of the mobile home occupant.
E.   Each mobile home site shall be marked for identification by number. Such
marker shall be with three inch (3") or larger numbers and must be easily
readable from the park street serving the lot.
F.   Mobile home parks shall be designed to include two (2) automobile parking
spaces for each mobile home lot.
G.   Each mobile home park shall develop curb, gutter and sidewalk on property
fronting city streets. (Ord. 628 §8, 1980)
15.24.090: MOBILE HOME LOT FACILITIES:
All utility connections shall conform to applicable state and city codes. (Ord.
628 §9, 1980)
15.24.100: MOBILE HOME ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A.   Every mobile home accessory building or structure shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions or nationally
recognized building codes, and shall conform to the criteria of the authority
having jurisdiction.
B.   Under no condition shall a mobile home accessory building or structure be
closer than five feet (5') from any adjacent mobile home or mobile home
accessory building or structure. (Ord. 628 §10, 1980)
15.24.110: CABANAS:
A.   A cabana may be erected, constructed, occupied or maintained on a mobile
home lot as an accessory to a mobile home and be of one story and conforming to
state and city building codes.
B.   A cabana shall be designed and constructed as a freestanding structure. A
cabana may be attached to a mobile home with appropriate flashing or sealing
materials to provide a weather seal. (Ord. 628 §11, 1980)
15.24.120: AWNINGS OR CARPORTS:
An awning or carport may be erected, constructed or maintained on a mobile home
lot only as an accessory to a mobile home located on the same lot. An awning
shall not be enclosed with rigid materials or walls or converted for the use as
a habitable room or cabana, unless the completed construction complies with all
the requirements for a cabana. (Ord. 628 §12, 1980)
15.24.130: RAMADAS:
A.   A ramada may be erected, constructed or maintained on a mobile home lot as
an accessory to a mobile home located on the same lot and conforming to state
and city building codes.
B.   A ramada or any portion thereof shall have a clearance of not less than
eighteen inches (18") in a vertical direction above any gas burning appliance
vent or plumbing vent extending through the roof of a mobile home and not less
than six inches (6") in a horizontal direction from each side of a mobile home.
Cross braces, architectural appurtenances or structural ties, shall not
obstruct movement of any mobile home.
C.   A ramada shall be designed and erected as a freestanding self- supporting
structure meeting requirements for cabanas.
D.   A ramada shall not be enclosed or partially enclosed on any side or end,
except that one side may be enclosed with the ramada roof continuous with the
roof of a cabana constructed on one side only of any mobile home.
E.   A ventilating opening shall be installed at the highest point in the
ramada roof to relieve products of combustion from vents or ducts of fuel
burning equipment. Vent openings shall have a minimum cross section of twenty
eight (28) square inches. Chimneys or vents of appliances burning solid or
liquid fuel shall extend through the ramada roof surface and shall terminate in
an approved roof jack and cap. (Ord. 628 §13, 1980)
15.24.140: PORCHES OR PATIOS:
A.   A porch or patio erected, constructed, or maintained on a mobile home lot
for the use of the occupants of the mobile home located on the same lot shall
comply with state and city building codes. (Ord. 628 §14, 1980)
15.24.150: FENCES AND WINDBREAKS:
A.   If a fence or windbreak is located on a mobile home lot, it shall not
exceed eight feet (8') in height, except where such fence is on park property
line. No person shall plant, install or otherwise create on public or private
property an obstruction to the vision of the drivers of a vehicle at an
intersection which, in the opinion of the city, constitutes a traffic hazard.
B.   A fence or windbreak exceeding forty two inches (42") in height shall not
be located closer than five feet (5') to any mobile home or mobile home
accessory building or structure. A fence or windbreak shall not be used to form
an enclosure of any part of an awning or carport. (Ord. 628 §15, 1980)
15.24.160: MOBILE HOME PARK PERMANENT BUILDINGS:
Every permanent building shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
applicable state and city building codes. (Ord. 628 §16, 1980)
15.24.170: MOBILE HOME PARK PLUMBING SYSTEMS:
A.   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each mobile home park. The water supply treatment shall provide
water of a quality which meets the chemical and bacteriological requirements of
the health authority having jurisdiction, but in no case shall the water
quality be less than that specified under the provisions of the safe drinking
water act of 1974 (Public Law 93-523 dated December 16, 1974). Where a public
supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available at
or within the boundary of the park site, connections shall be made thereto and
its supply used exclusively. When satisfactory public supply is not available,
a private water supply shall be developed.
B.   All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and city regulations and requirements and
shall be of a type and in locations approved by the authority having
jurisdiction.
C.   The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and where necessary shall be protected against
hazards of backflow and back siphonage.
D.   The water supply system shall be designated and maintained as to provide a
pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch under all normal
operating conditions at each mobile home site. Also, the system must be capable
of supplying up to fifty (50) mobile homes with a demand load of one hundred
(100) gpm, one hundred (100) mobile homes with one hundred eighty (180) gpm,
and three hundred (300) mobile homes with three hundred seventy (370) gpm.
Greater design value may be required when the system is to provide fire
protection. (Ord. 628 §17, 1980)
15.24.180: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A.   An adequate and safe sewage disposal system shall be provided in all
mobile home parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Wherever
available, connection shall be made to a public system. All new improvements
shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations.
B.   Where the sewage collection lines of a mobile home park are not connected
to a public sewer all proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by
the authority having jurisdiction prior to construction. (Ord. 628 §18, 1980)
15.24.190: MOBILE HOME PARK SAFETY REGULATIONS:
A.   The location and arrangement of each mobile home park shall meet the
approval of the board of investigators. Where there could be possible time
response delays for emergency equipment (fire, police or ambulance services)
occasioned by a single access to a mobile home park (such as might be caused by
railroad crossings, limited access highways, one-way streets, grades which can
become impassable under snow or icy conditions) a second access or emergency
access roadway shall be provided. A site plan shall be provided to the fire and
law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction.
B.   Access to a mobile home for fire protection services shall be such as to
permit fire apparatus to approach within one hundred feet (100') of each mobile
home.
C.   Mobile homes shall not be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from any
other mobile home or permanent building within or adjacent to the mobile home
park. A mobile home accessory building or structure shall not be closer than
five feet (5') from any adjacent mobile home or mobile home accessory building
or structure.
D.   Water supplies for fire department operations shall be required by the
authority having jurisdiction. Where there are no such requirements, water
supplies shall be adequate to permit the effective operation of at least two
(2) 11/2-inch hose streams on any fire in a mobile home or elsewhere in the
mobile home park whether the supply is derived from hydrants connected to an
underground water supply system, a reservoir or water supply source of not less
than three thousand (3,000) gallons (suitably accessible for fire department
drafting operations), or fire department apparatus equipped with a water tank
(s) constructed in accordance with the NFPA "Standard For Automotive Fire
Apparatus" (NFPA 19-1975). Hydrants, if provided, shall be located along
streets or public ways readily accessible for fire department use and located
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of all mobile home lots. Hydrant hose
coupling threads shall conform to those specified in the referenced standard.
E.   Mobile home park owners shall maintain the park area free of dry brush,
leaves, rubbish and weeds which might communicate fires between mobile homes
and other buildings in the park.
F.   Owners shall keep the area under and around their units free from
accumulation of rubbish (paper), leaves, and brush. Containers shall be
provided for disposition of rubbish and a collection system maintained. Burning
of rubbish shall be prohibited within the boundaries of any mobile home park.
G.   Owners shall not place empty liquefied petroleum gas containers under a
mobile home. Empty containers shall be left in place if there is more than one
container. If the mobile home LP gas supply is limited to one container and a
replacement has been secured, any empty fuel containers shall be stored in the
area designated for such storage.
H.   Operators of vehicular equipment should observe the posted signs and shall
keep all designated fire lanes and access to fire hydrants open at all times.
(Ord. 628 §19, 1980)
15.24.200: NONCOMPLIANCE:
A.   In addition to the power to revoke a mobile home park license under
section
15.24.070 of this chapter, the board of investigators may send the owner of a
mobile home park a written notice of noncompliance, notifying the owner of the
mobile home park of deficiencies under this chapter. Any single event of
noncompliance which remains uncured within thirty (30) days of the issuance of
the notice will be declared to be a violation of this chapter punishable by a
fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) together with ten dollars
($10.00) per day for every day after the initial day of violation and cure
period which the violation remains uncured.
B.   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the implementation of
license revocation proceedings under section
15.24.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 1060 §6, 2009)
15.24.300: PLACEMENT OF MOBILE HOMES OR MANUFACTURED HOMES IN PARKS:
The placement of a mobile home or manufactured home within any mobile home park
shall be subject to all other relevant provisions of this code, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of subsection
17.14.010B of this code. (Ord. 1060 §7, 2009)
CHAPTER 15.26
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME SITING
SECTION:
15.26.010: Definitions
15.26.020: Permit Required
15.26.030: Application; Fee
15.26.040: Appeal
15.26.050: Inspection
15.26.060: Used Mobile Homes Or Manufactured Homes
15.26.070: Penalties
15.26.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home"
shall be as defined in sections
 17.03.505 and
17.03.480 of this code as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 1060 §8, 2009)
15.26.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No mobile home or manufactured home shall be placed on real property within the
city without a siting permit. (Ord. 805 §1, 1996)
15.26.030: APPLICATION; FEE:
Any person desiring to place a mobile home or manufactured home within the city
limits shall make a written application to the city building official which
shall contain:
A.   The name of the owner of the manufactured home or mobile home;
B.   The name of the owner of the real property on which the mobile home or
manufactured home will be placed;
C.   The legal description and physical address of the real property on which
the mobile home or manufactured home will be placed;
D.   A drawing of the lot on which the mobile home or manufactured home will be
placed indicating the exact proposed location of the mobile or manufactured
home, including front, back and side yard setbacks;
E.   The name of the manufacturer, year of manufacture, and vehicle
identification number for the mobile or manufactured home;
F.   The zoning of the proposed site for the mobile or manufactured home;
G.   If the proposed site is zoned R-1, a detailed description of the square
footage of the mobile or manufactured home, the pitch of the roof, the nature
and color of exterior siding and roof, and the foundation plan;
H.   Such other information as may be reasonably required by the building
official.
The application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable one hundred dollar
($100.00) fee. The fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the
city council.
If the application is complete, the building official shall promptly review the
application and if it is found compatible with this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances of the city, the building official shall issue a permit
to the applicant for the siting of the mobile or manufactured home in
accordance with the application. If the building official denies the
application, he shall provide the applicant the reasons for the denial in
writing. The building official shall act on any complete application within ten
(10) days of receipt. (Ord. 805 §2, 1996)
15.26.040: APPEAL:
An applicant denied a siting permit may appeal the decision of the building
official to the city planning and zoning commission by filing a written notice
of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the receipt of the denial
of the siting permit by the building official. The writing must specify the
decision appealed from and state every reason for which the applicant believes
the denial of the permit to have been in error. The appeal shall be heard by
the planning and zoning commission utilizing the procedures found in section
17.48.080 of this code. The decision of the planning and zoning commission on
appeal may be appealed further to the city council under the procedures found
in section 17.48.080 of this code. (Ord. 805 §3, 1996)
15.26.050: INSPECTION:
The building official shall inspect the siting of the mobile home or
manufactured home to make certain the terms of the permit have been complied
with. (Ord. 805 §4, 1996)
15.26.060: USED MOBILE HOMES OR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
The placement of any mobile home or manufactured home within the limits of the
city shall be subject to all other relevant provisions of this code, including,
but not limited to, subsection
17.14.010B of this code as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 1060 §9, 2009)
15.26.070: PENALTIES:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place a mobile home or manufactured
home on real property in the city without a siting permit issued by the city.
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place a mobile home or manufactured
home on real property in the city in violation of any siting permit issued for
that purpose.
C.   A violation of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor. Every
separate day where a violation of this section has occurred shall be considered
a separate offense. (Ord. 805 §5, 1996)
TITLE 16
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16.04.010: Preamble
16.04.020: Purpose
16.04.030: Interpretation
16.04.040: Administration
16.04.050: Penalty
16.04.010: PREAMBLE:
From the effective date of this title, all subdivisions and plats of any tract
of land located wholly in the city shall be subject to this title. (Ord. 994
§2, 2006)
16.04.020: PURPOSE:
These regulations are authorized by title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter
65 of the Idaho Code; and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, as
amended or subsequently codified.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to provide for:
A.   The harmonious development of the area;
B.   The coordination of streets and roads within subdivisions with other
existing or planned streets and roads;
C.   Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
D.   Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
E.   The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in either
of the following:
   1.   The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or
other public services; and
   2.   The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public funds
for the supply of such services;
F.   The requirement as to the extent and the manner in which:
   1.   Roads shall be created and improved; and
   2.   Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections or other
facilities shall be installed;
G.   The manner and form of making and filing of any plat; and
H.   The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and duties
of approval authorities. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.04.030: INTERPRETATION:
All subdivisions, as herein defined, shall be submitted for approval by the
council and shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. These
regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and where at variance with
other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.04.040: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this title shall be conducted by the planning and zoning
administrator. The planning and zoning administrator shall be appointed by the
mayor and the appointment shall be ratified by the council, as described in
chapter 2.04 of this code. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.04.050: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any regulation of this title shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each and every day during which the
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
16.08.010: Terms Defined
16.08.010: TERMS DEFINED:
   ACCESS EASEMENT: An easement across one or more adjacent properties to allow
vehicular access to an otherwise inaccessible area at any time.
   ADMINISTRATOR: The planning and zoning administrator.
   ALLEY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the backside of a
property. Also see definition of Street.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Those methods or practices to prevent or
reduce water pollution and include, but are not limited to, structural and
nonstructural controls, and operation and maintenance procedures. BMPs can be
applied before, during, and after pollution producing activities to reduce or
eliminate the introduction of pollutants into receiving waters.
   BICYCLEWAY: A public way designed for the use of nonmotorized vehicles.
   BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries,
usually streets.
   BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended or used for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, plants,
chattels, or property of any kind.
   BUSINESS PARK: A development approved through the planned unit development
(PUD) process that contains a number of separate manufacturing, commercial,
office and supporting uses and open space.
   CITY: The city of Jerome, Idaho.
   COMMISSION: The city of Jerome planning and zoning commission.
   COMMON AREA: Lands or real estate intended for the common use of a group of
persons all of whom have an undivided common interest in the real estate.
   COMMON AREA, LIMITED: A common area within a condominium ownership that is
restricted in use to include only a part of the group of persons who have a
common interest in a condominium project.
   COMMON, INTEREST IN: Every interest created in favor of several persons in
their own right unless acquired by them in partnership, for partnership
purposes or unless declared in its creation to be a joint interest or unless
acquired as community property.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The overall guiding document for all development within
the legal jurisdiction of the city.
   COUNCIL: The city of Jerome city council.
   COUNTY: Jerome County, Idaho, and its governing board.
   COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder of Jerome County, Idaho.
   CROSSWALK: A right of way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block
to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street provided with turnaround space at its
terminus.
   DEAD END STREET: A street connecting to another street at one end only and
not having provision for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
   DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interest in land for use by the
public by ordinance, resolution or entry in the official minutes as by the
recording of a plat. Dedicated land becomes public land upon the acceptance by
the local governing authority.
   DEVELOPER: The owner, or his legally authorized agent, of lands that are
being platted or mapped.
   DEVELOPMENT: Lands within the boundaries of an area that are platted or
mapped in accordance with this title that are intended to be improved by the
construction or addition of buildings or other structures; by mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGNS: On premises incidental signs designed to guide or direct
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
   EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for specific purposes.
   ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
   EQUESTRIANWAY: A public way designed to be used for horseback riding.
   FINAL PLAT: A plan of a subdivision, dedication or any portion thereof
prepared for filing and recording with the Jerome County recorder and
containing those elements and requirements set forth in section
16.20.020 of this title. A final plat, upon its being filed and recorded by the
Jerome County recorder, shall thereafter be known as an authorized plat,
subdivision or dedication.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The official map on which the federal insurance
administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance
administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD OR FLOODWATERS: A temporary overflow of water on lands not normally
covered by water.
   FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat areas or lowlands adjoining the channel of a
watercourse, or areas where drainage is or may be restricted by manmade
structures which have been or may be covered partially or wholly by floodwater,
but shall compose an area not less than that area confined by the 50-year flood
and shall not exceed that area confined by the 100-year flood.
   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS: The codes, ordinances and other regulations relating
to the use of land and construction within the channel and floodplain areas,
including zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, housing
codes, setback requirements, open area regulations and similar methods of
control affecting the use and development of the areas.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents
of buildings.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface.
   FRONTAGE, ENTIRE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between
intersecting streets, or between a street and right of way, waterway, end of
dead end street or city boundary, measured along the street line. An
intersecting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the
side of the street which it intersects.
   GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The city council of the city of Jerome, Idaho.
   GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES: Facilities operated or occupied by a governmental
agency for the benefit of the general population.
   HISTORIC SITES: Sites established by the city, county, state or federal
government as historic monuments that should be preserved.
   IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions
associated with subdivision and building site developments.
   INFILL DEVELOPMENT: The residential development of parcels within previously
built areas. These areas are already served by public infrastructure, such as
water, wastewater and other utilities. To be considered an "Infill Development"
the original lot sought to be subdivided must be ten (10) acres or less.
   LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision which consists of sixty (60) or more
lots or dwelling units or which contains forty (40) acres or more.
   LOT: Unless otherwise defined, a parcel of land with sufficient size to meet
the minimum requirements of this title for use, dimensional standards and off
street parking and which is owned by a single person with a separate interest
or a group of persons with a separate interest together with an interest in
common in the real property.
   LOT AREA: The total area of a lot measured on a horizontal plane within the
boundary lines exclusive of public and private roads, and easements of access
to other property.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
   LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the two (2) side lot lines.
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT, PLATTED: A lot or individual parcel shown on a plat.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear.
   MAINTENANCE EASEMENT: An easement granted for the purpose of providing
access for repair and maintenance of the appurtenant property in zero lot line
subdivisions.
   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan showing a carrier's expected network of
wireless communication facilities within the city and its area of impact.
   MASTER PLAN: A planning map of the city of Jerome, Idaho, and the land area
within one mile of the city, showing the existing zoning and street layout
together with the future zoning and street layout as planned and proposed by
the city to secure and maintain an orderly growth and expansion program.
   MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or
iron steel rods, used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as
specified in section 50-1303, Idaho Code.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure not conforming to the
provisions of this title but which was lawfully existing or under construction
at the time of the adoption of this title.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A use not conforming to the provisions of this title but
which was lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this title.
   100-YEAR FLOOD: The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is
likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a 1 percent
chance of occurring each year).
   OPEN SPACE: An area retaining a natural ground cover free of any buildings,
structures, streets or parking areas.
   ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat of record or
on file in the office of the county recorder, or an unplatted contiguous parcel
of land held in one ownership and of record at the effective date hereof. In
cases of "unrecorded matters of fact", the commission shall use its best
judgment to determine a fair designation on an original parcel of land.
   OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in land to be subdivided to
commence and maintain proceedings under these regulations.
   PEDESTRIANWAY: A public way designed to be used as a walkway for
pedestrians.
   PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by
the subdivider or his surety to the city clerk which guarantees that the
subdivider will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an
approved plat, and provides that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply
with the provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay
damages up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the
requirements of the approved plat.
   PERMANENT: Not less than six (6) months.
   PERSON: Any individual or any corporation, limited liability company, joint
venture, limited partnership, partnership, firm, association, trustee or other
similar entity or organization.
   PLAT: The drawings, certifications, descriptions and approvals of a division
or proposed division of real property into two (2) or more lots, blocks,
parcels, sites, plots, units, common areas, limited common areas or other
descriptive designations for the purpose of offering for sale, lease or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions to any person.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT: A preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision or
dedication, containing the elements and requirements set forth in this title.
   PREMISES: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land with their
appurtenances and buildings which are under one ownership or control.
   PRIVATE: Belonging to an individual or group of persons and not for the
public or open to the public.
   PRIVATE DRIVE: Access for up to five (5) residential dwelling units.
   PRIVATE SHARED DRIVE: Access to more than one lot from one vehicular access
point.
   PRIVATE STREET: A street that provides access to more than five (5) and not
more than twenty-four (24) residential dwelling units on not more than ten (10)
lots.
   PRIVATE WAY: Any right of way or easement dedicated or platted across real
property owned by the person dedicating or platting the private way and
intended for the general or special use of a person or persons rather than the
general public.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Services offered by persons engaged in the legal,
engineering, architectural, design, planning, accounting, banking, auditing, or
related professions.
   PROJECT: A development.
   PUBLIC: Owned by federal, state or local government or subdivisions thereof.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any right of way or easement dedicated or platted across real
property owned by the person dedicating or platting the public way and intended
for the general or special use of the public; or any right of way or easement
legally obtained by the city for the public's use, providing such public way
has not been vacated by the city council.
   REAL PROPERTY: Real estate consisting of: a) lands, possessory rights to
land and ditch and water rights; b) that which is affixed to land; and c) that
which is appurtenant to land.
   REPRODUCIBLE DRAWING: A permanent drawing prepared in black India ink or an
archival photographic image process conforming to the standards established by
the American National Standards Institute on a polyester material four-
thousandths of an inch (0.004") thick with a matte finish.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way,
which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
   SERVICE ROAD: A dedicated minor way which is used for vehicular access to
back or side of residential property otherwise abutting on a street.
   SETBACK: The distance from a property line, centerline, canyon rim, right of
way, or structure within which a building is prohibited.
   SHALL: Designates a mandatory requirement.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The specifications as specified in this title or as
officially adopted by the city council.
   STATE: The state of Idaho.
   STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt, and surface runoff and drainage.
   STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the
dedication to the public of which has been officially accepted. The term
"street" also includes the terms "highway", "thoroughfare", "parkway", "road",
"avenue", "boulevard", "land", "place" and other such terms:Arterial: A street
designated for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.Collector: A
street designated for the purpose of carrying traffic from local streets to
other collector streets and/or arterial streets.Frontage: A local street
parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street to provide access to abutting
properties.Half Street: A street comprised of one-half (1/2) of the width
required to conform with a standard city street section.Local: A street which
has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.Loop: A
local street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.Partial: A
dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required street width,
usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.Private: A street that
is not accepted for public use or maintenance which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access.Stub Street: A street which terminates without provisions for
a turnaround area.
   STREET GRADE: The officially established grade of the street upon which a
lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of
the street shall be taken as the street grade.
   STRUCTURES: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on
the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes,
walls, fences and billboards.
   SUBDISTRICTS, BASIC AND SECONDARY: A zoning designation that provides
flexibility for the development of a homogeneous unit without compromising the
health, safety or general welfare of the community.
   SUBDIVIDER: The individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes
the application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in
accordance with the provisions of this title. The subdivider need not be the
owner of the property; however, he shall be an agent of the owner or have
sufficient property rights in the property to represent the owner.
   SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or
parcel of land into more than two (2) parts for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or development, which shall also include the dedication of public
streets and other rights of way and the addition to, or creation of, a
cemetery. However, this title shall not apply to any of the following:
   A.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does not
reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not change the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat;
   B.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal "condemnation" as
defined and allowed in the Idaho Code;
   C.   Widening of existing streets to conform to a comprehensive plan;
   D.   The acquisition of a street right of way by a public agency in
conformance with a comprehensive plan; or
   E.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage.
   SUBDIVISION OF PROPERTY WITHOUT PLAT/LOT SPLIT: The result of an act of
dividing an original lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) parts, which
shall also include the dedication of public streets and other rights of way and
the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery as required by the city of Jerome.
   SURVEYOR: A land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the state
of Idaho.
   TRAFFICWAY: A public way or a private way of which the primary use is for
movement of motorized vehicles.
   UNPLATTED AREA: Any area that has not been subdivided according to law.
   USE: An activity or purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon
is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained,
let or leased.
   UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas or electricity
and similar facilities providing service to and used by the public.
   UTILITY POLE: A telephone, power, light, cable television, or flag pole.
Light poles shall include street, stadium and security light poles.
   VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other descriptive
means the relationship of a proposed development to other nearby developments,
trafficways or other landmarks within the general area in order to better
locate and orient the area in question. (Ord. 1122, 2014: Ord. 994 §2, 2006;
Ord. 1177, 2019)
CHAPTER 16.12
PROCEDURAL OVERVIEW
SECTION:
16.12.010: Generally
16.12.020: Procedures And Requirements
16.12.010: GENERALLY:
Any person desiring to create a "subdivision" as herein defined shall submit
all necessary applications to the administrator on forms as provided by the
city. No final plat shall be filed with the county recorder or improvements
made on the property until the plat has been acted upon by the planning and
zoning commission and approved by the council. No lots shall be sold until the
plat has been recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 994 §2,
2006)
16.12.020: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of the "preapplication procedure" is to afford the
subdivider an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the
city administrator, city engineer and their staff before incurring the expense
of exhaustive surveys and calculations. Thorough analysis of the problems at
this stage will expedite approval of the preliminary and final plats.
B.   Permits: No permits shall be issued by any administrative officer of the
city for the construction of any building, or other improvement requiring a
permit, upon any land for which a plat is required by law unless and until the
requirements hereof shall have been complied with.
C.   Plat Approval Required: A plat shall be drawn for each subdivision of land
and submitted to the city council as provided below.
D.   Agenda: Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be
placed on the council's agenda only after fulfilling the appropriate
requirements of these regulations. However, a plat not meeting all the
requirements may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a
letter requesting any specific exceptions and enumerating in detail the reasons
therefor. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.16
PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE
SECTION:
16.16.010: Procedure
16.16.020: Preparation
16.16.025: Preapplication Procedure
16.16.030: Proof Of Ownership Required
16.16.040: Irrigation Facilities
16.16.045: Subdivision Of Property Without Plat/Lot Splits
16.16.047: Separate Ownership Of Units In Duplexes
16.16.050: Preliminary Plat
16.16.010: PROCEDURE:
The following procedures shall apply to the filing for preliminary approval of
any subdivision. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.16.020: PREPARATION:
The subdivider shall submit to the administrator a preapplication drawing of
the area to be subdivided. The drawing shall note outside dimensions of the
property, proposed lot sizes, location and width of streets, alleys, easements,
and other information he may have available. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.16.025: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A.   Application: The subdivider shall submit a preapplication to enable the
administrator to review and comment on the proposed subdivision. The
preapplication shall include at least one copy of a sketch plan. The sketch
plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision,
in schematic form and include the following:
   1.   The general layout and approximate dimensions of streets, blocks and
lots in sketch form;
   2.   The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and adjacent
to the proposed subdivision site, as well as the names and addresses of the
owners of any land abutting the land to be subdivided;
   3.   The areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities;
   4.   A legal description of the tract to be subdivided and of the lots into
which it is to be subdivided;
   5.   The location of existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains,
fire hydrants and culverts within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto;
   6.   All easements to be dedicated for electrical utilities, conduits, storm
or sanitary sewers, gas and water lines or other uses.
B.   Fee: No fee is required.
C.   Administrator Action: The administrator shall notify the subdivider within
fifteen (15) days from the date of receiving an acceptable preapplication as to
the general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal with this title, and
shall provide the necessary forms and checklists, as well as the additional
following consideration:
   1.   Compliance of the proposed development with existing local or state
policies, goals and objectives or comprehensive plans;
   2.   Determination if additional special permits for ordinance conflicts,
such as rezone, special development permit or variance are needed and the
manner of coordinating such permits;
   3.   Consideration of any unique environmental features or hazardous
concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject
property, such as areas that have been designated as areas of critical
environmental concern, unique plant or animal life and floodplains; and
   4.   Consideration of other local and state agencies that the subdivider
should contact before preparing a preliminary plat. (Ord. 1122, 2014)
16.16.030: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP REQUIRED:
In making application for approval of a subdivision plat, the owner shall
submit a current title report or provide other evidence acceptable by the city
council to establish ownership of the real property within the subdivision.
(Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.16.040: IRRIGATION FACILITIES:
If irrigation lines, ditches, laterals, canals, buried irrigation conduit and/
or structures are to be constructed, rerouted, in any way altered or changed as
part of the development of a subdivision, documentary evidence of consent to
the construction, rerouting or alteration or change by all parties interested,
including the irrigation entity that is or will be responsible for delivery of
irrigation water to the lands being subdivided, shall be presented to the city
council and be a condition of approval of the preliminary plat. (Ord. 994 §2,
2006)
16.16.045: SUBDIVISION OF PROPERTY WITHOUT PLAT/LOT SPLITS:
After reviewing the preapplication, the administrator may, in his or her sole
discretion, submit the preapplication to the planning and zoning commission for
approval without a plat. If, after public hearing, the commission finds that
the proposed subdivision is to split one lot into two (2) (a "lot split") and
the proposed subdivision will not have a substantial impact on present or
proposed public utilities, streets and parks, is consistent with the
comprehensive plan, and both resulting lots will meet minimum size and minimum
lot size requirements for the relevant zone and each lot has a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') of street frontage, no plat shall be required and the
lot split may be approved by the commission without submittal to the city
council. If a lot split occurs, any subsequent divisions of the split land
require subdivision review and approval. (Ord. 1122, 2014)
16.16.047: SEPARATE OWNERSHIP OF UNITS IN DUPLEXES:
Owners of duplexes may split a duplex into separate units to be sold to
different owners under the following procedure:
A.   An application for duplex split to be made with the Planning and Zoning
Administrator on a form provided by the Administrator. The Administrator shall
have all departments of the city review the application, and upon their review
and recommendations, shall allow a duplex split upon receiving evidence that
the following conditions have been met:
   1.   Each unit shall have a lot area not less than the following:
      a.   R-2: The minimum lot area shall be three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet;
      b.   R-3: The minimum lot area shall be three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet;
      c.   R-M: The minimum lot area shall be three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet;
      d.   C-1 (Subject to the approval of a special use permit): The minimum
lot area shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet;
      e.   CBD (Subject to the approval of a special use permit): The minimum
lot area shall three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet;
      f.    MU (Subject to the approval of a special use permit): The minimum
lot area shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet;
   2.    Firewalls as required by the building code and the city inspection
department have been provided between the units.
   3.    Separate sewer and water facilities are provided to each unit.
   4.    Two (2) off-street parking spaces are provided for each unit.
   5.   Duplex units shall abide by setback requirements in each zone which is
set forth in section
17.14.020  of the Jerome City Code.
   6.   Any requirements set forth in this subsection shall comply with all
city and state standards. (Ord. 1219, 4-18-2023)
16.16.050: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A.   Application: The subdivider shall file with the administrator a complete
subdivision application form and preliminary plat data as required in this
title.
B.   Combining Preliminary And Final Plats: The applicant may request that the
subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and final plat if
all the following exist:
   1.   The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots;
   2.   No new street dedication or street widening is involved;
   3.   No major special development considerations are involved, such as
development in a floodplain or a hillside development; and
   4.   All required information for both the preliminary and final plats is
complete and in an acceptable form.
A request to combine both the preliminary plat and final plat into one
application shall be acted upon by the commission after receiving a
recommendation by the administrator.
C.   Content Of Preliminary Plat: The contents of the preliminary plat and
related information shall be in such form as stipulated by the commission;
however, additional maps or data as deemed necessary by the administrator may
also be required.
The subdivider shall submit to the administrator at least the following:
   1.   Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision,
drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated: Each copy of the
preliminary plat shall be on good quality paper, shall be drawn to a scale of
not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), shall show the
drafting date and a north arrow.
   2.   A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat.
   3.   Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed
development within any special development area, such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, cemetery, large scale development, hazardous or unique
areas of development.
   4.   To ensure adequate water supply to each new subdivision/development,
all subdivision/development preliminary plat applications to the city will
include water modeling results which indicate the new subdivision/development
can be developed in a manner that will provide an adequate water supply for
domestic water and fire protection and that the new subdivision/development
will not adversely affect the city's ability to continue to provide adequate
domestic water and fire protection to the existing water system users.
   5.   To ensure adequate sewer treatment service by the city, each
subdivision/development preliminary plat application to the city will include
sewer service treatment modeling results which indicate the new subdivision/
development can be developed in a manner that will provide adequate sewer
service and sewer treatment capacity by the city and that the new subdivision/
development will not adversely affect the city's ability to continue to provide
adequate sewer treatment capacity to the existing sewer system users.
   6.   The cost of the water and sewer modeling will be the responsibility of
the developer.
D.   Requirement Of Preliminary Plats: The following shall be shown on the
preliminary plat or shall be submitted separately, together with any other
pertinent information requested by the administrator:
   1.   The name of the proposed subdivision, which does not duplicate the name
of any other subdivision in the county.
   2.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdividers, the
engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat, and any other professional persons
involved in the subdivision.
   3.   The names and addresses of all surrounding property owners both
adjacent to and beyond any public thoroughfares from the subject property on
record in the county assessor's office.
   4.   The legal description of the subdivision by section, township and
range.
   5.   A statement of the intended use of the proposed subdivision, such as
residential single-family, two-family and multiple housing, commercial,
industrial, recreational or agricultural and a showing of any sites proposed
for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses.
   6.   A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed
subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.
   7.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the
surrounding area (covering at least a 4 square mile area).
   8.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the
adjacent land.
   9.   Existing streets, street names, rights of way and roadway widths,
including adjoining streets or roadways, along with the type of surface and the
existence of any curb-gutter and/or sidewalks.
   10.   The approximate location and length of the boundary lines of each lot,
parcel or site and the proposed lot and block numbers and the approximate
acreage enclosed by the subdivision.
   11.   Contour lines, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope is
greater than twenty percent (20%) and at two foot (2') intervals where land
slope is twenty percent (20%) or less, referenced to an established bench mark
of the city vertical control system, including its location and elevation.
   12.   Location, size and direction of flow of all existing utilities,
including, but not limited to, storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation laterals,
ditches, drainages, bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants, gas lines,
power, telephone and streetlights. If utilities are not on or adjacent to the
property, an indication of the direction and distance to nearest utilities that
can serve the subdivision shall be provided.
   13.   A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants and/or deed restrictions.
   14.   Any dedications to the public of easements both public and private,
together with a statement of the location, dimensions and purpose of such to
the subject property and surrounding properties.
   15.   Any additional required information for special developments as
specified in this title.
   16.   A statement as to whether or not any variance will be requested with
respect to any provision of this title describing the particular provision, the
variance requested, and the reasons therefor.
   17.   Location, right of way width and name of all public or private
trafficways; the location, right of way width and use of any proposed public or
private pedestrianways or special ways; and a statement of intended
improvements to be made thereto.
   18.   A statement as to what improvements will be made to existing utilities
and what other on site improvements will be made.
   19.   The approximate lot corner and easement locations of all adjacent
subdivisions.
   20.   The location, size and direction of flow of all drainage, irrigation,
sewer and water line improvements which will be part of the subdivision
development.
E.   Fees: A fee for processing and checking a preliminary plat shall be due at
the time upon submittal of the preliminary plat to the administrator. The
amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the council.
F.   Administrator Review:
   1.   Certification: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, and all other
required data as provided for herein, the administrator, after review by the
city engineering department, shall certify the application as complete and
shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon. He shall, thereafter,
place the preliminary plat on the agenda for consideration at the next regular
meeting of the commission. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be delivered
by the subdivider to each member of the commission at least five (5) days prior
to the meeting for plat consideration.
   2.   Review By Other Agencies: The administrator shall refer the preliminary
plat and application to as many agencies as deemed necessary. Such agencies may
include the following:
      a.   Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
      b.   The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or districts
and drainage districts;
      c.   The superintendent of the school district; and
      d.   Other agencies having an interest in the proposed subdivision.
   3.   Recommendation: Upon expiration of the time allowance for department
and agency review, the administrator shall prepare a recommendation to the
commission.
G.   Notification To Property Owners: The subdivider shall certify to the
administrator that he has notified all adjoining property owners of the
proposed subdivision. Such written notification shall be mailed at least ten
(10) days prior to the commission meeting.
H.   Commission Action:
   1.   Review: The commission shall review the preliminary plat, comments from
the concerned persons and agencies and the report from the administrator and
arrive at a decision on the preliminary plat.
   2.   Findings: In determining the acceptance of a proposed subdivision the
commission shall consider the objectives of this title and at least the
following:
      a.   The conformance of the subdivision with the comprehensive plan;
      b.   The availability of public services to accommodate the proposed
development;
      c.   The continuity of the proposed development with the capital
improvement program of the city;
      d.   The public financial capability of supporting services for the
proposed development; and
      e.   The other health, safety or environmental problems that may be
brought to the commission's attention.
   3.   Action On Preliminary Plat: The commission may approve, conditionally
approve, disapprove or table for additional information when acting on the
preliminary plat. If tabled, approval or disapproval shall occur at the regular
meeting following the meeting at which the plat is first considered by the
commission. The action, and the reasons for such action, shall be stated in
writing by the administrator and forwarded to the applicant. The administrator
shall also forward a statement of the action taken and the reasons for such
action together with a copy of the preliminary plat to the council for its
information and record. Upon granting or denying a preliminary plat the
commission shall specify:
      a.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application;
      b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain plat
approval.
   4.   Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the commission's
conclusion is favorable to the subdivider's request for the subdivision to be
considered as both a preliminary plat and final subdivision, then a
recommendation shall be forwarded to the council in the same manner as herein
specified for a final plat. The commission may recommend that the combined
application be approved, approved conditionally or disapproved.
I.   Approval Period:
   1.   Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of the
final plat application by the administrator within one year after action by the
commission shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to be null and
void, unless an extension of time is applied for by the subdivider and granted
by the commission.
   2.   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in
successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of one year, may be considered for final
approval without resubmission for preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 1043, 2008:
Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.20
FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE
SECTION:
16.20.010: Procedure
16.20.020: Final Plat
16.20.010: PROCEDURE:
The following procedures shall apply to the filing for final approval of any
subdivision. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.20.020: FINAL PLAT:
A.   Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider may cause the total parcel, or any part thereof, to be
surveyed, and a final plat prepared in accordance with the approved preliminary
plat. The subdivider shall submit to the administrator four (4) copies of the
final plat.
B.   Content Of The Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in
compliance with all items required under title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho
Code, as it now exists or as it may be amended hereafter, and shall be drawn at
such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to enable the same to be
placed on one sheet of eighteen inch by twenty seven inch (18" x 27") stable
base drafting film with a minimum base thickness of three thousandths of an
inch (0.003"). The plat shall have a three inch (3") margin at the left for
binding and a one-half inch (1/2") margin on all other sides. No part of the
drawing shall be nearer than one-half inch (1/2") to the margins. The reverse
of said sheet shall not be used. If, because of the size or complexity,
required information cannot be shown, additional sheets may be used, provided
they conform to this chapter. The final plat shall include at least the
following:
   1.   A written application for approval of such final plat as stipulated by
the commission.
   2.   Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the
proposed final plat.
   3.   Such other information as the administrator or commission may deem
necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or
approved said final plat.
   4.   Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and meeting all
requirements or conditions thereof.
   5.   Conformance with all requirements and provisions of this title.
   6.   Demonstration of acceptable engineering practices and local standards
as determined by the administrator.
C.   Fees: At the time of submission of an application for a final plat, a fee
as established by resolution of the council shall be paid.
D.   Administrator Review:
   1.   Acceptance: Upon receipt of the final plat and compliance with all
other requirements as provided for herein, the administrator, after review by
the city engineering department, shall certify the application as complete and
shall affix the date of acceptance thereon.
   2.   Resubmittal Of Final Plat: The administrator shall review the final
plat for compliance with the approved or conditionally approved preliminary
plat. If the administrator determines that there is substantial difference in
the final plat than that which was approved as a preliminary plat or conditions
which have not been met, the administrator may require that the final plat be
submitted to the commission in the same manner as required in the preliminary
plat process.
   3.   Submission To The Council: Upon the determination that the final plat
is in compliance with the preliminary plat and all conditional requirements
have been met, the administrator shall place the final plat on the council
agenda at the next regular meeting.
E.   Agency Review: The administrator may transmit one copy of the final plat,
or other documents submitted, for review and recommendation to the departments
and the agencies as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with the
preliminary approval and/or conditions of preliminary approval. Such agency
review shall also include the construction standards of improvements,
compliance with health standards, the cost estimate for all improvements and
the legal review of the performance bond.
F.   Council Action: The council, at its next meeting following receipt of the
administrator's report, shall consider the commission's findings on the
preliminary plats and comments from concerned persons and agencies to arrive at
a decision on the final plat. The council shall approve, approve conditionally,
disapprove or table the final plat for additional information. A copy of the
approved plat shall be filed with the administrator. Upon granting or denying
the final plat the council shall specify:
   1.   The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application;
   2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
   3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain approval.
G.   Plans And Specifications: Prior to recording the final subdivision plat,
the subdivider shall submit to the administrator checked copies of the final
plans and specifications for streets, water, sewer, a master utility plan and
other public improvements to be constructed.
All plans and specifications shall have sufficient detail, written information,
vertical and horizontal dimensions to accurately locate the proposed
improvements in the field and determine their relationship to other
improvements.
H.   Fees: At the time of submittal of plans and specifications a fee to defray
costs and expenses of plan checking as provided for by resolution of the city
council shall be paid.
I.   Approval Period: A final plat shall be filed with the county recorder
within one year after written approval by the council; otherwise such approval
shall become null and void unless prior to said expiration date an extension of
time is applied for by the subdivider and granted by the council.
J.   Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the council, the
subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, posting of surety bond or other
acceptable guarantee and the inclusion of the following signatures on the final
plat, the administrator shall submit the final plat to the county recorder for
recording:
   1.   Certification and signature of the city council verifying that the
subdivision has been approved;
   2.   Certification and signature of the city clerk, if required, and the
city engineer verifying that the subdivision meets the city requirements and
has been approved by the council; and
   3.   Certification of the sanitation restrictions on the face of the plat
per section 50-1326, Idaho Code. (Ord. 1043, 2008: Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.24
ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF CERTAIN PLATS, PUD APPLICATIONS AND PETITIONS FOR
ANNEXATION
SECTION:
16.24.010: Electronic Submissions
16.24.010: ELECTRONIC SUBMISSIONS:
A.   Each final plat submitted under this title, all applications for a planned
unit development under title 17, chapter 17.40 of this code, and every petition
for annexation of real property to the city of Jerome, wherein as a condition
of annexation, the construction of public water lines, public sewer lines,
curb, gutter, sidewalk, streets or other similar public improvements is
required, shall as a condition of approval of any such final subdivision plat,
planned unit development or annexation submit the final subdivision plat,
preliminary development plan, record drawing plan, or in the case of
annexation, plans for the construction of required public improvements, in
electronic format, using one of the following approved formats:
   1.   AutoCAD;
   2.   AutoCAD map;
   3.   Land Desktop, Civil Design; or
   4.   CAD program, approved in advance by the city engineer.
All such electronic submissions must specify the software used, and the version
of the software upon which the data is being submitted.
B.   Four (4) paper copies of each preliminary subdivision plat, final
subdivision plat, preliminary development plan, or plans for the construction
of public improvements required as a condition of annexation shall also be
submitted. Five (5) paper copies of each commercial building plan shall be
submitted. Two (2) paper copies of each residential building plan shall be
submitted. One paper copy of the record drawings shall also be submitted. If
the requisite numbers of copies are not submitted, the city will make the
necessary copies and the applicant will pay the city the following copying
fees:
A six dollar ($6.00) base charge for each plat, preliminary development plan,
or construction plans for each plan copied plus two dollars ($2.00) per sheet
for each thirty six inch by twenty four inch (36" x 24") sheet and one dollar
($1.00) per sheet for each eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") sheet.
C.   Provided that sufficient Jerome city monuments, parks, lot boundaries,
public easements, and building footprints are available, each electronic
submission under subsection A of this section shall use one of the following
data coordinate systems:
   1.   NAD 83 for Idaho state plain central 1102 in feet, with mean sea level
in feet if elevations are used; or
   2.   The project depicted by the final subdivision plat, preliminary
development plan or construction plans must be tied into at least two (2) of
the city of Jerome's control points that have actual coordinate values.
D.   No application for final subdivision plat approval, for approval of a
final development plan under chapter 17.40 of this code, or application for
annexation shall be deemed complete without the applicant having complied with
the terms of this section. (Ord. 1043, 2008: Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.28
DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
16.28.010: Design Standards
16.28.020: Generally
16.28.030: Block Requirements
16.28.040: Lot Requirements
16.28.050: Streets
16.28.051: Dedication Of Streets
16.28.052: Street Location
16.28.053: Street Specifications
16.28.054: Street Names
16.28.055: Street Intersections
16.28.060: Alleys
16.28.070: Easements
16.28.080: Sewage System
16.28.090: Water Mains
16.28.100: Stormwater Retention/Detention
16.28.110: Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks
16.28.120: Sidewalks
16.28.130: Driveway Curb Cuts And Approaches
16.28.140: Irrigation Lines And Water Stocks
16.28.150: Required Improvements And Standards For Improvements
16.28.010: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following standards shall be followed in all subdividing within the scope
of these regulations. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.020: GENERALLY:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth hereinafter in this chapter; provided, however, that any higher
standards adopted by any other agency having jurisdiction shall prevail over
those set forth herein. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.030: BLOCK REQUIREMENTS:
No block shall be longer than one thousand feet (1,000') or less than three
hundred eighty feet (380') between street intersections and shall have
sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots except as provided in
section
16.28.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.040: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
Lots shall conform to the following:
A.   Zoning: The lot width, depth and total area shall not be less than the
requirements of any applicable zoning district.
B.   Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually
large lots, the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for
future resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated the plan
thereof shall be approved by the commission prior to the taking of such action.
(Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.050: STREETS:
A.   Width of right of way shall meet the minimum requirements shown in the
following table:
                   Minimum Right Of Way Width (In Feet)
Type Of Public Way Residential Commercial Manufacturing
                    Minimum Right Of Way Width (In Feet)
Type Of Public Way  Residential Commercial Manufacturing
Trafficways:
   Alley                                20
   Service road  25          25         Not allowed
   Local street  56          60         60
   Collector stre64          64         64
   Arterial stree80          80         80
Special ways:
   Pedestrian    10          10         10
   Bicycle       15          15         15
   Equestrian    20          20         20
Easements:
   Utility       15          15         15
   Access        10          10         15
 
                   Minimum Centerline Radius (In Feet)
Type Of Public Way  Residential Commercial Manufacturing
Trafficways:
   Alley                                60
   Service road  50          50         Not allowed
   One-way road  50          50         60
   Local street  100         150        200
   Collector stre200         250        300
   Arterial stree500         500        500
Special ways:
   All           25          25         25
Easements:
   All           0           0          0
 
                   Minimum Tangent Length (In Feet)
Type Of Public Way  Residential Commercial Manufacturing
Trafficways:
   Alley                                0
   Service road  0           0          Not allowed
   One-way road  100         150        200
   Local street  100         150        200
   Collector stre200         250        300
   Arterial stree400         400        400
Special ways        0           0          0
Easements           0           0          0
 
                   Minimum Cul-De-Sac (In Feet)
Type Of Public Way  Residential Commercial Manufacturing
 
Trafficways:        110         110        110
   All           100         100        100
 
(Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.051: DEDICATION OF STREETS:
Within a proposed subdivision arterial and collector streets, as shown on a
master plan, shall be dedicated to the public in all cases. In general, all
other streets shall also be dedicated to public use. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.052: STREET LOCATION:
Street and road location shall conform to the following:
A.   Street Location And Arrangements: All street locations shall conform to
the Jerome master plan where applicable. Collector type streets may, for
aesthetic reasons, curve and wind in accordance with these standards, but such
trafficways shall maintain a grid type pattern approximately one-fourth (1/4)
of a mile square.
B.   Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to the
boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said
streets into adjacent areas. A vehicular nonaccess reserve strip may be
required and held in public ownership. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be required.
C.   Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to
topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
D.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial
subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off street
loading and parking. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
E.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than one thousand
feet (1,000') in length and shall terminate with an adequate turnaround having
a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') for the right of way.
F.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where unusual
circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a tract.
Special justification shall be presented for such a variance request to the
commission. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or
partial street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated within such
tract. A vehicular nonaccess reserve street may be required and held in public
ownership.
G.   Private Streets: Private street construction standards shall be based upon
the following standards and the reasonable recommendations of the City
Engineer. Private streets are intended for infill development only.
   1.    The city will not accept a private street for public use or
maintenance.
   2.    Adequate construction standards may vary depending on the size of the
development and the demands placed on such improvements. The following are
minimum requirements that shall be met in every infill development:
      a.    A private street cannot be a through street.
      b.    Private streets will be allowed to serve up to ten (10) lots or
twenty-four (24) residential lots.
      c.    Required street width shall be determined according to the
following table, but under no circumstances shall any road or street be
constructed with a width of less than twenty-five (25) feet.
 
Minimum Street Width With Parking On-Street Total Street Width
25'                  N/A                    25'
25'                  8' - one side          33'
25'                  16' - both sides       41'
 
      d.    Private streets without parking, or parking on one side, shall be
posted as fire lanes with no parking allowed.
      e.    The city shall, at the developer's sole expense, make, install and
maintain street signs on private streets at approved locations. The financial
obligations for the sign or signs shall be the owners of properties which front
upon such streets.
      f.    The developer shall provide covenants, conditions and restrictions
relative to the property being platted or mapped establishing the party or
parties responsible for the repair and maintenance of the private street,
binding said parties and their successors and assigns to perform such repair
and maintenance and including provisions for the funding thereof.
      g.    Easement: The private street shall be constructed on a perpetual
ingress/egress easement or a single platted lot that provides access to all
properties served by such private street.
      h.    All private streets shall be paved.
   3.    Private streets will be reviewed during the subdivision and/or lot
splitting process. In order for the Planning and Zoning Commission to approve a
lot split or a preliminary plat; or for the City Council to approve a final
plat, the City Engineer and Fire Chief or their designee shall provide the
following testimony:
      a.    The proposed private street is clearly identified on the plat.
      b.    The design of the private street meets the requirements of this
article and the reasonable requirements of the City Engineer.
      c.    Granting approval of the private street would not cause damage,
hazard, or nuisance, or other detriment to persons, property, or uses in the
vicinity; and
      d.    The use and location of the private street shall not conflict with
the comprehensive plan and/or the transportation plan. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006; Ord.
1177, 2019)
16.28.053: STREET SPECIFICATIONS:
A.   Street Right Of Way Widths: Street and road right of way widths shall
conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive plan and the rules of
the state department of highways and the highway district having jurisdiction.
Minimum right of way standards shall be in accordance with this chapter.
B.   Street Grades: Street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%) on either
local or collector streets and six percent (6%) for arterial streets. Minimum
street grades shall be four-tenths percent (0.4%).
C.   Street Alignment: Street alignment shall be as follows:
   1.   Horizontal alignment: Shall be in accordance with this chapter.
   2.   Vertical alignment: Minimum stopping sight distances shall be two
hundred feet (200') for minor streets and designed in accordance with design
speed for collector and arterial streets. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.054: STREET NAMES:
The names of streets and avenues shall be as given and shown on the map of the
city on file in the office of the administrator. Names of all streets and
avenues hereafter dedicated shall be approved by the administrator.
The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
A.   Street names shall not duplicate any existing name within the limits of
the city except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street.
Street names, if spelled differently but sounding the same as existing streets,
shall not be used.
B.   All new streets shall be designated as follows: Streets having
predominantly north-south direction shall be named "street" or "way"; streets
having a predominantly east-west direction shall be named "avenue" or "road";
meandering streets shall be named "drive", "lane", "path" or "trail" and cul-
de-sacs shall be named "circle", "court" or "place".
C.   When any new subdivision contains any street which is a continuation of
any street, such new street shall take the name of such existing street. No new
street not a continuation of an existing street shall be given the same or
similar name of any existing street. The city engineer shall have the power to
change the name of any street on any map or plat submitted to make such map or
plat conform to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.055: STREET INTERSECTIONS:
A.   Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°) or
as closely thereto as possible, and in no case shall streets intersect at less
than seventy degrees (70°).
B.   Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street
intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver of another
vehicle when each is one hundred feet (100') from the center of the
intersection.
   1.   Obstruction To Vision At Intersections, Alleys And Driveways: No person
shall plant, install, create, maintain or possess on public or private property
an obstruction to the vision of a driver of a vehicle at an intersection, alley
or driveway which constitutes a traffic hazard.
Prima facie evidence of an obstruction constituting a traffic hazard shall
exist if any object, structure or thing, except buildings and residences which
are otherwise in conformance with law, is allowed to exist which exceeds three
feet (3') above the existing roadway centerline elevation within the triangular
area formed by the intersecting roadway edges and a straight line joining said
roadway edges at points which are forty feet (40') distant from the point of an
intersection measured along said street edges. At alley and street
intersections, the dimensions shall be forty feet (40') along the street edge
and fifteen feet (15') along the alleyway edge. At driveway and street
intersections, the dimensions shall be one hundred feet (100') along the street
edge and ten feet (10') along the driveway edge on the left side of the
driveway as viewed when facing the property from the street, and the dimensions
shall be one hundred twenty five feet (125') along the street edge and ten feet
(10') along the driveway edge on the right side of the driveway as viewed when
facing the property from the street. Trees and utility facilities are allowed
in such triangular area provided that no tree limb or growth extending from
said limb shall be maintained or allowed to exist nearer than eight feet (8')
from the surface of the ground.
C.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
D.   T Intersections: T intersections may be used wherever such design will not
restrict the free movement of traffic.
E.   Centerline Offsets: Street centerlines shall be offset by a distance of at
least one hundred twenty five feet (125').
F.   Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A nearly flat grade with appropriate
drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat section shall be
extended a minimum of one hundred feet (100') each way from the intersection.
An allowance of two percent (2%) maximum intersection grade in rolling terrain,
and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain will be permitted. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.060: ALLEYS:
A.   Alleys may be required at the rear of all business lots and shall be at
least twenty feet (20') in width. Alleys, when provided in residential blocks,
shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width.
B.   At the intersection of two (2) alleys, the corners of the abutting
property shall be provided with a property line return having a radius not less
than twenty feet (20').
C.   Except under unusual circumstances alleys shall not terminate in a dead
end, and in no case shall a dead end alley be accepted unless turnaround
facilities are provided to the satisfaction of the council.
D.   The alley pavement base and leveling coarse gravel shall be constructed in
accordance with the recommendations of the city engineer. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.070: EASEMENTS:
A.   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines,
rear lot lines and side lot lines when deemed necessary. The total easement
width shall be in accordance with this title.
B.   Unobstructed drainageway easements shall be provided as required by the
council.
C.   A lot drainage plan shall be submitted for approval as part of the plans
and specifications required. All lots required by the plan to drain along rear
and side lot lines shall have drainage easement widths determined by an Idaho
licensed engineer and shall not be less than five feet (5') in width. The final
plat shall specify that the rear and side yard drainageways shown in the
approved drainage plan shall be neither obstructed nor substantially regraded
by the property owners. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.080: SEWAGE SYSTEM:
All subdivisions shall be required to connect to the city's wastewater
treatment system. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.090: WATER MAINS:
A.   Central water lines and fire hydrants shall be provided in all
subdivisions.
B.   All subdivisions shall be required to connect to the city's wastewater
treatment system. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.100: STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION:
No residential plat shall be approved unless it includes provision for
stormwater retention/detention. Developers may combine land designated for
stormwater retention/detention with the requirement of parks in compliance with
the city's standard design drawings.
A.   Improvements: Development of neighborhood parks shall include curb,
gutter, finish grading, sidewalks, irrigation systems and ground cover,
complying with city standards. Stormwater facilities shall be incorporated into
a residential lot or lots within the subdivision. Subsurface retention/
detention facilities shall be located within a maintenance easement and in a
manner that allows easy access with minimum disturbance to adjacent property.
B.   Maintenance: All designated stormwater retention/detention shall be
maintained in accordance with all applicable standards expressed in this code,
including, but not limited to, title 8 of this code. The maintenance and upkeep
of stormwater retention/detention improvements shall be at the expense of the
developer and his successors and/or an established homeowner's association.
(Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.110: CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS:
A.   Curb, Gutter And Sidewalk: New curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be
constructed at the expense of the developer with and at the same time as all
new construction or modification of existing buildings in accordance with city
standards on all streets, within and adjacent to the development, and in all
zoning districts for all land uses.
B.   Deferment: The administrator may defer the construction of required curb,
gutter and/or sidewalk until other curb, gutter and/or sidewalk is constructed
adjacent to other lands in the neighborhood under any one or more of the
following conditions:
   1.   If existing curb, gutter and/or sidewalk are in good repair and to an
acceptable line and grade which conforms to the line and grade of other curb,
gutter and/or sidewalk in the standard block, it may be retained.
   2.   Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall not be required or allowed to be
constructed or may be deferred if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the
improvement would create a traffic hazard or an unusual drainage problem.
C.   Construction Standards For Vertical And Rolled Curb: Both vertical and
rolled curb shall be allowed in the city, in accordance with the provisions of
this code and in conformance with the standard construction design and
specifications for the same, as are on file in the city engineer's office. The
most recent construction design and specifications shall prevail.
Standard detail C-2 (6 inch rolled curb) shall be used only when the following
applicable conditions have been met:
   1.   On local residential streets in new developments, when the top of curb
to top of curb street drainage capacity is not exceeded by the peak flow
generated during a 50-year, 24-hour storm. It shall be the developer's
engineering consultant's responsibility to compile and submit drainage
calculations to the city for review and approval.
   2.   On residential cul-de-sac streets in new developments which meet the
drainage requirements.
   3.   On local residential streets in existing developments where no curb or
gutter exists in the block under consideration and a study by the administrator
indicates that the proposed installation will meet the drainage requirements.
   4.   In all cases six inch (6") rolled curb shall be transitioned into six
inch (6") vertical curb around all curb returns. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.120: SIDEWALKS:
A.   Right of way for pedestrian walkways in the middle of long blocks may be
required where necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to
schools, parks or shopping areas. The pedestrian easement shall be in
accordance with section
16.28.070 of this chapter. Cul-de-sacs will be connected to other adjacent
streets with cul-de-sacs within the proposed subdivision or existing
subdivisions and to adjacent arterial or collector streets with paved
pedestrian walkways at least ten feet (10') wide within fifteen foot (15')
easements. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.130: DRIVEWAY CURB CUTS AND APPROACHES:
Driveway curb cuts and approaches shall be made in accordance with other
provisions of this code. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.140: IRRIGATION LINES AND WATER STOCKS:
Irrigation lines, structures and/or ditches shall be provided for all lots
within the subdivision. Irrigation lines shall be constructed of SDR-3034 PVC,
or equal, with prior approval from the city's engineer. All irrigation pipe
shall meet the requirements of ASTM designation C-118-59. All North Side Canal
Company water stocks appurtenant to the land included in a subdivision within
the city limits shall be transferred to the city as trustee before any plat of
land shall be approved by the council. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.28.150: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with conditions and specifications as follows:
A.   Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with section 50-1303,
Idaho Code.
B.   Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the council.
C.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets
and service roads.
All construction shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications
adopted by the council.
D.   Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities shall be required
in all new subdivisions.
Existing utilities or new large transmission lines shall not be required to be
buried.
E.   Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the
administrator, highway district or state highway department.
F.   Storm Drainage: Storm drainage shall be governed by chapter 16.34 of this
title.
G.   Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: All new public water supply or
sewer systems shall be an extension of an existing public system.
H.   Fire Hydrants And Water Mains: Adequate fire protection shall be required
in accordance with standards established by the city engineer.
I.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate
locations at each street intersection in accordance with the local standards.
Cost of street signs shall be the responsibility of the developer.
J.   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both
sides of the street in residential subdivisions and on one side of the street
in industrial and commercial subdivisions, except that where the average width
of lots, as measured at the street frontage line or at the building setback
line, is over two hundred ten feet (210') sidewalks on only one side of the
street may be allowed. Pedestrian walkways, when required, shall have easements
at least ten feet (10') in width and include a paved walk at least four feet
(4') in width.
Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards
and specifications as adopted by the council.
K.   Mailboxes: Mailbox locations shall conform to the following standards:
   1.   No mailbox shall be placed in the public right of way and shall not
encroach over public sidewalks in any zone.
   2.   In area classified as a "mounted carrier delivery" by the United States
postal services, developers will be required to install, pay and provide
"cluster mailboxes".
Cluster mailbox locations shall be reviewed and approved by the U.S. postal
service.
L.   Greenbelt: Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required for the
protection of residential properties from adjacent major arterial streets,
waterways, railroad rights of way or other features. Subdivision plats shall
show the location of any greenbelt areas.
M.   Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be required to be installed at all
entrances to a subdivision and at all intersections. Other streetlights must be
installed on every street in the subdivision such that all streetlights are at
least two hundred fifty feet (250') but no more than four hundred fifty feet
(450') from the nearest streetlight on the same street. Cost of conventional
wood pole, mercury vapor luminaries and overhead service shall be the
responsibility of the developer. Other types or configurations for lighting
shall be approved by the administrator and the cost shall be borne by the
subdivider.
N.   Landscape And Sidewalk Placement: Landscaping and sidewalk placement is
required adjacent to arterial and collector streets. A tract of land eleven
feet (11') in depth behind the curb line will be dedicated as part of any
residential development adjacent to arterial and collector streets. Within that
tract the developer shall install landscaping six feet (6') in depth with a
sprinkler system and with grass and trees behind the curb line and shall also
install a five foot (5') sidewalk. All landscaping will be maintained by any
homeowners' association established with the creation and development of each
subdivision. In the event the developer elects not to have a homeowners'
association, the landscaping will be maintained by the city and funded through
a fee added to the water bill of each resident within the development.
Irrevocable restrictive covenants for this development and maintenance shall
provide for this funding. Alternative landscaping other than trees and grass
may be approved by the city.
O.   Irrigation Water: Pursuant to this code, the use of the city's potable
water supply as the primary source of irrigation water in all new developments
capable of being serviced by alternative sources of ground or service waters
shall be prohibited. For purposes of this subsection, the term "new
development" means any new subdivision or PUD, or any development of any parcel
of land of two (2) acres or larger that is not part of a subdivision or PUD.
One share of North Side Canal Company water for each acre of property within
the subdivision shall be deeded to the city before the filing of the final plat
for use in the city's irrigation system.
P.   Fiber Optical Conduit: All developers will be required to pay for and
install two inch (2") SDR11 smoothwall innerduct fiber optical conduit, which
is orange in color, with pull rope, PG style service boxes, forty seven inches
(47") high by forty eight inches (48") wide by forty eight inch (48") open
bottom and PG style heavy duty cover with support beam. The placement and
construction of the fiber optical conduit shall be done in accordance with city
of Jerome standards and at the discretion of the city engineer. (Ord. 1103,
2012: Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.32
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
16.32.010: Repair Guarantee
16.32.010: REPAIR GUARANTEE:
Prior to approval of the final plat, the owner shall enter into an agreement
with the city, on a form to be prescribed by the city, wherein the owner shall
agree to reimburse the city for all required repairs to any alley, easement,
sewage system, water system, sidewalk, surface drainage, curb, gutter, approach
or irrigation line required by this chapter, to be installed by owner as a
condition of final plat approval. The guarantee shall be for a period of one
year from the date of final plat approval, and shall be secured by a good and
sufficient performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a responsible
lending institution, cashier's check, or other acceptable surety in an amount
determined by the city council. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
CHAPTER 16.34
DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.34.010: Drainage And Stormwater Management
16.34.020: Drainage Study And Calculation Requirements For Stormwater
Management
16.34.010: DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A.   Best Management Practices: Building sites shall use best management
practices (BMPs) to retain as much stormwater as possible on the property.
B.   Highway Drainage: Drainage to a state highway shall be subject to the
regulations of the Idaho transportation department. Necessary permits shall be
acquired by the developer.
C.   Road Drainage: Drainage to a road under the care, custody and control of
the Jerome highway district shall be subject to their regulations. Necessary
permits shall be acquired by the developer.
D.   Drainage To U.S. Waters Or Canals: No drainage shall be allowed from a
building site directly to any waters of the United States or to any privately
owned canal system.
E.   Residential Subdivisions:
   1.   All residential subdivisions shall design and construct stormwater
retention facility or facilities to retain the 25-year, 24-hour rainstorm
event.
   2.   The stormwater shall be detained and released over a forty eight (48)
hour period or at a rate that is approved by the North Side Canal Company or by
any other entity that may govern the waterway downstream.
   3.   The stormwater dischargers releasing water from their retention area
shall use best management practices (BMPs) to reduce the amount of pollutants
from the water. Discharge water quality shall comply with the most current
regulations or standards that may apply.
   4.   The retention facilities shall also have an overflow device that can
convey the 100-year, 24-hour rainstorm event, without damage to the retention
facility. This structure should be designed to minimize any downstream safety
problems.
   5.   Storm sewers shall be placed in a public right of way or minimum
fifteen foot (15') wide easement. Easements shall also be required for the
retention areas. The city reserves the right to modify the retention facilities
to stay in compliance with any state or federal regulation.
F.   Commercial And Industrial Developments: All commercial and industrial
developments shall design and construct stormwater retention facilities to
retain the 50-year, 24-hour rainstorm event. Refer to subsection
16.34.020A3b of this chapter to determine the volume requirements. No discharge
of stormwater will be allowed from these areas.
G.   Procedure For Review And Approval Of The Stormwater Management Plan:
Note: Review and approval by the city does not constitute an engineering review
of project plans and calculations. The review is for the purpose of ensuring
general conformance to city policies and requirements. The submitting engineer
is solely responsible for the design. All submissions to the city shall be
stamped by a professional engineer registered in the state.
The following shall be submitted to the city:
   1.   A topographic survey of the development showing all drainage and
irrigation water conveyance systems within the area encompassed by a line two
hundred feet (200') outside the property line.
   2.   Peak flow calculations, with peak flows delineated on the drawings.
   3.   Runoff volume calculations.
   4.   Plans and profiles of new or modified drainage and irrigation water
conveyance systems.
   5.   Plans, profiles and calculations for stormwater retention or detention
facilities.
   6.   Flood routing computations for the 100-year flood through any existing
drainage conveyance systems.
   7.   Maintenance and operation manuals for stormwater facilities.
   8.   Infiltration rates where applicable.
   9.   Seasonal high ground water table elevations where applicable. This
applies when the absorption of stormwater is used as a best management
practice. Facilities using absorption designs shall not intercept the
postdevelopment ground water table. The bottom of the facility shall have a
minimum four foot (4') vertical separation from the seasonal high ground water
elevation and bedrock. The four foot (4') separation between the bottom of the
facility and the seasonal high ground water table shall contain a sandy loam
material to treat the water prior to entering the ground water. If the best
management practices are utilized to pretreat the water prior to discharge into
the absorption facility, the requirement for four feet (4') of sandy loam will
be waived.
The seasonal high ground water table elevation shall be established and used
for the facility design. The elevation of the seasonal high ground water table
shall be determined by a monitoring well established at the facility site and
monitored during the high ground water season. If available, ground water
records may be used to establish the probable highest ground water elevation.
The high ground water elevation shall be shown on the plans and be referenced
to a nearby bench mark; the latitude and longitude of the well shall be shown
on the plans. If ground water is encountered during construction of the
facility at an elevation higher than that shown on the plans, the facility
shall be redesigned to account for the higher elevation.
   10.   Soil classifications where applicable.
   11.   Flood routing of the 100-year storm to the ultimate drainage system.
   12.   Copies of associated permits and discharge agreements.
   13.   Copy of the pollution prevention plan that is on file with EPA for the
development. Prior to beginning of construction on any development site larger
than five (5) acres, the developer or their representative must have a
pollution prevention plan in place and must file a notice of intent (NOI) with
the EPA, in accordance with NPDES (national pollutant discharge elimination
system) requirements. The pollution prevention plan will include provisions for
reducing sediment discharges from the construction site and tracking of mud
onto roadways. A copy of this plan and the NOI shall be provided to the city
prior to any site grading. Refer to 40 CFR chapter 1, section 122.26,
stormwater discharges for NPDES requirements. (Ord. 994 §2, 2006)
16.34.020: DRAINAGE STUDY AND CALCULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT:
A.   The drainage study and conceptual plan shall be submitted under the
following concepts:
   1.   Drainage Patterns: Drainage flows of all frequencies should enter and
depart from the property to be developed in substantially the same manner as
predevelopment conditions.
   2.   Street Relationships/Emergency Access: All lots, structures, etc.,
within a development shall be accessible by at least one route during a 100-
year storm with a maximum street water depth of one foot (1'). In all cases,
the flow of water shall be contained within rights of way.
   3.   Retention Facility: In order to reduce the storm runoff as much as
feasible, retention facilities shall be sized for local (on site) stormwater
using the following procedures:
      a.   The design frequency shall be the 25-year storm, using the 24-hour
rainfall depth "D" as determined from the national weather services for Idaho.
For the Jerome area the 24-hour rainfall on a 25-year storm frequency is 1.6
inches.
      b.   Volume requirements for the retention facility are calculated by the
following method:
 
(Vt) * (12) = (1.6) * (A), where
Vt   = Volume required in acre feet
1.6  = 24 hour rainfall depth in inches on a 25-year storm frequency
A    = Tributary area
 
   4.   Side Slopes: Where possible, the retention facility shall have four to
one (4:1) side slopes.
   5.   Parking In Floodplains; Commercial: Parking within the 100-year
floodplain shall be allowed provided that there are no unattended vehicles and
that there is no substantial obstruction to the free flow of water. If the
depth of water exceeds one foot (1') during the base flood, the parking area
shall be signed to show the parking area is subject to periodic flooding. (Ord.
994 §2, 2006)
TITLE 17
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 17.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17.02.010: Title
17.02.020: Authority
17.02.030: Interpretation, Scope Of Regulations
17.02.040: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
17.02.010: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF
THE CITY OF JEROME, IDAHO. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.02.020: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to authority granted by title 67, chapter 65 of
the Idaho Code and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, as amended
or subsequently codified. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.02.030: INTERPRETATION, SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
A.   In their interpretations and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public
health, safety and the general welfare.
B.   The regulations for each district shall apply uniformly to each class or
kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
C.   Whenever the requirements of this title conflict with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the
most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
D.   No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no building
or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located.
E.   No yard or lot existing at the effective date hereof shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or
lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum
requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.02.040: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a
collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals, variances,
special use permits, plan approvals and other matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this title requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other similar matters. The schedule
of fees shall be posted in the office of the building official and may be
altered or amended only by the council. Until all applicable fees, charges and
expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or
appeal. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.03
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
17.03.002: Generally
17.03.005: Accessory Use Or Structure
17.03.010: Administrator
17.03.015: Adult Business
17.03.020: Agricultural Tourism
17.03.023: Agriculture
17.03.025: Airport
17.03.030: Ambulance Services
17.03.035: Animal Care
17.03.040: Antenna
17.03.045: Artist Studios
17.03.050: Arts, Entertainment And Recreation
17.03.055: Auction Facility
17.03.060: Basement
17.03.065: Bed And Breakfast
17.03.070: Building
17.03.075: Building, Accessory
17.03.080: Building Height
17.03.085: Building Material, Garden And Farm Equipment, And Supplies
17.03.090: Building, Principal
17.03.095: Cemetery
17.03.100: Central Sewer System
17.03.105: Club Or Lodge
17.03.110: Commission, Planning And Zoning
17.03.115: Communication Facilities
17.03.120: Comprehensive Plan
17.03.125: Conditional Use
17.03.130: Contractor’s Yard
17.03.135: Convenience Store
17.03.140: Correctional Facility Or Jail
17.03.145: Council
17.03.150: Daycare
17.03.160: Density
17.03.165: Drinking Establishment
17.03.170: Drive-In Theater
17.03.175: Drive-Through Establishment
17.03.180: Dwelling Unit
17.03.185: Easement
17.03.190: Eating Establishment
17.03.195: Education Services, Private
17.03.200: Education Services, Public
17.03.205: Emergency Services
17.03.210: Equipment Sales, Rentals, And Services
17.03.215: Facade
17.03.220: Family
17.03.225: Farm
17.03.230: Farm Animal
17.03.235: Farm Sign
17.03.240: Financial Institution
17.03.245: Flex Space
17.03.250: Food Products, Processing
17.03.255: Food Products, Small-Scale Processing
17.03.260: Frontage Road
17.03.265: Fuel Sales Facility, Limited
17.03.270: Fuel Sales Facility
17.03.275: Fuel Yard
17.03.280: Government Offices
17.03.285: Government Services
17.03.290: Health Authority
17.03.295: Health Care And Social Services
17.03.300: Height
17.03.305: Heliports
17.03.310: Historic Preservation
17.03.315: Historic Property
17.03.320: Home Occupation
17.03.325: Horticulture, Limited
17.03.330: Hospital
17.03.335: Improved Pasture
17.03.337: Industrial
17.03.340: Industry
17.03.345: Institution
17.03.360: JMC
17.03.365: Laundromat
17.03.370: Laundry And Dry Cleaning
17.03.375: Loading Space, Off Street
17.03.380: Lodging
17.03.385: Lot
17.03.390: Lot Coverage
17.03.395: Lot Frontage
17.03.400: Lot, Minimum Area Of
17.03.405: Lot Of Record
17.03.415: Lot Types
17.03.420: Manufactured Home
17.03.430: Manufactured Home Park
17.03.435: Mobile Home
17.03.440: Museum
17.03.445: Nonconforming Use
17.03.450: Nursing Home/Care Facility
17.03.460: Offices, Business And Professional
17.03.465: Open Space
17.03.470: Pad Mounted Mechanicals
17.03.475: Parapet Or Parapet Wall
17.03.480: Park And Recreation Facility
17.03.485: Parking Facility
17.03.490: Parking Space, Off Street
17.03.495: Pawnshops
17.03.505: Personal And Professional Service
17.03.515: Planned Unit Development
17.03.520: Portable Classroom
17.03.530: Private Road
17.03.535: Public Service Facility
17.03.545: Public Street
17.03.550: Public Use
17.03.560: Public Utility Yard
17.03.565: Quasi-Public Use
17.03.570: Railroad Yard Or Shop
17.03.580: Recreational Vehicle
17.03.585: Recreational Vehicle Park
17.03.590: Recycling
17.03.600: Rendering Plant
17.03.605: Repair Services
17.03.610: Research And Development
17.03.620: Restaurant, Drive-In
17.03.625: Retail Store
17.03.635: Riding Academies And Stables
17.03.645: Right Of Way
17.03.650: Roof Mounted Mechanicals
17.03.660: Salvage Yard
17.03.670: Seat
17.03.680: Setback Line
17.03.690: Shelter Home
17.03.700: Shopping Center
17.03.710: Shopping Mall
17.03.720: Sidewalk
17.03.730: Sign
17.03.735: Slaughterhouse
17.03.740: Stockyard
17.03.745: Storage
17.03.750: Storage Facility, Self-Service
17.03.755: Story
17.03.760: Structure
17.03.765: Tattoo And Body Piercing
17.03.770: Temporary
17.03.778: Temporary Use
17.03.780: Terminal Yard, Trucking
17.03.785: Tire Shop
17.03.790: Tower
17.03.795: Truck And Heavy Equipment Repair And Sales
17.03.797: Truck Stop
17.03.800: Turf And Tree Farm
17.03.805: Use
17.03.810: Variance
17.03.815: Vehicle Body Shop
17.03.818: Vehicle And Equipment Sales
17.03.820: Vehicle Repair
17.03.822: Vehicle Storage
17.03.825: Vehicle Washing Facility
17.03.828: Vehicle Wrecking Yard Or Salvage
17.03.830: Vicinity Map
17.03.835: Walkway
17.03.840: Wall
17.03.845: Warehouse And Storage, Wholesale
17.03.850: Wireless Facility
17.03.855: Yard
17.03.860: Yard Sale
17.03.865: Zoning Permit
17.03.002: GENERALLY:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
A.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company or corporation, or other similar business entity as well as an
individual.
B.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes
the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
C.   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
D.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed" or
"arranged" to be used or occupied.
E.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel" and "tract". (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.005: ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE:
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental
and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. In residential zones
accessory uses/structures include, but are not limited to, detached carports
and garages, pool houses and cabanas, amateur radio and satellite dish
antennas, barns, corrals, stables, and similar uses and structures. In
nonresidential zones accessory uses/structures include, but are not limited to,
detached carports and garages, caretaker's quarters, guardhouses, storage
sheds, outdoor storage structures, microwave and satellite dish antennas, and
similar uses and structures. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.010: ADMINISTRATOR:
An official having knowledge in the principles and practices of zoning who is
appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council, to administer this
title. In the absence of an administrator, the city administrator shall serve
as the administrator. The terms "administrator" and "zoning administrator" are
synonymous. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.015: ADULT BUSINESS:
The use of a site that has a substantial portion of its trade in materials or
performances that depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities.
(Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.020: AGRICULTURAL TOURISM:
Agriculturally related accessory uses that are subordinate to the growing of
crops, designed to bring the public to a farm on a temporary or continuous
basis, such as U-pick farm sales, retail sales of agricultural products (farm
stands), farm mazes, pumpkin patches, wagon rides, farmland and facility tours,
horticulture nurseries and associated display gardens, cider pressing, classes
or workshops, or wine or cheese tasting. (Ord. 1158, 2016)
17.03.023: AGRICULTURE:
The use of a site for farming, dairying, pasturage, aquaculture, horticulture,
floriculture, and viticulture as a commercial enterprise, including the storage
of equipment and materials and the erection of structures. The classification
does not include uses classified as Farm Animal, Horticulture (general),
Stockyard, and Turf and/or Tree Farm. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.025: AIRPORT:
The use of a site for aircraft landings and take-offs including all necessary
facilities for maintenance and housing of aircraft. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.030: AMBULANCE SERVICES:
Provision of nonemergency medical care transportation, including incidental
storage, maintenance and parking of medical transport vehicles. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.03.035: ANIMAL CARE:
The use of a site for the boarding, care, grooming, diagnosis or treatment of
four (4) or more animals, including but not limited to sick, ailing, infirm or
injured animals, and those who need medical or surgical attention. The
classification includes but not be limited to an animal clinic, animal
hospital, or veterinary office or kennel. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.040: ANTENNA:
Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas,
such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional
antennas, such as whip antennas. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.045: ARTIST STUDIOS:
The use of a site for the production, or sale of a creative pursuit, including
but not limited applied art or craft or performing arts. Instruction is
classified as Education Services, Private. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.050: ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION:
The use of a site for entertainment, spectator sports or recreational
activities. The use includes, but is not limited to amusement parks, motion
picture and performing arts theaters, racetracks, sports fields, golf courses,
health/fitness clubs, museums, zoos, marinas, bowling, video, billiard parlors,
dance halls, ice/roller skating rinks and other games and amusements. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.055: AUCTION FACILITY:
The use of a site for the sale of new and/or used merchandise by auctioning.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.060: BASEMENT:
A dwelling unit, all or partly underground, but having at least one-half (1/2)
of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. (Ord. 1225,
2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.065: BED AND BREAKFAST:
The use of an owner occupied site for overnight accommodations and breakfast
food service to no more than twelve (12) guests at any one time. (Ord. 1225,
2024)
17.03.070: BUILDING:
Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or
protection of persons, animals, plants, trees, chattels or property of any
kind. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.075: BUILDING, ACCESSORY:
A subordinate building detached from, but located on the same lot as the
principal building, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the
main building or use. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed
finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof
for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and the top of the peak for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.085: BUILDING MATERIAL, GARDEN AND FARM EQUIPMENT, AND SUPPLIES:
The use of a site for the retail sale and service of merchandise used in home,
farm and garden improvements. The classification includes but is not limited
to: home and garden centers; hardware stores; lawn and garden equipment supply
stores; paint and wall paper stores; building supply stores; lumber yards;
nursery, garden and farm supply stores. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.090: BUILDING, PRINCIPAL:
A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which
said building is situated. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.095: CEMETERY:
The use of a site for the burial of human remains and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbarium, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries
operated in conjunction with the cemetery. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.100: CENTRAL SEWER SYSTEM:
Any system that receives blackwaste or wastewater in volumes exceeding two
thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per day; any system which receives
blackwaste or wastewater from more than two (2) dwelling units or more than two
(2) buildings under separate ownership. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.105: CLUB OR LODGE:
The use of a site for activities organized and operated by an association of
persons for social, literary, political, educational or recreational purposes;
and primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests; and not
primarily operated for profit nor to render a service that is customarily
carried on as a business. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.110: COMMISSION, PLANNING AND ZONING:
The planning and zoning commission appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
council, referred to sometimes in this title as "the commission". (Ord. 1225,
2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.115: COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
The use of a site for broadcasting, recording, and other communication services
accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but excluding public
service facilities and personal wireless service facilities. This
classification includes radio, television, or recording studios; telephone
switching centers; and telegraph offices. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.120: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the council including such things as
the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities
including housing, industrial and commercial uses, major transportation, parks,
schools and other community facilities. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.125: CONDITIONAL USE:
A use permitted within a district, other than a principally permitted use,
requiring a permit and approval of the commission. Uses permitted in each
district are listed in the official schedule of district regulations, section
17.14.010 of this title. The terms "special use" and "conditional use" are
synonymous. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.130: CONTRACTOR'S YARD:
The use of a site for by a contractor for storage, maintenance, or processing
incidental to the business of building, hauling, excavation, demolition, or
similar activity and including any area of land used for minor pre-installation
work or repair of machinery used for any of the above listed activities. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.135: CONVENIENCE STORE:
The use of a site for retail sales of a limited line of groceries and household
goods. The use may or may not also include the sale of fuel. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.140: CORRECTIONAL FACILITY OR JAIL:
The use of a publicly owned site for housing, care, and supervision of persons
confined by law. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.145: COUNCIL:
The city council of the city of Jerome. The terms "council" and "city council"
are synonymous. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.150: DAYCARE:
The use of a residential site for non-medical care, protection or supervision
regularly provided to children under twelve years of age, the elderly, or
disabled persons of any age, for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours per
day, while the parents or guardians are not on the premises. There are three
types of daycare facilities distinguished by the number of individuals served:
A.   Daycare, Center: more than twelve (12) individuals.
B.   Daycare, Group: more than six (6) but no greater than twelve (12)
individuals.
C.   Daycare, Home: five (5) or fewer individuals. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.160: DENSITY:
A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
A.   Gross density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be
developed, including public right of way.
B.   Net density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the
acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding
public right of way. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.165: DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT:
The use of a site primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink
or glass, but not including restaurants with a wine and beer license where the
principal business is serving food. The use includes, but is not limited to
bar, brewery, lounge, night club, and tavern. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.170: DRIVE-IN THEATER:
The use of an open site for showing motion pictures to patron seated in
vehicles. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.175: DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT:
The use of a portion of a structure where business is transacted, or is capable
of being transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle. The
classification includes but is not limited to: food or beverage service, bank
service, laundry, and/or film processing. The classification shall not include
Fuel Sales Facility or Vehicle Washing Facility. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.180: DWELLING UNIT:
Space within a dwelling comprising living, dining, sleeping room or rooms and
storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet
facilities, all used by only one family and its household employees.
 
                     A structure used for long term living, eating and sleeping
GROUP:               accommodations. The use includes boarding, lodging,
                     dormitories, and halfway houses.
                     A structure, or portion thereof, that contains three (3)
                     or more dwelling units including apartment houses, town-
MULTI-FAMILY:        houses and condominiums with varying arrangements of
                     entrances and party walls. Multi-family housing may
                     include public housing and industrialized units.
SINGLE-FAMILY:       A detached structure that accommodates a single dwelling.
                     A structure containing two (2) dwelling units attached by
                     a common wall, where both dwelling units are located on
TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): the same property and designed for two (2) households
                     living independently of each other. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
                     1192, 2020: Ord. 1070, 2010)
 
17.03.185: EASEMENT:
A legal right to the use of real property which does not include the ownership
of any interest in the real property. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.190: EATING ESTABLISHMENT:
The use of a site where food items are prepared, served and consumed by patrons
primarily on-site. The serving of alcoholic beverages may also be provided but
is secondary to the service of food. The term includes, but is not limited to:
café, coffee shop, delicatessen, diner, eatery, grill, pizza parlor,
restaurant, sushi bar. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.195: EDUCATION SERVICES, PRIVATE: 
The use of a site for education purposes not supported by the State of Idaho.
The use includes, but is not limited to elementary and secondary schools;
institutions of higher learning; professional, technical and trade schools;
driving schools; and photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.200: EDUCATION SERVICES, PUBLIC:
The use of a site for education supported by the State of Idaho. The use
includes, but is not limited to, elementary and secondary schools; institutions
of higher learning; and vocational schools. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.205: EMERGENCY SERVICES:
The use of a site for the provision of emergency medical care transportation,
fire protection and police protection, including incidental storage and
maintenance and parking of emergency and emergency related vehicles. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.210: EQUIPMENT SALES, RENTALS, AND SERVICES:
The use of a site for the sale, rental or servicing of tools, trucks, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, or similar industrial
equipment. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.215: FACADE:
The front or face of a building. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.220: FAMILY:
One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit; provided, that all
members are related by blood, adoption or marriage. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.225: FARM:
Buildings and premises used for the raising and processing of farm products in
an agricultural setting by an individual or an association which operates and
manages the farm either as owner or tenant, at a site used for a farm residence
and associated farm accessory buildings. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.230: FARM ANIMAL:
The use for keeping animals, other than household pets, for training, boarding,
home use, sales, or breeding and production. The classification includes but is
not limited to: alpacas, cattle, chinchillas, donkeys, emus, goats, horses,
llamas, minks, ostriches, poultry, and sheep. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.235: FARM SIGN:
A sign erected for a limited period of time for retailing and marketing
agricultural products and/or agricultural tourism, that is, seasonally for a
period not exceeding two (2) weeks before such items are offered and
terminating when such items are no longer offered. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1158,
2016)
17.03.240: FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:
The use of a site for lending, exchanging and handling money or currency for
customers. The classification includes but is not limited to: credit unions,
savings and loan, commercial banks, cash machines, insurance agents, and loan
establishments. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.245: FLEX SPACE:
The use of a site for substantial amounts of storage and working area as well
as office and/or showroom space. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.250: FOOD PRODUCTS, PROCESSING:
The use of a site for producing, manufacturing, processing, or storage of food
products. The classification includes but is not limited to: beverages, bakery
good, coffee, ice, snacks, dairy products, fruits, vegetables, meat, and
seafood. The use does not include Slaughter House. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.255: FOOD PRODUCTS, SMALL-SCALE PROCESSING:
The use of a site for producing, manufacturing, processing, or storage of food
products on a small scale and limited production. The use includes but is not
limited to catering, smoking and curing, canning and preserving. (Ord. 1225,
2024)
17.03.260: FRONTAGE ROAD:
A road which has unlimited access to collector and access streets but has
limited access to arterial streets. Access onto arterial streets is limited to
one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') between points. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.265: FUEL SALES FACILITY, LIMITED:
The use of a site for the sale of only motor fuel typically including a small
kiosk building covered by a canopy. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.270: FUEL SALES FACILITY:
The use of a site for the sale of supplies, motor fuel, lubricating oils,
replacement parts, and/or grease, to on premise trade. Major mechanical and
body work and/or repair is classified as Vehicle Body Shop and storage of
automobiles is classified as Vehicle Storage. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.275: FUEL YARD:
The use of a site where the primary business is that of storing fuel, including
but not limited to: propane, kerosene, diesel, home heating fuel, gasoline, and
natural gasoline in either above or below ground tanks. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.280: GOVERNMENT OFFICES:
Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency,
including postal facilities, together with incidental storage and maintenance
of vehicles. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.285: GOVERNMENT SERVICES:
Any use of land by the United States Of America, the state of Idaho, the county
of Jerome, the city of Jerome or other public corporation, political
subdivision of the state of Idaho or quasi-public agency for any public
purpose, other than the establishment of schools. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.03.290: HEALTH AUTHORITY:
The South Central Public Health District, Idaho Department of Health and
Welfare, the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality or any other local,
state or federal agency with jurisdiction. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.295: HEALTH CARE AND SOCIAL SERVICES:
The use of a site for ambulatory health care services Included in this use are
offices of dentists; physicians; chiropractors; optometrists; mental health
practitioners; physical, occupational and speech therapists; audiologists;
outpatient care centers; family planning centers, medical and diagnostic
laboratories, imaging centers, kidney dialysis centers; blood and organ banks.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.300: HEIGHT:
The height of personal wireless facilities, spires, poles, antennas, steeples,
towers, and similar structures shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the point of contact with the ground to the highest point of the
structure, including any vertical projection thereof. When mounted upon other
structures, the combined height of the personal wireless facility, spire, pole,
antenna, steeple, tower, and/or similar structure, including the height of the
structure mounted upon, shall be used to determine height. The height of the
buildings shall be determined under this code. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.03.305: HELIPORTS:
The use of a site for enabling takeoffs and landings by helicopters. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.310: HISTORIC PRESERVATION:
The research, documentation, protection, restoration and rehabilitation of
buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites significant in the
history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state, or
the nation. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.315: HISTORIC PROPERTY:
Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state, or the
nation. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.320: HOME OCCUPATION:
The use of a residential site for an occupation conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit or an accessory structure and clearly incidental to a residential
use. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.325: HORTICULTURE, LIMITED:
The use of a site for the raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees and
shrubs as a commercial enterprise, provided that no nursery equipment or
materials shall be stored and no structures erected. Commercial horticulture
accessory to a dwelling unit is classified as A Home Occupation. (Ord. 1225,
2024)
17.03.330: HOSPITAL:
The use of a site for the medical or surgical care of patients for twenty-four
(24) hours or more. This classification includes incidental facilities for
outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative
services for patients and employees. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.335: IMPROVED PASTURE:
Grazing lands that are not in crop rotation and are planted primarily to
introduced domesticated native forage that receive periodic renovation and/or
cultural treatments such as tillage, fertilization, mowing, and weed control.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.337: INDUSTRIAL:
A.   Heavy: Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing and similar
industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive in
character, require large sites, open storage and service areas, extensive
services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation and normally
generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, odor, vibration, dust, glare, air
pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
B.   Light: Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are usually controlled
operations; relatively clean, quiet and free of objectionable or hazardous
elements such as smoke, noise, odor or dust; operating and storing within
enclosed structures and generating little industrial traffic and no nuisances.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.340: INDUSTRY:
A.   Craftsman: The use of a site for small-scale, craftsman operated
production of materials, assembly of parts, or the blending of materials
primarily by hand including wood, metal, plastics, computer components,
electronics, oils, and resigns. The use includes but is not limited to
furniture re-finishing, machine shops, cabinet makers, frame shops, and sign
shops.
B.   Heavy: The use of a site for 1) basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products, predominately from extracted or raw materials; 2)
storage or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials; or
3) storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive conditions
C.   Light: The use of a site for the manufacture, processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, and/or packaging of finished products or parts,
predominantly from previously prepared materials.
D.   Limited: The use of the site for small-scale, craftsman operated
production of materials, assembly of parts, or the blending of materials
including gems, metals, plastics, clay, pottery, fabric, wool, paper, oils, and
resins. Typical uses include custom bookbinding, ceramic studios, candle making
shops, and custom jewelry manufacture. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.345: INSTITUTION:
The use of a site to aid individuals in need of mental, therapeutic,
rehabilitative counseling or other correctional services. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.360: JMC:
The Jerome municipal code as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.365: LAUNDROMAT:
Business providing self-service cleaning facilities for clothing and other
fabric articles. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.370: LAUNDRY AND DRYCLEANING:
The use of a site that launders and dry cleans clothing and other fabric
articles in bulk. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.375: LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET:
Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pick ups and deliveries,
scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such
vehicles when required off street parking spaces are filled. Required off
street loading space is not to be included as off street parking space in
computation of required off street parking space. All off street loading spaces
shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right of way. (Ord.
1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.380: LODGING:
The use of a site providing visitor or overnight accommodations, including
sleeping rooms, sanitary facilities, and lobby areas. Lodgings can also include
a dining room where meals and/or beverages are served. The classification
includes but is not limited to: motels, hotels, and inns. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.385: LOT:
A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for
use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are
herein required. Such lot shall have frontage, as may be required within this
title, on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may
consist of:
A.   A single lot of record;
B.   A portion of a lot of record; and
C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.390: LOT COVERAGE:
The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot to the
horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage. (Ord. 1225,
2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.395: LOT FRONTAGE:
The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For
the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots,
all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage and yards
shall be provided as indicated under "yards" in this chapter. (Ord. 1225, 2024:
Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.400: LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF:
The area of a lot is computed exclusive of any portion of the right of way of
any public or private street. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.405: LOT OF RECORD:
A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county
recorder; or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of
which has been so recorded. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.415: LOT TYPES:
Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots, interior lots and
through lots is as follows:
A.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets;
B.   Interior Lot: A lot with only one frontage on a street;
C.   Reversed Frontage Lot: A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot;
and
D.   Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets also may be referred to as double
frontage lots. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.420: MANUFACTURED HOME:
A factory built, single family home built or re-built under authority of the 42
U.S.C. Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards,
is transportable in one or more sections, and is built on a permanent. The term
"manufactured home" includes any mobile home rehabilitated in accordance with
Idaho Code section 44-2501 et seq. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.430: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK:
The use of a site under single ownership consisting of at least five (5) acres
upon which six (6) or more portions of the site are used for the placement of
manufactured homes as a primary residence. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.435: MOBILE HOME:
A factory assembled structure or structures generally constructed prior to June
15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to
be readily movable as a unit or units on their own running gear and designed to
be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a permanent foundation, or
as defined at Idaho Code section 39-4105(9) as it now exists or as it may
hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.440: MUSEUM:
Institutions displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the
arts or sciences. This classification includes museums and art galleries. (Ord.
1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.445: NONCONFORMING USE:
A building, structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment of this
title, and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which
it is situated. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.450: NURSING HOME/CARE FACILITY:
The use of a site for establishments providing care on a twenty-four (24) hour
basis for persons requiring regular attention, but excluding facilities
providing surgical or emergency medical services. The classification includes
but is not limited to: assisted living or residential care facilities. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.460: OFFICES, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL:
The use of a site for offices of firms or organizations providing professional,
executive, management, or administrative services. The classification includes
but is not limited to: medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office use.
Banks and savings and loan associations are classified as Financial
Institution. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.465: OPEN SPACE:
A.   An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a
building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental features,
water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and any other recreational
facilities that the commission deems permissive. Streets, parking areas,
structures for habitation and the like shall not be included; or
B.   A common area platted as a separate lot, provided within a recorded
easement, or dedicated to and accepted by the city. The area shall be
substantially open to the sky, exclusive of streets, buildings and other
covered structures, and shall be designated and intended as a usable and
convenient amenity to any proposed development. Wetland areas, drainage
ditches, irrigation ditches, and similar features shall not be considered as a
part of the minimum area of open space required. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.03.470: PAD MOUNTED MECHANICALS:
All mechanical and electrical equipment mounted on the ground, including, but
not limited to, transformers, compressors, generators, and other equipment to
establish a controlled interior environment. All pad mounted mechanicals shall
be screened from view. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.475: PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL:
That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level. (Ord. 1225,
2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.480: PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY:
The use of a site for noncommercial parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities
and open spaces. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.485: PARKING FACILITY:
A.   Commercial: The use of a site, including surface areas and/or structures,
for short term or long-term parking to the public for a fee.
B.   Non-Commercial: The use of a site, including surface areas and/or
structures, for short term or long-term parking for customers, employees or the
general public. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.490: PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET:
An off street parking space shall consist of an area adequate for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly
related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be
located totally outside of any street or alley right of way. (Ord. 1225, 2024:
Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.495: PAWNSHOPS:
A.   Auto: The use of a site for businesses dealing exclusively in offering
loans secured by automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles,
travel trailers and similar vehicles, the storage of which requires one or more
large parking areas. An auto pawn dealer may sell unredeemed pawned vehicles;
however, the auto pawn classification does not include the sale of new vehicles
unless auto pawn business is in conjunction with and on the premises of a new
vehicle dealership.
B.   General: The use of a site for licensed businesses engaged in the buying
or selling of new or secondhand merchandise, including minimal numbers of used
autos, and offering loans secured by personal property. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.505: PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICE:
The use of a site for the provision of individualized services generally
related to personal needs. The classification of Personal Service includes but
is not limited to: beauty and health care services such as salons, hair nail
and skin care, spa, and barbers; locksmiths; and repairs such as footwear and
leather goods, electronics, and watches. The classification of Professional
Service uses include, but are not limited to: architects, landscape architects
and other design services; computer designers; consultants; lawyers; media
advisors; photography studios, and title companies. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.515: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The use of a site in which a variety of residential, commercial and industrial
uses developed under single ownership or control are accommodated in a
preplanned environment with more flexible standards, such as lot size and
setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally apply under these
regulations. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.520: PORTABLE CLASSROOM:
A detached mobile unit not intended for occupancy as a dwelling unit and
designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, flatbed trailer
or detached wheels. Use is only for classroom space associated with and as an
accessory building to an approved school facility. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.530: PRIVATE ROAD:
A road, street, alley, or bridge that is not laid out or established by the
state of Idaho or a subdivision of the state or dedicated to the state or a
subdivision of the state and accepted by such entity or used by the public for
a period of not less than twenty (20) years and worked and not kept up by, at
the expense of, the public during that period of time. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.535: PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY:
The use of a site for utility or infrastructure needed to serve the general
public. The use includes power plants or substations, natural gas facilities
including main service lines, water treatment plants or pumping stations,
sewage disposal or pumping plants and other similar public services structures.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.545: PUBLIC STREET:
A right of way that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent
properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted by the city.
The term "public street" also includes the terms street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or other such terms.
A.   Local street: A minor street which has the primary purpose of providing
access to abutting properties.
B.   Alley: A minor street providing secondary access at the back or side of a
property otherwise abutting a street.
C.   Arterial: Provides access from one part of the community to another and
also provides for the movement of vehicles through the community.
D.   Collector: Accommodates circulation within and between neighborhoods.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.550: PUBLIC USE:
The use of a site for civic, library, senior centers and cultural activities,
but not including uses classified as: Emergency Response; Park and Recreation;
and Public Service Facilities and Public Utility Yard. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.560: PUBLIC UTILITY YARD:
The use of a site for the storage and maintenance of equipment, vehicles, and
materials, recycling and public service facilities. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.565: QUASI-PUBLIC USE:
Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges, hospitals and other
facilities of an educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic or nonprofit
nature. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.570: RAILROAD YARD OR SHOP:
The use of a site for storing, repairing and switching of rolling stock. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.580: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE:
A motor vehicle or trailer which includes living quarters designed for dwelling
purposes on a temporary basis. This includes motorhomes, campervans, caravans
(also known as travel trailers and camper trailers), fifth-wheel trailers,
popup campers and truck campers. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.585: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK:
The use of a site by six (6) or more recreational vehicles or travel trailers
for living quarters on a temporary basis. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.590: RECYCLING:
The use of a site for collection, storing, separation, processing and shipping
of materials for re-use. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.600: RENDERING PLANT:
The use of a site for processing and/or converting waste animal tissue into
stable, value added materials. Rendering can refer to any processing of animal
byproducts into more useful materials, or more narrowly to the rendering of
whole animal fatty tissue into purified fats like lard and tallow. (Ord. 1225,
2024)
17.03.605: REPAIR SERVICES:
The use of a site primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to
individuals and households, rather than businesses, the classification includes
but is not limited to: small engine repair like mowers and chain saws; and
appliance repair; shoe repair: upholstery shops; watch or jewelry repair; and
repair of musical instruments. Vehicle and vehicle equipment repair are
classified as Vehicle Repair or Vehicle Body Shop. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.610: RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT:
The use of a site for research, development and testing related to chemical,
pharmaceutical, medical, electronic, transportation, engineering, agriculture,
or other scientific or technical endeavor. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.620: RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN:
A restaurant which primarily serves patrons in vehicles parked outside the
principal building. Patrons are served at the vehicle and these facilities
typically have no indoor seating. This use does not include restaurants with
drive-up window service. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.625: RETAIL STORE:
The use of a site that offers merchandise to the public for monetary
compensation. The use includes, but is not limited to, food stores; apparel and
accessories stores; book, computer, and music stores; electronics and
appliances; florists; furniture and home furnishings; general merchandise
stores; health and personal care stores; hobby, office supplies, stationary and
gift stores; specialty stores; sporting goods; and used merchandise stores.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.635: RIDING ACADEMIES AND STABLES:
The use of a site for instruction in horseback riding, including rings,
stables, and exercise areas, and facilities for the care and exercise of horses
and related equestrian activities. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.645: RIGHT OF WAY:
A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the
roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting
and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by
topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped area, viaducts
and bridges. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.650: ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICALS:
All equipment mounted above the roof plane of a building, including, but not
limited to, heating and air conditioning equipment, antennas, satellite dishes,
and other equipment necessary to establish a controlled interior environment.
All roof mounted mechanicals shall be screened from view. (Ord. 1225, 2024:
Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.660: SALVAGE YARD:
The use of a site where waste and discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or handled. The
classification includes house wrecking yards and used lumber yards. (Ord. 1225,
2024)
17.03.670: SEAT:
For purposes of determining the number of off street parking spaces for certain
uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated
on each twenty four (24) linear inches of benches, pews or space for loose
chairs. A row of benches, pews or loose chairs for every five feet (5') of
seating area shall be considered for determining total possible number of rows.
(Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.680: SETBACK LINE:
A line established by this title, generally parallel with and measured from the
lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building or structure may
be located aboveground except as may be provided herein. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.690: SHELTER HOME:
A building or part of a building used for the temporary housing or relocation
of abused, vulnerable, or Shelter home homeless individuals. Qualified
supervision and care shall be provided for those housed in the facility. This
Definition excludes "Group Homes" as defined herein. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.700: SHOPPING CENTER:
The use of a site for the grouping of commercial establishments, planned,
developed, owned and/or managed as a unit related in location, size and type of
shops to the trade area the unit serves. Neighborhood centers will typically be
comprised of between thirty thousand (30,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross leasable floor area and community centers will typically
be comprised of between one hundred thousand (100,000) to four hundred fifty
thousand (450,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.710: SHOPPING MALL:
A regional shopping facility comprised of many separate shops typically with
two (2) or more major anchors (usually full line department stores) with shops/
major anchors accessed mostly by indoor halls/walking areas. Outdoor access may
be provided for open air shopping malls. A shopping mall shall provide services
for a regional area, as well as the community, and will typically be comprised
of between four hundred fifty thousand (450,000) to eight hundred fifty
thousand (850,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.720: SIDEWALK:
The portion of the road right of way outside the roadway which is improved for
the use of pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.730: SIGN:
A.   Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on
the premises on which the sign is located.
B.   Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or device,
illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place designed
to advertise, identify or convey information, including any landscaping where
letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing the public's attention
to a product or location, with the exception of window displays and state or
national flags.
   1.   Illuminated sign: Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light including reflecting or phosphorescent light.
   2.   Lighting device sign: Any light, string of lights or group of lights
located or arranged so as to cast illumination on sign.
   3.   Off premises sign: Any sign unrelated to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises
where such sign is located.
   4.   On premises sign: Any sign related to a business or profession
conducted, or a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises where
such sign is located.
   5.   Projecting sign: Any sign which projects from the exterior of a
building. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.735: SLAUGHTERHOUSE:
The use of a site for the slaughtering of livestock, and preparing or
processing livestock carcasses for human consumption. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.740: STOCKYARD:
The use of a site for temporarily housing livestock for no more than one week
of continuous time for the purposes of offering for sale or selling such
livestock to the public. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.745: STORAGE:
The use of a site where equipment, inventory, supplies or other similar items
are stored inside or outside. Vehicle storage is classified as Vehicle Storage
or Terminal Yard, Trucking. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.750: STORAGE FACILITY, SELF-SERVICE:
The use of a site that provides storage space for household or commercial goods
within an enclosed building with direct public access to individual storage
spaces. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.755: STORY:
That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling
immediately above it. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.760: STRUCTURE:
Anything constructed of which requires location on the ground or attachment to
something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures
include buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, walls, fences and
billboards. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.765: TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING:
The use of a site for placing permanently marks or designs on the skin by the
process of pricking or ingraining an indelible pigment or by raising scars. A
design made on the skin with a temporary dye such as henna or ink and piercing
of a part of the body with an ornamental ring or stud. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.770: TEMPORARY:
A unit of time not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.03.778: TEMPORARY USE:
The use of a site on a seasonal basis or for a short period of time. The
classification includes but is not limited to: animal shows and sales, arts and
crafts shows, barn and square dances, Christmas tree lots, circuses, carnivals,
construction buildings, corn mazes, farmers markets, firework stands, hayrides,
live entertainment events, mobile offices, model homes, petting zoos, produce
stands, pumpkin stands receptions, snow cone stands, street fairs, trade shows,
and weddings. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.780: TERMINAL YARD, TRUCKING:
The use of a site as a major stopping or transferring point for freight. The
use may include the short-term storage and repair of trucks. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.785: TIRE SHOP:
The use of a site for the sale or installation of new, used, or retread tires
and tubes. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.790: TOWER:
Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, similar structure, windmill or
combination thereof, with a "height", as defined by this title, in excess of
fifteen feet (15'), including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and
masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.795: TRUCK AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT REPAIR AND SALES:
The use of a site for the sale and repair of new and used trucks, trailers and
similar vehicles with two or more rear axles. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.797: TRUCK STOP:
The use of a site for sale of motor fuel, lubricating oils and greases to on
premises trade including large trucks as well as automobiles, including sale of
tires, batteries, accessories and related services, major and minor motor
vehicle repairs, and special services to operators and drivers of trucks
operating on an interstate basis. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.800: TURF AND TREE FARM:
The use of a site to produce and harvest turf or trees for off- site sales.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.805: USE:
The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated, arranged,
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. (Ord. 1225, 2024:
Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.810: VARIANCE:
A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot coverage,
width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, height
of buildings or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of a
structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A
variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but may be
granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of the
characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the
public interest. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.815: VEHICLE BODY SHOP:
The use of a site for painting repairing or straightening the body and/or
chassis of vehicles. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.818: VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT SALES:
The use of a site for the sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles,
manufactured homes, travel trailers, recreation vehicles, trucks and/or farm
implements, but not including repair work except incidental warranty repair.
(Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.820: VEHICLE REPAIR:
The use of a site for the repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles or parts. Collision service and painting are classified as Vehicle
Body Shop; steam cleaning of vehicles is classified as Vehicle Washing
Facility. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.822: VEHICLE STORAGE:
The use of a site for the storage of parking tow-aways, impound yards, and
storage lots for automobiles, trucks, buses and recreational vehicles. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.825: VEHICLE WASHING FACILITY:
The use of a site for washing, waxing or steam cleaning of automobiles or
similar light vehicles. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.828: VEHICLE WRECKING YARD OR SALVAGE:
The use of a site for the dismantling or wrecking of two (2) or more used motor
vehicles, manufactured homes, trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of
dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
Any premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, where more than two (2) motor
vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than thirty (30) days, or
where used motor vehicles or parts thereof are dismantled or stored. (Ord.
1225, 2024)
17.03.830: VICINITY MAP:
A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means the relationship of the
proposed developments to other nearby developments or landmarks and community
facilities and services within the general area in order to better locate and
orient the area in question. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.835: WALKWAY:
A public way, four feet (4') or more in width, for pedestrian use only, whether
or not along the side of a road. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.840: WALL:
A continuous structure designed to enclose an area to be the surrounding
exterior of a building. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.845: WAREHOUSE AND STORAGE, WHOLESALE:
The use of a site for storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured
products, supplies and equipment, excluding retail sales. (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.850: WIRELESS FACILITY:
Facilities necessary for the provision of personal wireless services (i.e.,
towers, support buildings, etc.). (Ord. 1225, 2024)
17.03.855: YARD:
A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure from three feet (3') above the general
ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments and
furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
A.   Front yard: A yard extending between the side lot lines across the front
of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
B.   Interior side yard: A yard extending from the principal building to the
side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines
establishing the front and rear yards.
C.   Rear yard: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a
lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
D.   Street side yard: A yard extending from the principal building to the
secondary street that adjoins the lot between the lines establishing the front
and rear yards. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.860: YARD SALE:
An on premises sale of new or used household or related goods from a residence
or lot upon which a residence may be constructed. The terms "garage sale" or
"rummage sale" are synonymous with "yard sale". No single yard sale shall
exceed three (3) consecutive days in any seven (7) consecutive days from its
commencement to its end. No more than six (6) yard sales may be conducted from
any single residence, residential lot, or lot upon which a residence may be
constructed in the same calendar year. At the conclusion of each sale, all
evidence of the sale must be removed from the view of public streets. (Ord.
1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.03.865: ZONING PERMIT:
A document issued by the administrator authorizing the uses of land and
structures, and the characteristics of the uses. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070,
2010)
CHAPTER 17.10
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
17.10.010: Purposes And Restrictions
17.10.020: Districts Established
17.10.030: Official Zoning Map; Incorporation By Reference
17.10.040: Schedule Of District Use Regulations
17.10.010: PURPOSES AND RESTRICTIONS:
For the interpretation of this title the zoning districts have been formulated
to realize the general purposes as set forth in this title. In addition, the
specific purpose of each zoning district are as stated in section
17.10.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.10.020: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The following zoning districts are hereby established with the specific
purposes stated below:
A.   R residential districts: To provide regulations and districts for various
residential uses. Centralized water and sewer facilities are required for all
subdivision and lot split applications submitted after the effective date
hereof in all residential and other districts. The four (4) residential
districts focus on the following residential uses:
   1.   Residential one (R-1): Single-family dwellings.
   2.   Residential two (R-2): Single or two-family dwellings.
   3.   Residential three (R-3): Single-family, two-family and multi- family
dwellings.
   4.   Multi-family residential (R-M): "Multiple-family dwellings", defined as
dwellings for three (3) families or more.
B.   C-1 neighborhood business district: To permit the establishment of
convenience business uses which tend to meet the daily needs of the residents
of an immediate neighborhood while establishing development standards that
prevent adverse effects on residential uses adjoining a C-1 district. Such
districts are typically appropriate for small shopping clusters or integrated
shopping centers located within residential neighborhoods. (Formerly NS -
neighborhood services.)
C.   C-2 general business district: To permit the establishment of areas for
commercial uses allowed in other commercial zones and commercial uses which are
more intensive than those permitted in other commercial zones. Uses that
complement rather than compete with the uses allowed within the CBD zoning
district shall be encouraged.
D.   C-3 high density business district: To permit the establishment of areas
for travel related services such as hotels, motels, service stations, drive-in
restaurants, offices, limited warehousing, commercial services and retail
sales. This district is specifically designed in clusters to service the
motoring public on major streets. Uses that compete with the uses allowed
within the CBD zoning district shall be discouraged.
E.   CBD central business district: To accommodate and encourage further
expansion and renewal in the historical core business area of the community. A
variety of business, public, quasi- public, cultural, residential and other
related uses are encouraged. The greatest possible concentration of retail
sales and business is to occur in this district. Pedestrian friendly uses and
developments are encouraged.
F.   M-1 light industrial district: To encourage the development of
manufacturing and wholesale business establishments which shall be free of
hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare,
are operated entirely within enclosed structures and generate little industrial
traffic. Research activities are encouraged and limited office and commercial
uses may be permitted as ancillary uses. This district is further designed to
act as a transitional use between heavy manufacturing uses and other less
intense businesses.
G.   BP business park district: To encourage the development of technical park/
research and development facilities, offices and office complexes, and limited
manufacturing activities including small scale production, distribution and
storage of goods. Support activities may also be permitted. All development
within this district shall be designed to be within a landscaped setting, and
be free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke
or glare. Such development shall be operated entirely within enclosed
structures, and generate minimal industrial traffic. All development requiring
a special use permit in the BP zoning district, as shown in section
17.14.010 of this title, shall occur under the PUD process in accordance with
section
17.40.010 et seq., of this title unless the proposed development does not meet
the area requirements. Development, in conjunction with adjacent parcels (to
meet the minimum area requirements), shall be encouraged. Otherwise a special
use permit shall be required unless the proposed use is shown as a permitted
use in the BP zoning district within section
17.14.010 of this title.
H.   M-2 heavy industrial district: To encourage the development of major
manufacturing, processing, warehousing and major research and testing
operations. Limited office and commercial uses may be permitted as ancillary
uses. These activities shall include certain uses excluded from the M-
1 district for reasons of health, safety or general welfare. All development
within this land use shall be reasonably free of hazardous or objectionable
elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare.
I.   PS public/semipublic: To provide for public/semipublic development such as
golf courses, parks, recreation facilities, greenways, schools, and public
service facilities such as government offices.
J.   MU mixed use district: To provide for a variety and mixture of uses such
as limited office, limited commercial, and residential. This district is
intended to ensure compatibility of new development with existing and future
development. It is also intended to ensure assemblage of properties in a
unified plan with coordinated and harmonious development which shall promote
outstanding design without unsightly and unsafe strip commercial development.
Uses should complement the uses allowed within the CBD zoning district. All
development requiring a special use permit in the MU zoning district, as shown
in section
17.14.010 of this title, shall occur under the PUD and/or development agreement
process in accordance with
 chapter 17.40 or 17.120 of this title unless the proposed development does not
meet the area requirements. In that case a cooperative development, in
conjunction with adjacent parcels (to meet the minimum area requirements),
shall be encouraged. Otherwise a special use permit shall be required unless
the proposed use is shown as a permitted use in the MU zoning district.
Residential densities shall not exceed twenty (20) dwelling units per gross
acre. When a property is being proposed for rezone to the MU zoning district a
development agreement may be utilized in lieu of the PUD and/or special use
process if approved by the council provided the development agreement includes
conditions of development that are required during the PUD and special use
process.
K.   P planned unit development: This designation, following any zoning
designation noted on the official zoning map of the city, indicates that the
development was approved by the city as a planned unit development. Density
transfers may have been permitted as a part of the overall development.
L.   Interstate sign overlay district: The purpose of this district is to allow
for different standards for signs erected in certain areas adjacent to
Interstate I-84. The following provisions for signs within the interstate
highway overlay district shall apply:
   1.   High Rise Signs:
      a.   High rise signs shall have a maximum height of eighty five feet
(85') when measured from the surface of the ground to the top of the sign.
      b.   Each high rise sign shall have a maximum signage of three hundred
fifty (350) square feet for a single business occupancy of a parcel of real
property and a maximum of six hundred (600) square feet for two (2) or more
businesses on a single parcel of real property.
      c.   Each parcel of real property within the district may have one high
rise sign per parcel of real property.
      d.   High rise signs must meet all requirements of the state of Idaho
department of transportation pertaining to high rise signs adjacent to
interstate highways.
   2.   Frontage Business Identification Or Product Signs:
      a.   The maximum height of frontage business identification or product
signs shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') from the surface of the ground to
the top of the sign.
      b.   Every frontage business identification or product sign shall not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet and no more than one frontage business
identification or product sign per street shall be permitted on any parcel of
real property no matter how many individual businesses are located thereon.
   3.   Building Signs:
      a.   A maximum square footage of three (3) square feet per linear foot of
building front shall be permitted for a building sign.
      b.   Buildings with less than twenty one (21) linear feet of frontage may
not have a building sign which exceeds more than sixty five (65) square feet.
      c.   For purposes of this subsection L, any signage and/or logos on
attached or detached canopies shall be considered part of a building sign.
   4.   Permits:
      a.   A building permit shall be required for the erection of any sign in
the interstate sign overlay district which permit shall be applied for and
issued in conformance with existing provisions of this title.
   5.   Off Premises Signs: Permits for off premises signs in the interstate
sign overlay district shall be by special use permit only.
   6.   Contradictory Terms: This subsection L is intended to take precedence
over any other provisions of this code which contradict any of its terms.
   7.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection L, the following
definitions shall apply:
   BUILDING SIGN: A sign installed on or supported by the business building.
   FRONTAGE BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION OR PRODUCT SIGN: A sign installed within
twenty (20) linear feet of the business front property line and/or side street
property line for corner lots or parcels.
   HIGH RISE SIGN: A sign in excess of thirty five feet (35') above the ground
level installed within the interstate sign overlay district.
   PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: A contiguous parcel of land in identical ownership
and defined by legal description, adequate for recording in the office of the
county recorder.
   8.   Boundaries: The initial boundaries of the interstate sign overlay
district shall be as follows:
      Beginning at the intersection of the east boundary of Section 6, T 9 S, R
17 E, and the north Right of Way of Interstate Highway 84;
      Thence in a northwesterly direction along the north Right Of Way of said
Interstate Highway 84 through Section 6, T 9 S, R 17 E, Section 31, T 8 S, R 17
E, and Sections 36, 25, 24, 23 and 14, T 8 S, R 16 E, to the west boundary of
said Section 14, T 8 S, R 16 E;
      Thence north along the west boundary of said Section 14 to a line which
lies 1000 feet northeast of and parallel to the north Right of Way of said
Interstate Highway 84;
      Thence southeasterly along a line parallel to and 1000 feet northeast of
the north Right Of Way of said Interstate Highway 84 through Sections 14, 23,
24, and 25, T 8 S, R 16 E, and Section 30, T 8 S, R 17 E, to a point on the
north boundary of Section 31, T 8 S, R 17 E;
      Thence east along the north boundary of said Section 31 to a line 1000
feet east of and parallel to the west boundary of said Section 31;
      Thence south along a line 1000 feet east of and parallel to the west
boundary of said Section 31 to a line which lies 1000 feet northeast of and
parallel to the north Right Of Way of said Interstate Highway 84;
      Thence southeasterly along a line parallel to and 1000 feet northeast of
the north Right Of Way of said Interstate Highway 84 and Section 31, T 8 S, R
17 E, and Section 6, T 9 S, R 17 E, to the east boundary of said Section 6;
      Thence south along the east boundary of said Section 6 to the north Right
Of Way of Interstate Highway 84 and the point of beginning.
M.   Design Overlay District:
   1.   District Created: The Design Overlay District is hereby created. The
real property within the Design Overlay District shall consist of the following
real property:
      All real property parallel to and within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
the rights-of-way for either Main Street or Lincoln Street within the
boundaries of the City of Jerome, excluding any property used for residential
purposes, or which is occupied by the owner as a personal residence.
   2.   Amendment Of Zoning Map: The official map of the City of Jerome is
hereby amended to include the above real property, described in subsection M1
of this section, within the Design Overlay District.
   3.   Design Review Permit: Prior to obtaining a building permit as required
by the International Building Code or any successor Uniform Code adopted by the
City of Jerome, any person shall, prior to obtaining a building permit for
structures within the Design Overlay District, apply for, and obtain, a design
review permit. Additionally, a design review permit shall be obtained by any
person prior to painting or modifying the exterior facade of any structure or
building facing Main or Lincoln Streets, or altering any sign, which sign faces
either Main or Lincoln Streets within the Design Review Overlay District. The
following activities shall be excepted from the requirement to obtain a design
review permit:
      a.   Interior remodeling of a building or structure which does not impact
its exterior appearance or significantly impact the parking, landscaping or
other exterior uses of the property on which it is located; or
      b.   Repairs to an existing building or structure if the exterior
appearance is not significantly altered; or
      c.   Improvements to, or modification or maintenance of, undeveloped
property which does not significantly alter the outward appearance of the
property.
   4.   Applications; Fee:
      a.   A person required to obtain a design review permit under this
chapter shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator.
      b.   Application shall be made on a form to be provided by the Zoning
Administrator, which has been approved by the commission. No fee for the
application shall be required unless the Council has passed a resolution
requiring a fee prior to the filing of the application.
   5.   Application Review: When an application for a design review permit has
been received with the appropriate fee, if such fee is required, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the application and, if the Zoning Administrator
determines that the application will have no substantial impact on real
property within the Design Overlay District adjacent to the real property
affected by the application or upon the City itself, the Zoning Administrator
may submit findings of the application and place it on the agenda of the
commission for its next regular meeting. Provided, however, all applications
for sign design review may be reviewed and approved, or approved with
conditions, by the Administrator. The Administrator shall follow the design
review guidelines in force at the time the application is made in making such
approval or approval with conditions. If the Administrator approves the
application, he or she shall issue the applicant a design review permit. If the
Administrator does not approve the application, the matter shall be placed on
the agenda of the commission for the next regular meeting to be considered by
the commission for approval or denial. If the Administrator approves the
application with conditions, the applicant may accept the conditions and ask
the Administrator to issue a permit or may request the permit be submitted to
the commission for consideration. If such request is made, the Administrator
shall place the application on the agenda for the commission's next regular
meeting.
   6.   Planning And Zoning Commission; Hearing:
      a.   For all applications other than sign design review applications, the
Zoning Administrator shall only have authority to recommend approval of an
application for design review permit to the commission, or send such
application to the commission for its consideration without making a
recommendation for approval on its consent agenda. The commission may approve,
deny, or conditionally approve any application for a design review permit.
      b.   At any meeting of the commission at which the approval of a design
permit application is on the agenda, the commission may approve the application
by the unanimous vote of the members present. If no unanimous vote is obtained,
a public hearing shall be required on the application for design review permit
at a meeting of the commission after public notice of such hearing is given
pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6509. After the hearing, the commission may
approve, by a majority vote, an application for design review permit.
   7.   Appeals: Appeals of the decision of the commission on design review
permit applications may be appealed to the City Council under the provisions of
section
17.70.070 of this title.
   8.   Permit Issuance: When an application for design review permit has been
approved, an original design review permit shall be issued by the commission
and signed by the Zoning Administrator, setting forth the details of the permit
and any conditions thereto.
   9.   Contents Of Application: The application for design review permit shall
be made to the commission and shall contain all information which may be
required by the commission including, but not limited to:
      a.   Name and address of applicant;
      b.   The legal description upon which the project will be undertaken;
      c.   The street address of the real property upon which the project will
be undertaken;
      d.   The owner of the real property;
      e.   A narrative statement describing how the application meets the
criteria set forth herein;
      f.   Unless waived for good cause, in whole or in part by the Zoning
Administrator, seven (7) copies of the following:
         (1)   Vicinity map showing the property's location in relationship to
neighboring properties in the surrounding area;
         (2)   A copy of any existing subdivision design or construction
standards then in effect with respect to the property;
         (3)   Elevations of all sides of any new or modified building or
structure on the real property;
         (4)   Descriptions or details of all materials proposed to be used for
the exterior of the building or structure, including color chips and color
swatches;
         (5)   A plan for any landscaping to be modified or constructed, if
any; and
         (6)   Details of the placement, height, and specifications for new or
modified exterior lighting, if any.
   10.   Scope Of Review: The Zoning Administrator or the commission if the
Zoning Administrator determines not to make a recommendation, in cases where
the sign or facade under subsection M3 of this section involves less than fifty
(50) square feet, shall review the application for compliance with the
following criteria:
      a.   Whether the project compromises the health, safety or welfare of the
public;
      b.   Whether the project is in general compliance with the design review
guidelines then in force as adopted.
The Zoning Administrator shall report to the commission at its next ensuing
meeting all decisions made by the Administrator under this subsection M10.
   11.   Revocation Of Permit: A design review permit issued and which has
become final and nonappealable, may be subject to revocation if the project
described in the permit is constructed or operated in violation of the design
review permit. The Council may initiate procedures for the revocation of a
design review permit and require the holder of such a permit to appear and show
cause before it why the permit should not be subject to revocation.
   12.   Penalties For Noncompliance; Binding On Successors: No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any new structure or building under section
17.50.060 of this title until full compliance with the design review permit has
been demonstrated. Any person no longer in compliance with an issued design
review permit may, upon prior notice from the Council, and an opportunity to be
heard, have its design review permit revoked. The certificate of occupancy
shall not be reissued until compliance with the design review permit has been
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Council. Every design review permit
shall be binding upon the heirs, successors and assigns of the person to whom
the design review permit was issued. (Ord. 1169, 2018: Ord. 1079, 2010: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.10.030: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE:
A.   Map Adopted: The zoning map of the City, copied and attached to the
ordinance codified herein as exhibit A, is adopted as the official zoning map
of the City, together with all explanatory material thereon, and is hereby
incorporated into this title as if set forth at length.
B.   Boundaries Of Districts: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map,
the following shall apply:
   1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerline of street lines, highway right-of-way lines, streams, lakes or other
bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such boundary;
   2.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;
   3.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map; and
   4.   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary
shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said railroad
line. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.10.040: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS:
District regulations shall be as set forth in the official schedule of district
regulations, in the performance standards in
chapter 17.18 of this title, and as otherwise provided within this Code. The
official schedule of district regulations is divided into five (5) land use
groups: agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial, and public/
semipublic. To determine in which district a specific use is allowed:
A.   Find the use in one of the land use groups;
B.   Read across the chart until either "P" or "S" appears in one of the
columns; and
C.   If "P" appears, the use is an allowed use; if "S" appears, the use is only
allowed upon the issuance of a special use permit and/or a development
agreement upon rezone to an MU or BP zoning designation; if no letter appears
the use is prohibited.
   Provided, however, that if a proposed use of property is not specifically
listed in the official schedule of district regulations, the use shall be
prohibited, unless the Administrator determines that the proposed use is
equivalent to a permitted or special use. In making said determination, the
Administrator shall consider the following:
   1.   The impacts on public services, and activities associated with the
proposed use, are substantially similar to any of the permitted or special uses
listed for the application district;
   2.   The proposed use shall not involve a higher level of activity or
density than any of the permitted or special uses listed for the applicable
district;
   3.   The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the district in
which the use is proposed to be located; and
   4.   The proposed use is in substantial conformance with goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
   5.   Should the use be determined to be equivalent to a use that requires a
special use permit, the application shall be required to follow the procedures
set forth for special use permits. (Ord. 1070, 2010: Ord. 1192, 2020)
CHAPTER 17.14
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
17.14.010: Official Schedule Of District Regulations
17.14.020: Schedule Of Building Height And Lot Area Regulations
17.14.030: Special Use Permits
17.14.010: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
P = Permitted use
S = Special use
Blank (no P or S) = Prohibited use
* See Section
17.18.050 Performance Standards for Specific Uses
Land Uses Zoning Districts
          R-1 R-2 R-3 R-M C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD M-1 BP M-2 PS MU
Land Uses                      Zoning Districts
                               R-1 R-2 R-3 R-M C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD M-1 BP M-2 PS MU
Adult business                                                 S      S
Agriculture*                   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S   S  S
Airport                                                P       P
Animal care*                                   S   P   P   S   P      P      S
Artist studio                                  P   P   P   P   P   P
Arts, entertainment, and       S   S   S   S   P   P   P   S   P   P  P   P  S
recreation
Auction facility                                   S           P   S  P
Bed and breakfast              S   S   S       P           P                 P
Building material, garden/farm                     P   P   S   P      P      S
equipment and supplies
Cemetery                                           S   S       P   S  P   S
Club or lodge                                  P   P       P                 P
Communication facility                         P   P   P       P      P      S
Contractor’s yard*                               S   P       P   S  P
Convenience store with fuel                    S   P   P   P   P      P
service
Convenience store with no fuel S   S   S   S   P   P   P   P   P   S  P   S  P
service
Correctional facility or jail                                  S   S  S   S
Daycare, center*                   S   S       P   P   S   P                 S
Daycare, group*                S   S   P   P   S   S       P                 S
Daycare, home*                 S   P   P   P   P           P                 P
Drinking establishment                             S   S   S                 S
Drive-in theater                                   S   S           S      S  S
Drive-through                                  P   P   P   S   P   P         P
Establishment*
Dwelling, group                        S   S   S   S       S                 S
Dwelling, multi-family (three          P   P   S   S   P   S                 S
to four units)
Dwelling, multi-family (five           S   P   S   S   S   S                 S
or more units)
Dwelling, single family        P   P   P   P   S           S                 S
Dwelling, two-family duplex        P   P   P   S           S                 S
Eating establishment                           P   P   P   P   P   P         P
Education services, private                    P   P   P   P       P         P
Education services, public         P   P   P   P   P   S   S              P  S
Emergency services                             P   P   P   P   P   P      P  P
Equipment sales and rental                     S   S   P       S   S  P      S
services
Farm animal(s)*                S   S   S   S   S   S   S       S      S      S
Financial institution                          P   P   P   P   P   P         P
Flex space                                             P       P   P         S
Food products, processing                                      S   S  P
Food products, smalls scale                    P   P   P   S   P   S  P      S
processing
Fuel sales facility                            S   P   P   P   P      P
Fuel yard                                                      S      P
Health care and social                         S   P   P   S       P         S
services
Heliports                                              S       S
Home occupation*               S   S   S       S           S                 S
Horticulture, limited                          P   P                         P
Hospital                                       S   P   P   S   S             S
Industry, craftsman                                P   P       P   S  P      S
Industry, heavy*                                               S      S
Industry, light*                                               P   S  P
Industry, limited*                                 S   P       S   P  S
Institution                                            S           S
Laundromat                                     P   P   P   P   P             S
Laundry and dry cleaning                       S   P   P       P             S
Lodging                                            P   P   P                 S
Manufactured home              P   P   P   P   S           S                 S
Manufactured home park*        S   S   P   P   S   S   S   S                 S
Museum                                         P   P   P   P              P  S
Nursing home or care facility          S       P   P   P   S                 S
Office, business, and                          P   P   P   P       P         P
professional
Park and recreation facility   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   P       P      P  S
Parking facility, commercial                   P   P   P   S   P   S         S
Parking facility, non-                         P   P   P   S   P   P  P   P  P
commercial
Pawnshops, auto                                        S   S   S      S
Pawnshops, general                                 S   S   S   S      S
Personal and professional                      P   P   P   P                 P
services
Planned unit development               S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S      S
Public service facility        S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S  S   S  S
Public use                                     P   P   P   P   S   P      P  S
Public utility yard                                    S       S   S  P   S
Quasi-Public Use               S   S   S   S   S   S   S   P   S   S  S   P  S
Railroad yard or shop                                  S       S      P
Recreational vehicle park*                         S   S                  S  S
Recycling center                                               S      S
Rendering plant                                                       S
Repair services                                P   P   P   S   P   S  P      S
Research and development                       S   S   S   S   P   P  P      S
Restaurant, drive-in*                              P   P   S       P
Retail store                                   S   P   P   P       S         P
Riding academies and stables*                                             S  S
Salvage yard                                                   S      S
Shelter home                               S   S   S   S   P       S      S  S
Shopping center                                S   S   S   P       S         S
Shopping mall                                      S   S   P       S         S
Slaughterhouse*
Stockyard*
Storage                                        S   S   S       P   S  P      S
Storage facility, self-service                 P   P   P       P   S  P      S
Tattoo and body piercing                       S   P   P   P   P
Terminal yard, trucking                                S       S      P
Tire shop                                          P   P   S   P   S  P
Tower                                          S   S   S   S   S      S
Truck and heavy equipment                          S   S       S   S  P
repair and sales
Truck stop                                         S   P       S   S  P
Turf and tree farm             S   S   S   S   S   S   S       S   S  S   S  S
Vehicle body shop                                  P   P       P   S  P
Vehicle and equipment sales                        S   P   S   P   S  P
Vehicle repair                                     P   P   S   P   S  P
Vehicle storage                                                S      P
Vehicle washing facility                       S   P   P       P   S         S
Vehicle wrecking yard or                                       S      S
salvage*
Warehouse and storage,                                         P   S  P
wholesale
Wireless facility                              P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P  P
 
Temporary Uses
P = Permitted use
S = Special use
Blank (no P or S) = Prohibited use
* See Section
17.18.060  Performance Standards for Temporary Uses
Land Uses Zoning Districts
          R-1 R-2 R-3 R-M C-1 C-2 C-3 CB D M-1 BP M-2 PS MU
Land Uses                  Zoning Districts
                           R-1 R-2 R-3 R-M C-1 C-2 C-3 CB D M-1 BP M-2 PS MU
Farmers’ markets (outdoor            P   P      P            P  P
Roadside stands (temporary             P   P   P   P              P
structure)
Animal shows or sales                  S   S          S   S       S
Arts and crafts shows                     P      P            P  S
Christmas tree sales                   P   P   P   P    P   P     P  P
Circuses and carnivals                    P      P    P        P  S
Live entertainment events              S   P   S   P            S  S
Mobile office                          S   S   S       S   S       S
Street fair                            P   P   P   P            P  P
Trade fair                                P      P              S
Yard sales*                P   P   P   P   P   P      P            P  P
 
A.   Churches presently existing in any residential zone may be allowed to
expand structures by special use permit in accordance with the procedures set
forth elsewhere in this title for the processing of applications for such
permits.
B.   All manufactured homes located within any zoning district of the city must
meet the following requirements:
   1.   Every manufactured home shall be composed of two (2) or more sections
and must enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet on a
single level.
   2.   Every manufactured home must be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation and must have an enclosed perimeter.
   3.   Every manufactured home shall have a pitched roof not less than three
feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
   4.   Every manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in
color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used in residential dwellings predominantly found in the
neighborhood in which it is located as determined by the building official of
the city.
   5.   Mobile homes rehabilitated in accordance with the provisions of Idaho
Code 44-2501 et seq., shall be regarded as manufactured homes for the purpose
of this title and the schedule of uses in this section.
   6.   Manufactured homes or rehabilitated mobile homes under Idaho Code 44-
2501 meeting all the requirements of this title, except for the size
requirement, may be placed in manufactured home or "mobile home parks" as
presently defined in section
15.24.010 of this code.
   7.   A mobile home not rehabilitated in accordance with Idaho Code 44-2501
et seq., shall not be placed within any zoning district of the city. (Ord 1225,
2024: Ord. 1198, 2021: Ord. 1192, 2020: Ord. 1158, 2016: Ord. 1083, 2011: Ord.
1074, 2010: Ord. 1070, 2010; Ord. 1233, 11-5-2024)
17.14.020: SCHEDULE OF BUILDING HEIGHT AND LOT AREA REGULATIONS:
A.   Official Height And Area Regulations; Minimum Yard Setbacks 1 :
Zoning   Maximum Front                Interior Side             Minimum Lot
District Height  Setback Rear Setback Setback       Street Side Area (Sq.
                                                                Ft.)
R-1      35'     25'     20'          7'            15'         6,250
Zoning   Maximum Front                Interior Side             Minimum Lot
District Height  Setback Rear Setback Setback       Street Side Area (Sq.
                                                                Ft.)
R-1      35'     25'     20'          7'            15'         6,250
R-2      35'     25'     20'          7'            15'         5,000
R-3      35'     25'     20'          7'            15'         5,000
R-M      35'     25'     20'          15'           20'         7,000
C-1      35'     25'     10'          7'            25'         n/a
C-2      50'     25'     10'          12'           25'         n/a
C-3      50'     25'     10'          12'           25'         n/a
CBD      35'     0'      0'           0'            0'          3,125
M-1      85'     25'     25'          20'           20'         n/a
BP       35'     25'     20'          20'           20'         n/a
M-2      85'     25'     25'          25'           20'         n/a
PS       40'     25'     20'          20'           20'         n/a
MU       35'     25'     20'          20'           20'         7,000
RT       35'     25'     20'          20'           20'         6,000
 
B.   Note Conditions:
   1.   Setback reductions (to be measured from the foundation to the property
line):
      a.   No portion of the structure may extend more than three feet (3')
into the side yard setback;
      b.   Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms,
carports, covered patios and similar architectural projections shall be
considered part of the building to which it is attached and shall not project
more than fifteen feet (15') into the required rear yard setback;
      c.   A garage, carport or other accessory building detached from a
residential structure may be constructed within three feet (3') from the rear
and side property line within the zones and for the yards indicated.
   2.   In zones C-1, C-2, and C-3, no structure shall occupy more than eighty
percent (80%) of the total lot size.
C.   Residential Buildings: All residential buildings in residential districts
must meet residential official height and area regulations.
D.   Structures Not Containing Sprinkler Fire Control System: Structures not
containing a sprinkler type fire control system may be further limited in
height. This is to be determined by the Jerome city fire chief or his designee
and their interpretation and review of the international fire code.
E.   Front Yard Setbacks: Fifteen foot (15') front yard setbacks are
permissible on the following lots fronting East and West Avenues D, E, F and G,
and East and West Streets 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th:
Lots 1-6, in Block 1; Lots 1-8 in Block 2; Lots 1-8 in Block 3; Lots 1-8 in
Block 4; Lots 1-8 in Block 7; Lots 1-8 in Block 8; Lots 1-8 in Block 9; Lots 1-
4 in Block 10; Lots 1-4 in Block 11; Lots 1-16 in Block 12; Lots 1-16 in Block
13; Lots 1-8 in Block 14; all lots and blocks within Shepard Replat #3; Lots 1-
5 in Block 17; Lots 1-8 in Block 18; Lots 1-16 in Block 19; Lots 1-12 in Block
20; Lots 1-6 in Block 21; Lots 1-16 in Block 22; Lots 1-16 in Block 23; Lots 1-
16 in Block 24; Lots 1-8 in Block 27; Lots 1-8 in Block 28; Lots 9-16 in Block
29; Lots 1-8 in Block 30; Lots 1-8 in Block 31; Lots 1-16 in Block 32; Lots 1-
16 in Block 33; Lots 9-16 in Block 34; Lots 1-16 in Block 38; Lots 1-16 in
Block 39; Lots 1-6 in Block 40; Lots 1-6 in Block 41; Lots 1-8 in Block 42;
Lots 1-8 in Block 43; Lots 1-8 in Block 44; Lots 1-8 in Block 47; Lots 1-8 in
Block 48; Lots 9-16 in Block 118; Lots 9-16 in Block 119; Lots 7-12 in Block
121; Lots 1-16 in Block 122; Lots 1-8 in Block 123; Lots 1-12 in Block 126;
Lots 1-16 in Block 127; Lots 1-8 in Block 129; Lots 1-8 in Block 130; Lots 1-
4 in Block 131; Lots 1-8 in Block 132; Lots 1-16 in Block 133; Lots 1-16 in
Block 134; Lots 1-16 in Block 135; Lots 1-6 in Block 137; Lots 1-8 in Block
138; Lots 1-8 in Block 139; Lots 1-6 in Block 140; Lots 7-12 in Block 141; Lots
1-16 in Block 142; Lots 1-8 in Block 146; Lots 1-8 in Block 147; Lots 1-16 in
Block 148; Lots 1-16 in Block 149; Lots 1-4 in Block 150; Lots 1-4 in Block
151; Lots 1-8 in Block 152; Lots 1-8 in Block 154; Lots 1-8 in Block 155; and
Lots 1-6 in Block 160, all within the Jerome Townsite.
(Ord. 1095, 2012: Ord. 1094, 2012: Ord. 1070, 2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See note conditions.
17.14.030: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
Structures in excess of the height limits established in section
17.14.020 of this chapter may be allowed by special use permit utilizing the
procedures set forth in section
17.60.060 of this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.18
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
17.18.010: Purpose
17.18.020: Supplemental General Provisions
17.18.030: Supplemental Yard And Height Regulations
17.18.040: Commercial And Industrial Use Regulations
17.18.050: Unique Land Uses
17.18.060: Temporary Uses
17.18.070: Landscaping Requirements
17.18.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of performance standards is to set specific conditions for various
uses or areas where problems are frequently encountered. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.18.020: SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following
provisions shall be adhered to:
A.   Conversion To More Residential Dwelling Units: A residence may not be
converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
   1.   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the
zoning regulations for new structures in that district;
   2.   The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district; and
   3.   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant provisions of
this code.
B.   Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, construction trailers, equipment
and materials used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted
in any district during the period construction work is in progress, but such
temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction work.
Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the completion date of the
project shall require a zoning permit authorized by the administrator.
C.   Parking And Storing Of Certain Vehicles: Except as stated in subsection D
of this section, automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without
current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned
property other than in a completely enclosed building or carport. Further, no
boats, motor homes or other recreational vehicles may be parked more than
seventy two (72) consecutive hours in front of any residentially zoned
property.
D.   Recreational Vehicles:
   1.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the term "recreational motor
vehicle (RV)" includes, but is not limited to: motor homes, fifth wheels, over
cab pickup campers, travel trailers and/or tents.
   2.   Prohibition Of Use As Primary Residence: No person(s) shall reside or
permit any other person(s) to reside in and utilize any RV as their primary
residence in any zoning district within the city of Jerome unless otherwise
prescribed herein.
   3.   Temporary RV Residence: Pursuant to the regulations contained in
subsections D4 to D7 of this section, a person may obtain a license permitting
the use of an RV as a temporary residence for a period not to exceed fourteen
(14) days. The RV must remain mobile and road worthy at all times. In addition,
the RV may connect to electricity but it shall not connect to any residential
cleanouts or street manholes.
   4.   Application Procedure: The applicant must submit an application to the
planning and zoning administrator and receive approval prior to residing in an
RV on private property. As part of said application, the applicant must provide
the address, proposed dates they will reside in the RV, and written consent
from the property owner where the RV will be located.
   5.   Renewal: Upon request by the applicant, and in the sole discretion of
the planning and zoning administrator, any temporary RV license obtained may be
renewed for an additional fourteen (14) day period. Provided, however, that any
such license may only be renewed twice during any calendar year for an absolute
maximum of forty two (42) days. Renewal request must be submitted with all of
the application materials listed in subsection D4 of this section and processed
before the expiration of the original approval.
   6.   Temporary RV Residence Exemption: Any person may reside in an RV on
private residential property with the property owner's consent for up to
seventy two (72) hours without a license. The RV residence must remain mobile
and road worthy. The RV residence may connect to electricity but it shall not
connect to any residential cleanouts or street manholes. Additionally, any
person may reside in an RV residence in a "manufactured home court (RV)" as
defined by
 chapter 17.03, "Rules And Definitions", of this title.
   7.   Violation/Penalty: Any person found in violation of this section shall
be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). A
second violation within one year of the previous offense shall constitute an
infraction and subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. Any subsequent
offense within one year of the previous offense shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable by up to six (6) months in jail, up to a three hundred dollar
($300.00) fine or both such jail and fine.
E.   Enclosed Trash Areas: All trash and/or garbage collection areas for
commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on
at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence of at least four feet (4') in
height, and a solid wood gate on a metal frame shall enclose the fourth side,
or shall be within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate vehicular access
to and from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage as
determined by the administrator shall be provided.
F.   Accessory Building:
   1.   Will not be located in any required front or street side yard area.
   2.   Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area or
larger shall comply with the minimum setbacks of three feet (3') from property
lines and shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty-five feet (25') or no
higher than the primary structure, whichever is less and shall require a
building permit. All accessory buildings shall utilize siding materials that
are similar in type (vinyl, wood, etc.), color, hue, tone as the primary,
existing structure.
   3.   Accessory buildings shall be constructed with building materials that
are similar and harmonious with the existing structures on the property in
which the building is being proposed.
G.   Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Gases Above Ground And For Resale:
   1.   Will be required to comply with the setback requirements of the Idaho
Fire Code or located at least one hundred feet (100') from a residential zone,
residence, motel, or hotel, except for an owner’s residence;
   2.   Will be erected subject to the approval of the fire chief; and
   3.   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off-street parking
facilities subject to the approval of the fire chief.
H.   Chemicals, Pesticide, and Fertilizer Storage and Manufacturing: Will have
adequate fire protection, storage area, handling, and disposal as approved by
the fire chief. (Ord. 1233, 2024: Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1119, 2014)
17.18.030: SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In addition to all yard regulations specified in section 17.14.020 of this
title, and in other sections of this title, the following provisions shall be
adhered to:
A.   Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between the height of two and one-half (21/2) and ten
feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area
bounded by the right of way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points
along said street right of way lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection.
B.   Fences In Front Yards: In any required front yard, no fence or wall or
shrub shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard over
the height of three feet (3') and twenty feet (20') back from front property
line.
C.   Yards In Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings shall be
considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear
yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall require one front, one rear
and two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate district.
D.   Exceptions To Height Regulations: The height limitations contained in
section 17.14.020 of this title do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas,
antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually
required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human
occupancy, except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard
to the safe landing and takeoff of aircraft at an established airport.
E.   Maximum Units Per Lot: Any buildable lot conforming to this title shall be
permitted a maximum of one dwelling unit per lot, where permitted by this
title. Additional dwelling units shall not be permitted within the above
mentioned zoning designations unless specifically permitted elsewhere within
this title. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.18.040: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A.   Performance Requirements: No land or building in any district shall be
used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or
otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding
areas or adjoining premises; except, that any case permitted by this title may
be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce
dangerous and objectionable conditions to acceptable limits as established by
the following performance requirements:
   1.   Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or
explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire
prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the
handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent
activities to a distance that is compatible with the potential danger involved
as specified in the international fire code and the National Safety Foundation
publications.
   2.   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful
radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
   3.   Noise: Objectionable noise, as determined by the administrator, which
is due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled.
Air raid sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are
exempt from this requirement.
   4.   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without
instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
   5.   Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and
regulations established by the health authority.
   6.   Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible
from any property outside a manufacturing district or from any street.
   7.   Erosion: No erosion by man, wind or water shall be permitted which will
carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
   8.   Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements
and regulations established by the health authority.
B.   Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of
the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to
applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American National
Standards Institute, the American Chemistry Council, the United States
department of energy, the Idaho department of environmental quality, and the
local health authority.
C.   Enforcement: The administrator, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit,
may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the manner in
which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and in
equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits and
tolerances.
D.   Outdoor Storage of Commercial and Industrial Materials:
   1.   Will be screened from view from any existing, adjoining residence or
residentially zoned area, whether or not such property is separated by an
alleyway or street; and
   2.   Will not be located in any front yard setback area. (Ord. 1225, 2024:
Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.18.050: UNIQUE LAND USES:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental
influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions
of this title:
A.   Agriculture:
   1.   A minimum area of five (5) acres of land area for production of
agricultural products.
   2.   Prior to issuing a special use permit, the planning and zoning
commission shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in
 chapter 17.60 of this title:
      a.   The statement of purpose of this chapter;
      b.   The proposed use for a location in an area;
      c.   The availability of alternative locations;
      d.   Compatibility with existing or permitted uses on adjacent lands;
      e.   The need for public services created by the proposed use;
      f.   The effect of the proposed use on water, air or soil resources;
      g.   Parking; and
      h.   Any other site elements which to the planning and zoning commission
appear relevant.
   3.   Conditions which may be attached to special use permits include, but
are not limited to:
      a.   Increased setbacks and yards;
      b.   Specifications for water supply, liquid waste and solid waste
disposal facilities;
      c.   Additional landscaping and vegetable buffers and screens;
      d.   Time of operation;
      e.   Air pollution controls;
      f.   Locations of the use;
      g.   Buffers; and
      h.   Site plan review.
   4.   Depending on the nature of the specific agricultural use, additional
standards as follows may be applied in the special use permit:
      a.   Apiary, Beekeeping:
         (1)   No more than one beehive shall be kept for each one thousand
(1,000) square feet of lot area.
         (2)   No beehive shall be kept closer than five feet (5') to any lot
line and ten feet (10') to a dwelling or the permitted placement of a dwelling
on another parcel. No beehive shall be kept in a required front yard or side
street yard. The front of any beehive shall face away from the property line of
any adjacent residential dwelling.
         (3)   A solid fence or dense hedge at least six feet (6') in height,
shall be placed along the side of the beehive that contains the entrance to the
hive, and shall be located within five feet (5') of the hive and shall extend
at least two feet (2') on either side of the hive. No solid fence or hedge
shall be required if all beehives are located at least twenty five feet (25')
from all property lines or located on porches or balcony areas at least ten
feet (10') above grade, except if such porch or balcony is located less than
five feet (5') from a property line.
         (4)   A supply of fresh water shall be maintained in a location
readily accessible to all bee colonies on the site throughout the day to
prevent bees from congregating at swimming pools or other sources of water on
nearby properties.
         (5)   No Africanized bees may be kept on a property under the
regulations of this subsection.
      b.   Retail Sales, Farm Stand And Agricultural Tourism Activities:
         (1)   Retail sales including farm stands, and agricultural tourism
shall be subordinate to the growing of crops.
         (2)   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the products sold at the
farm stand or agricultural tourism activity shall be grown or produced on the
site where the farm stand is located.
         (3)   Adequate and safe conditions for off street parking to serve the
farm stand or agricultural tourism shall be provided. Parking and internal
driveways shall not be located on or adjacent to combustible surfaces or
materials.
         (4)   Structures, signs, merchandise, or any other material utilized
in the operation of the farm stand or agricultural tourism activity shall not
interfere with the clear vision triangle.
         (5)   The operation of the farm stand or agricultural tourism activity
shall not be conducted within the public right of way, unless otherwise
authorized by the city.
         (6)   If an increased setback and/or buffer has been required for the
agricultural land use as a condition of the special use permit, the operation
of the required farm stand or agricultural tourism activity shall not be
conducted within that required setback and/or buffer.
         (7)   Any permit or temporary structure associated with the farm stand
or agricultural tourism activity shall meet the building code requirements.
B.   Animal Care:
   1.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any residence
including lodging, except for an owner's residence. The administrator may
modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed in soundproof
structures that completely screen them from view of the abutting residential
property; and
   2.   Will comply with all state and local regulations relative to such an
operation and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent the
creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and
odor.
C.   Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Gases Above Ground And For Resale:
   1.   Will be located at least five hundred feet (500') from a residential
zone, a residence, motel or hotel, except for an owner's residence;
   2.   Will be erected subject to the approval of the fire chief; and
   3.   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off street parking
facilities subject to the approval of the fire chief.
D.   Chemicals, Pesticide And Fertilizer Storage And Manufacturing: Will have
adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved by
the fire chief.
E.   Farm Animal:
   1.   Chickens, Poultry, And Fowl:
      a.   No household or parcel of property shall keep more than six (6)
chickens, poultry, or fowl.
      b.   Roosters are prohibited.
      c.   The chickens, poultry, or fowl shall be contained to the site, or
the site shall be fenced.
      d.   Any chicken coop or accessory structure associated with the
chickens, poultry, or fowl shall be placed in accordance with the accessory
structure setback requirements.
      e.   Chickens, poultry, or fowl shall not be kept in the front yard.
      f.   Chickens, Poultry, and Fowl are exempt from obtaining a special use
permit; however, an application shall be completed and approved
administratively by the planning and zoning department.
      g.   Any unresolved violations of 1. a. through e. or nuisance complaints
regarding smell and/or noise will result in the permit being revoked. An
applicant may reapply through the special use permit process after one (1) year
of the permit being revoked.
      h.   Any fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   2.   Horses, cattle, and sheep quartered within the city limits prior to May
5, 1983, may remain without the necessity of a special use permit being issued.
If the real property upon which the animals are located is sold, or leased,
should the number of horses, cattle or sheep be increased, or should no such
animals at all be on the real property for a period of at least one year, then
a special use permit shall be required before any such animals may be quartered
on the real property. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed
to allow by implication the quartering of any other livestock within the city
limits, by special use permit, by right, or by any other means.
   3.   For each lot of one and one-half (11/2) acres the owner may maintain,
in combination, no more than two (2) head of horses, cattle, or sheep per acre
of improved pasture. For each additional acre of improved pasture, the owner
may maintain an additional combined total of two (2) head, provided no owner
shall maintain a total of more than six (6) head irrespective of the total size
of the lot or acres of improved pasture. The right to maintain animals under
this section shall be subject to the following conditions:
      a.   The lot must be maintained by the owner or tenant.
      b.   The animals be securely fenced or otherwise restricted to the
owner's property.
      c.   All pens, corrals, sheds, stables or other structures used for
keeping livestock, shall be located not less than twenty feet (20') from the
applicant's residence and no less than fifty feet (50') from any neighboring
residence. Fences or pens, corrals or similar enclosures must be of sufficient
height and strength to retain the animals. All structures, including sheds,
corrals, and stables, shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
consistent with the structures located on surrounding properties. Standings
under roofed stables or sheds, and pens or corrals, shall be provided with
proper drainage and shall not create offensive odors, fly breeding, and other
nuisances.
      d.   Adequate water supply must be provided.
F.   Contractor's Yard:
   1.   Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from
any residence, except for an owner's residence;
   2.   Will have screening fence around areas utilized for storage of
equipment; and
   3.   Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to
contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
G.   Day Care:
   1.   On-site vehicle pickup, parking and turnaround areas shall be provided
to ensure safe discharge and pickup of clients.
   2.   For day care centers and group day care facilities located in a
residential zone and/or adjoining an adjacent residence, the hours of operation
shall be between 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
   3.   Additional standards for day care facilities that serve children:
      a.   All outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a minimum
six-foot (6') fence to secure against exit/entry by small children and to
screen abutting properties.
      b.   Outdoor play equipment over six feet high, shall not be located in a
front yard or within any required yard.
      c.   Outdoor play areas in residential districts adjacent to an existing
residence shall not be used after dusk.
H.   Drive-Through Establishment:
   1. A drive-through establishment shall be oriented toward the side or rear
yards and not placed between the street right-of-way and the primary customer
entrance.
   2.   A six-foot (6') sight obscuring fence or equivalent landscaping shall
be provided where a stacking lane or window location adjoins a residential zone
or an adjacent residence.
   3.   Adequate trash receptacles shall be provided within an enclosed
structure.
   4.   The direction of night lighting shall be away from any other
properties.
   5.   Safe pedestrian and vehicle access and circulation on the site and
between adjacent properties shall be demonstrated as follows:
      a.    Access to the pedestrian customer shall be provided facing the
public right-of-way.
   b.    Stacking lanes shall have sufficient capacity to prevent obstruction
of the public right-of-way by patrons. The stacking lane shall be a separate
lane from the circulation lanes needed for access and parking.
   c.    The design and construction of the drive-through facilities shall
minimize the number of street accesses.
I.   Drive-In Restaurant:
   1.   Will be enclosed on the property line with landscaping and fencing,
except for ingress and egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other
properties;
   2.   Will have at least a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence along the
property lines that adjoin a residence;
   3.   Will provide for adequate trash receptacles; and
   4.   Will avoid the direction of night lighting toward any residence.
J.   Home Occupations:
   1.   Any use which changes or may change the character of the neighborhood
will not be permitted. The following uses shall not be permitted as home
occupations in residential zones:
      a.   Medical/dental office;
      b.   Motor vehicle and engine repair;
      c.   Painting or body work on vehicles, trailers, or boats;
      d.   Small engine repair;
      e.   Medical facilities for animals, including animal care or boarding
facilities;
      f.   Dispatch centers, where employees come to the site and are
dispatched to other locations;
      g.   Machine shop/metal working;
      h.   On-site retail sales;
      i.   Commercial food preparation, not including catering;
      j.   Contractors shops;
      k.   Mortuaries or funeral home;
      l.   Body piercing and/or painting, tattoo; and
      m.   Any business that requires storage or manufacturing of toxic or
hazardous materials, as a significant part of its business, including
ammunition or gunpowder.
   2.   An occupation which does not comply with the following criteria shall
not be deemed a “home occupation”:
      a.   No more than one (1) person other than members of the family
residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation;
      b.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or accessory
structure. A detached accessory structure shall be located in the rear or side
yard;
      c.   Not more than four hundred (400) square feet of the floor area of
the dwelling unit or accessory structure shall be used in the conduct of the
home occupation;
      d.   The appearance of the dwelling unit or accessory structure shall not
be altered and the occupation shall not be conducted in any manner that causes
the premises to deviate from its residential character, either by color,
materials or construction, lighting, signs, sound or noise vibrations, traffic
generation and parking requirements;
      e.   No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable or objectionable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation
is conducted in a single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or
cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises;
      f.   No storage of materials or supplies outdoors; and
      g.   A home occupation shall not involve the use of signs and/or
structures other than those permitted in the zone in which the property is
located.
   3.   Any existing home occupation with a current special use permit that
would violate paragraph 1., shall not be denied renewal solely on the grounds
it violates paragraph 1., provided it is otherwise in compliance with this
section.
K.   I. Manufactured Home:
   1.   Every manufactured home shall be composed of two (2) or more sections
and must enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet on a
single level.
   2.   Every manufactured home must be placed on an excavated and backfilled
foundation and must have an enclosed perimeter.
   3.   Every manufactured home shall have a pitched roof not less than three
feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
   4.   Every manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in
color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used in residential dwellings predominantly found in the
neighborhood in which it is located as determined by the building official of
the city.
   5.   Mobile homes rehabilitated in accordance with the provisions of Idaho
Code 44-2501 et seq., shall be regarded as manufactured homes for the purpose
of this title and the schedule of uses in this section.
   6.   Manufactured homes or rehabilitated mobile homes under Idaho Code 44-
2501 meeting all the requirements of this title, except for the size
requirement, may be placed in manufactured home or "mobile home parks" as
presently defined in section
15.24.010 of this code.
   7.   A mobile home not rehabilitated in accordance with Idaho Code 44-2501
et seq., shall not be placed within any zoning district of the city.
L.   Manufactured Home Park:
   1.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
   2.   All manufactured home parks will be required to install curb, gutter
and sidewalks on the exterior of the development and the interior lots of the
development; streets and walkways designed for the general use of the mobile
home park residents shall be lighted during all hours of darkness. Such
lighting shall not be under the control of the manufactured home occupant.
   3.   Each manufactured home site shall be marked for identification by
number. Such marker shall be with three inch (3") or larger numbers and must be
easily readable from the park street serving the lot;
   4.   Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future neighboring
uses;
   5.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage, refuse
disposal and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the
establishment of the proposed park shall be able to provide adequately any such
service;
   6.   Will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this title;
   7.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
streets or roads;
   8.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic
or historic features of major importance;
   9.   Will meet the minimum health standards as set forth by the Idaho state
department of health and welfare; and
   10.   Will have a minimum total area for the manufactured home park of five
(5) acres. A manufactured home shall not be located closer than fifteen feet
(15') from any other manufactured home or permanent building within the
manufactured home park. A manufactured home accessory building shall not be
closer than five feet (5') from a mobile home or building on an adjacent site.
M.   Recreational Vehicle Park:
   1.   All RV parks shall file an application for a special use permit
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 17.60.
   2.   Each RV Park shall be held in one ownership and shall contain at least
two (2) acres of land.
   3.   Each RV shall have its own RV space within the park and all RV spaces
shall be connected to central water and sewer systems. Dry RV spaces may be
allowed as long as water is provided on-site and sewer can be accommodated with
an on-site RV dump or by use of the City/Private off-site RV dumps.
   4.   All RV spaces shall be graveled or paved.
   5.   All internal streets and ways shall be private and shall be constructed
in accordance with the subdivision ordinance standards for private streets.
   6.   The RV park shall be adequately screened from view by a fence or
substantial landscaping from adjacent and nearby properties and public streets.
A landscape plan for the entire property shall be included as part of the
special use permit application.
   7.   Areas shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles. Such areas
shall accommodate at least the number of vehicles equal to the number of spaces
provided.
N.   Nursing Home or Care Facility shall be located adjacent to an arterial or
collector roadway in all zoning districts.
O.   Riding Academies And Stables:
   1.   All stables or loafing sheds will be located not nearer than three
hundred feet (300') from any residence, except for an owner's residence. All
facilities shall be set back a distance of thirty feet (30') from any property
line;
   2.   Will be designed and located with full consideration being given to
their proximity to adjacent uses and their effect upon adjacent and surrounding
properties, as to the storage of horse trailers, and the factors of noise and
odor; and
   3.   Will require that the owner or operator of such use shall have a
continuous obligation to maintain adequate sanitary practices and to prevent
the creation of a nuisance.
P.   Slaughterhouses Or Stockyards:
   1.   Shall not be permitted, or be allowed by special use permit, within the
city limits.
Q.   Vehicle Wrecking Yard Or Salvage:
   1.   Will be completely enclosed by a solid six foot (6') high or higher
sight obscuring fence;
   2.   Will not result in the storage of automobile, junk or salvage material
that is visible from any public right of way;
   3.   Will not result in the storage of automobiles that exceed the height of
the fence; and
   4.   Will have such landscaping that is appropriate with the surrounding
area. (Ord. 1238, 2025: Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord. 1184, 2020: Ord. 1158, 2016: Ord.
1115, 2013)
17.18.060: TEMPORARY USES:
A.   Setbacks: Structures and/or the display of merchandise shall comply with
the setback requirements of the district within which it is located.
B.   Site Layout:
   1.   Temporary structures and merchandise shall be displayed so as not to
interfere with the clear vision triangle. In no case shall items be displayed,
or business conducted within the public right of way, unless otherwise
authorized by the transportation authority.
   2.   Compressors, fans, pumps, and other motorized equipment shall be
located or shielded to reduce noise levels to adjoining properties.
   3.   Except for the construction of a temporary office for model home sales,
a maximum of one structure shall be allowed and may cover a maximum of five
hundred (500) square feet.
   4.   No use shall be located on a site in a way that would block a private
or public sidewalk.
C.   Parking and Access:
   1.   The use shall not displace the required off-street parking spaces or
loading areas of the permitted uses on the site.
   2.   The entrance and exit drives shall be designed to prevent traffic
hazards and nuisances.
   3.   All surfaces used for parking shall be constructed with paving,
vegetative cover or of dustless material.
D.   Limitations:
   1.   Except for the construction of an office for model home sales, the use
shall not result in the construction of any permanent structures that would not
otherwise be permitted subject to the provisions of this title.
   2.   Any temporary structures shall be portable and completely removed at
the end of the allowed time period.
   3.   Except as otherwise defined in this section, one temporary use is
allowed on a property for a specified period not exceeding two (2) weeks in any
twelve (12) month period from the date of issuance of a temporary use permit.
For seasonal stands or events, the temporary use permit shall specify a
beginning and end date.
E.   Site Maintenance:
   1.   The site shall be returned to a clean condition after the termination
of the use, including being free of debris and garbage.
   2.   Unsold food products, trees, greens, or debris generated by the use
shall be properly disposed of off the site.
F.   Additional Standards for Fireworks Stands:
   1.   Prohibited: The use shall be prohibited in residential districts.
   2.   Shall follow Jerome Municipal Code as outlined in
Chapter 8.24.
G.   Additional Standards for Model Home Sales and Construction Office:
   1.   The sales office shall be located on a lot within a subdivision or
planned unit development.
   2.   The sales shall be limited to the sale of lots and/or dwellings within
the development.
   3.   When required, the applicant or owner shall obtain a building permit to
convert the sales office to a dwelling or shall remove the sales office within
thirty (30) days of the sale or rent of the final lot or space.
   4.   Temporary buildings, construction trailers, equipment, and materials
may be permitted in any district during the period construction work is in
progress. Such temporary facilities or equipment shall be removed within sixty
(60) days of completion of the construction work.
H.   Additional Standards for Seasonal Sale of Agricultural and Food Products:
Such sales are limited to a period of time not to exceed two (2) consecutive
months for pumpkin and Christmas tree sales, and four (4) consecutive months
per calendar year for other uses. Christmas tree lots shall be removed by
January 1.
I.   Additional Standards for Arts, Entertainment or Recreation Event:
   1.   Events, such as festivals, carnivals, circuses, fairs, and amusement
rides may be allowed in any nonresidential district for a period not to exceed
two (2) weeks within any ninety (90) day period.
   2.   The Jerome City Police and Fire Department shall approve the location
and access for any use in this category.
J.   Additional Standards for Yard Sales:
   1.   No single yard sale shall exceed three (3) consecutive days in any
seven (7) consecutive days from its commencement to its end.
   2.   No more than six (6) separate yard sales may be conducted from any
residence, residential lot or lot upon which a residence may be constructed
within a single calendar year.
   3.   At the conclusion of each sale, all evidence of the sale must be
removed from the view of public streets.
   4.   It shall be unlawful to conduct a yard sale in violation of this
section. Any such violation shall be an infraction. (Ord. 1225, 2024: Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.18.070: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Applicability:
   1.   This article shall apply to all new development and to any change of
use of an existing building, structure or parcel of land in the following
zoning districts within the City of Jerome:
      a.   C-1 Neighborhood Business District;
      b.   C-2 General Business District;
      c.   C-3 High Density Business District;
      d.   CBD Central Business District;
      e.   M-1 Light Industrial District;
      f.   M-2 Heavy Industrial District; and
      g.   Any commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential use within
the Design Overlay District.
   2.   New commercial parking lots with twenty (20) spaces or more shall
comply with subsection B8 of this section.
   3.   Additions to commercial development greater than fifty percent (50%) of
the existing structure or developed area shall comply with this section.
   4.   Commercial or industrial parking lot replacement with twenty (20)
spaces or more, not including sealing, striping or repaving, that is greater
than fifty percent (50%) of the parking area shall comply with this section.
B.   Landscape Requirements For Site Design:
   1.   General Requirements:
      a.   All landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape designer or
landscape architect.
      b.   The landscape plan shall be submitted as part of an application for
design review, special use permit, variance, occupancy or building permit.
   2.   Uses/Buildings:
      a.   All new developments shall provide landscaping in accordance with
the requirements of this section.
      b.   Expansions And Alterations To Existing Buildings: The requirements
of this section shall apply to the expansion and alteration of existing
buildings when the project increases 50 percent (50%) or more in gross square
footage.
      c.   Change Of Use: The requirements of this section shall not be imposed
upon a change of use unless the property in question never complied (or no
longer complies) with the ordinance requirements in existence at the time of
approval or conditions of approval at the time of construction.
      d.   Existing Parking Lots:
         (1)   Twenty-six percent (26%) to fifty percent (50%) expansion or
replacement of the parking lot shall be required to replace and repair the
existing landscaping to previous approval standards and provide perimeter
landscaping.
         (2)   Fifty-one percent (51%) to one hundred percent (100%) expansion
or replacement of the parking lot shall comply with all requirements of this
section.
   3.   Waivers:
      a.   If the location of existing buildings or other structures prevents
conformance with the requirements of subsection B, of this section or its
implementation would create non-conformity of parking standards or other
special circumstances, the Planning and Zoning Administrator may grant a waiver
based on the following findings:
         (1)   That the requirements of subsection B. of this section are not
feasible due to existing development or circumstances regarding the property;
         (2)   That granting a waiver will not have a detrimental effect on
adjacent properties; and
         (3)   Granting a waiver will not be in conflict with past approvals
that required landscape improvements.
      b.   A letter requesting a waiver and reasons therefore, shall be
submitted at the time of application. Decisions of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission within
sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the Administrator's written decision.
   4.   Alternative Compliance:
      a.   Purpose: To provide for alternative means to meet the intended
purposes of the landscape requirements when explicit compliance is not feasible
or the alternative means are superior to what is required.
      b.   Process:
         (1)   A request for alternative compliance shall be submitted as part
of the building permit or zoning application process. The request will be
considered by the same approval body as the base application. The request shall
specify:
            (A)   The specific requirements that are proposed to be modified;
            (B)   The reasons for the modification; and
            (C)   A demonstration of how the alternative means for compliance
meets the requirements' intended purpose.
         (2)   Stormwater Swales: Stormwater swales within front setbacks can
be approved as staff level provided that the landscape plans approved by the
applicable approval body are not changed substantially and comply with
subsection B. of this section. A landscape plan with swale construction details
which incorporate the landscape design shall be submitted for staff level
review.
      c.   Standards: The proposed alternative means for compliance with
specific requirements shall demonstrate the alternative compliance provides an
equal or superior means of meeting the intent and purpose of this section.
      d.   Required Findings: In order to grant approval for an application for
alternative compliance, the approving department shall determine the following:
         (1)   Strict adherence or application of the requirements is not
feasible because one of the following exist:
            (A)   Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are
such that full compliance is impossible or impractical;
            (B)   The site involves space limitations or an unusually shaped
lot;
            (C)   Safety consideration;
            (D)   Other regulatory agencies or departments having jurisdiction
are requiring design standards that conflict with the requirements of this
section;
            (E)   The proposed design includes innovative design features or
other site designs that promote walkability or mixed-use neighborhoods; or
            (F)   Environmental quality benefits;
         (2)   Alternative compliance provides an equal or superior means for
meeting the requirements; and
         (3)   Alternative compliance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or adversely affect the uses and character of surrounding properties.
   5.   Minimum Design Standards And Requirements:
      a.   Xeriscaping is encouraged.
      b.   Approved Plant Material: Plans should use plants that will thrive in
this environment. Guidance regarding certain species that are routinely
approved may be obtained from the Planning and Zoning Administrator and/or the
City Arborist.
      c.   Minimum Plant Sizes:
 
Evergreen trees        Four foot (4') height minimum
Shade/Ornamental trees One and half inch (1.5") caliper minimum
Perennials             One (1) gallon pot minimum
Woody shrubs           One (1) gallon pot minimum
 
      d.   Trees:
         (1)   Spacing: For design flexibility, trees may be grouped together
or spaced evenly as desired. The landscape plan shall show trees at mature size
on the drawings and spacing shall be no closer than 80 percent (80%) of the
average mature width of the trees.
         (2)   When five (5) or more trees are to be planted to meet the
requirements of any portion of this section, a mix of species shall be
provided. The number of species to be planted shall vary according to the
overall number of trees required to be planted according to the chart below:
 
No. of Trees  Minimum Number of Species
5-10         2
11-30        3
31-50        4
50+             5
 
      e.   Mulch: Mulch shall be used in all required planting areas. Approved
mulches may be organic, such as bark or they may include rock products, such as
"permabark" or similar products. Use of mulch, organic or rock, as the only
ground cover in required planting areas is prohibited. Pea gravel, drain rock
under one and a half inches, road base gravel, and similar products shall not
be used as mulch. All mulch shall be contained by a curb or other edging
material to contain the mulch and prevent it from moving to bordering surfaces.
Impermeable plastic weed barriers under the mulch is prohibited. Within
stormwater facilities, mulch may not float.
      f.   Curbing: All planting areas that border driveways, parking lots and
other vehicle use areas shall be protected by curbing, wheel stops or other
protective devices. Such devices shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") from
tree trunks to prevent cars from damaging tree trunks.
      g.   Utilities: The following standards apply to the planting of trees
near existing utilities and to trenching for new utilities near existing trees:
         (1)   Overhead Utilities: For trees planted under or within ten (10)
lateral feet of any overhead utility wires, the landscape plan designer must
certify that the type of tree selected for that location will not grow to a
height so as to interfere with the overhead utility wires.
         (2)   Underground Utilities: All trees shall be planted outside of any
utility easement, unless written approval is obtained from the applicable
agency. All trees shall be planted outside of any easement that contains a city
sewer main, unless written approval is obtained from the City Engineer. If any
utility easement precludes trees required by this section, the width of the
required buffer shall be increased to accommodate the required trees.
         (3)   Trenching: New underground utilities shall be located outside of
the dripline of existing trees if trenched, or be tunneled a minimum of three
feet (3') below existing grade within the tree's dripline. Trenching within the
dripline of existing trees shall be done by hand, with care not to cut or
damage roots larger than two inches (2"). The guiding principle is that no root
two inches (2") or larger shall be cut. Note: This requirement is for placement
of new utilities and does not affect the city's or the utility's ability to
access existing utilities for repair, replacement and maintenance.
      h.   Berms: Berm slopes shall not exceed 3:1 (horizontal: vertical).
Slopes shall not exceed 4:1 on areas which require mowing.
      i.   Water Efficiency: The landscape plan shall provide for water
efficient landscaping as follows:
         (1)   Lawn Areas: Where appropriate and on sites where other landscape
options can be incorporated, large expanses of mown lawn are discouraged due to
its high water consumption. Lawn should not be treated as a fill-in material,
but rather as a functional or aesthetic element of the landscape. Mown lawn
should not be used in median strips, parking strips, or other difficult areas
to irrigate less than six feet (6') in width.
         (2)   Plant Selection And Location: Plants should be placed based on
adaptability to regional and micro climatic conditions. The use of native and
other low-water-use plants is encouraged. Plants having similar water needs
should be grouped together in distinct hydrazones, and spaced to minimize
watering needs while maximizing growth and spread of plants.
   6.   Irrigation:
      a.   Required: All landscape areas requiring irrigation shall be served
with an automatic underground irrigation system. Areas of landscaping which
will not require supplemental watering after initial establishment are not
required to have permanent irrigation.
      b.   Irrigation Water: Use of non-potable irrigation water is required
when determined to be available and adequate.
   7.   Perimeter Buffers
      a.   Street Buffers:
         (1)   Applicability: Landscape street buffers shall be required in all
multi-family residential, commercial and industrial zones. Street buffers shall
not be required in the Central Business District Zone in circumstances where a
landscape buffer would prevent the placement of a proposed building at the
allowed zero foot (0') front or street side setbacks.
         (2)   Size And Location: Landscape buffer widths along streets shall
be based on the required setbacks of the underlying zone. All required buffers
shall be maintained by the property owner.
         (3)   Street Trees: All required landscape street buffers shall be
planted with trees and shrubs, lawn or other vegetative groundcover, with a
minimum density of one (1) tree per forty lineal feet (40'). If this
calculation results in a fraction of one-half (.5) or greater, round up to an
additional tree. Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be spaced no
closer than eighty percent (80%) of the average mature width of the trees.
         (4)   Conifers Along Streets: Coniferous trees are allowed along
streets only within planting areas 20 feet (20') or greater in width.
         (5)   Tree Wells: Tree wells shall be a minimum of nine (9) square
feet in size in the sidewalk area. Root barriers are encouraged.
      b.   Side And Rear Perimeter Buffers:
         (1)   Applicability: Side and rear landscape buffers shall be required
for all multi-family residential, commercial and industrial developments.
         (2)   Size And Location: Landscape buffer widths shall be based on the
required setbacks of the underlying zone. All required side and rear buffers
shall be located within the property and shall be maintained by the property
owner.
         (3)   Parking Lot/Vehicular Use Area Buffers: If an interior side or
rear lot line is adjacent to a parking lot or other vehicular use area, such
as, but not limited to, vehicle sales areas, truck and bus parking areas and
driveways, the following standards shall apply:
            (A)   Landscaping: The perimeter landscape strip shall be planted
with one (1) tree per 40 lineal feet (40'). If this calculation results in a
fraction of one-half (.5) or greater, round up to an additional tree.
Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be spaced no closer than 80 percent
(80%) of the average mature width of the trees.
            (B)   Exceptions: Where two (2) properties have a shared access and
parking agreement that has been approved by the city, the above requirements
may be waived.
      c.   Buffers Between Different Land Uses:
         (1)   Applicability: Land use buffers shall be required along
contiguous property lines between residential uses and dissimilar uses such as
industrial and commercial. The buffers are required along the entire contiguous
property line. This section shall not apply to mixed use projects on contiguous
properties.
         (2)   Size: The minimum buffer width between land uses is based on the
required setbacks of the underlying zone.
         (3)   Buffer Materials: The materials within the required buffer
between incompatible land uses are regulated as follows:
            (A)   Mix Of Materials: All buffer areas shall be comprised of, but
not limited to, a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, lawn, or other
vegetative groundcover. A minimum of six foot (6') fences, walls and berms may
also be incorporated into the buffer area.
            (B)   Buffer Walls: Where existing or proposed adjacent land uses
cannot be adequately buffered with plant materials, the city may require
inclusion of a wall, fence, or other type of screen that mitigates noise and/or
unsightly uses. If a wall or fence six feet (6') tall is provided, the planting
requirement may be reduced to at least one (1) tree per forty lineal feet
(40'), plus shrubs, lawn, or other vegetative groundcover, in lieu of the
requirements of this section. Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be
spaced no closer than 80 percent (80%) of the average mature width of the
trees.
            (C)   Chain-link Fencing: Chain-link fencing does not qualify as a
screening material; therefore the buffer must still be landscaped, even if a
chain link fence is provided.
            (D)   Pedestrian Access: Landscaping and screens shall not
eliminate pedestrian access between commercial and residential districts.
   8.   Interior Parking Lot:
      a.   Applicability: Interior parking lot landscaping shall be required in
any parking lot with twenty (20) spaces or more, including vehicle sales lots.
      b.   Planter Size: Landscape planters shall be a minimum of eight feet
(8') in width for trees. Required parking lot planters shall be the length of
the adjacent parking space. Dimensions are measured inside curbs.
      c.   Parking Lot Layout: No linear grouping of parking spaces shall
exceed twenty (20) in a row, without an internal planter island. Interior
landscaping shall be used to delineate and guide major traffic movement within
the parking area. Terminal planters shall be provided at the ends of rows of
parking to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to aisles and
driveways. Interior landscape planters shall be spaced as evenly as feasible to
reduce the visual impact of long rows of parked cars.
      d.   Trees Required: Each interior planter that serves a single row of
parking spaces shall be landscaped with at least one (1) tree and shall be
covered with low shrubs or other vegetative groundcover. Each interior planter
that serves a double row of parking spaces shall have at least two (2) trees
and shall be covered with low shrubs or other vegetative groundcover. Deciduous
shade trees must be pruned to a minimum height of eight feet (8') above the
adjacent parking areas. Evergreen trees are prohibited in interior planters.
      e.   Industrial Exclusion: Industrial parking, storage, and loading areas
are specifically excluded from the interior landscape requirements, but shall
meet all perimeter and right-of-way landscape and screening requirements.
      f.   Snow removal and storage shall be accommodated when developing a
landscape plan to minimize damage to plants and to compliment the stormwater
management design.
C.   Landscape Approval: Before issuance of the final certificate of occupancy,
the Building Official along with the Administrator or their respective
designees, shall certify the landscape is what was approved.
D.   Extension Of Time For Installation:
   1.   Upon recommendation of the Administrator, a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed one hundred
eighty (180) days when:
      a.   Due to weather or other circumstances, the landscaping or other
required site amenities cannot be completed; and
      b.   The applicant has provided a surety to the city for the required
improvements.
E.   Landscape Maintenance:
   1.   Applicability: The requirement for landscape maintenance applies in all
zones where landscaping has been required.
   2.   Standards:
      a.   The property owner, occupant, user or person in charge or control of
any property shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping and
screening devices required by this section.
      b.   Topping any street tree required by this section is prohibited. For
trees not within street right-of-way, alternative pruning techniques to achieve
specific horticultural or aesthetic effects may be used if approved by the City
Arborist. Examples include pleached allee, pleached bosque, espalier, and
pollarded canopy.
      c.   Tree grates shall be widened to accommodate the growing tree trunk
and prevent girdling of any tree planted in tree wells within sidewalks or
other public right-of-way.
      d.   Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease, and/
or damage shall be appropriately treated to correct the problem. Dead plant
materials shall be replaced within thirty (30) calendar days of notification
from the city.
      e.   All landscaping required by this subsection may be subject to
periodic inspections by city officials to determine compliance or to
investigate.
      f.   Violations of this section shall be subject to Chapter 8.08 Nuisance
of the City of Jerome Municipal Code. (Ord. 1191, 2020)
CHAPTER 17.22
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES, SPIRES, POLES, ANTENNAS, STEEPLES, TOWERS, AND
OTHER SUCH STRUCTURES
SECTION:
17.22.010: Purpose
17.22.020: Towers In Zoning Districts
17.22.030: Collocation Requirements
17.22.040: Tower And Antenna Design Requirements
17.22.050: Tower Setbacks
17.22.060: Tower Lighting, Signage, And Attachments
17.22.070: Amateur Radio Antennas
17.22.080: Accessory Utility Buildings
17.22.090: Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers
17.22.095: Priorities
17.22.100: Additional Application Submittal Requirements
17.22.110: Permits
17.22.120: Additional Requirements For Notice Of Public Hearing
17.22.130: Restricted Areas
17.22.010: PURPOSE:
A.   To accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while
protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community,
regulations regarding personal wireless facilities, spires, poles, antennas,
steeples, towers, and other such structures are necessary in order to:
   1.   Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the city;
   2.   Minimize adverse visual effects of spires, poles, antennas, steeples,
towers, and other such structures through careful design and siting standards;
   3.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from spire, pole,
antenna, steeple, tower, and other such structures' failure, through structural
standards and setback requirements; and
   4.   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the
number of towers needed to serve the community. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.22.020: TOWERS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
A.   Residential (R) Districts:
   1.   On residentially zoned parcels, towers supporting amateur radio
antennas shall not be permitted in the front, side or street side yard.
   2.   Personal wireless facilities shall be prohibited in all residential (R)
zones.
B.   PS (Public/Semipublic) District:
   1.   Wireless antennas may be permitted to be attached to existing light
standards and power line support devices (or replacement equivalent of same
height) provided, however, the antenna(s) are either flush mounted or mounted
in a manner that provide minimum visual impact. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
all provisions of this subsection shall be applicable to wireless antennas
located on existing light standards and power line support devices. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.22.030: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower
in excess of thirty five feet (35') in height shall not be approved unless the
commission finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed
tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building
within the following radius of the proposed tower:
   1.   A two (2) mile radius for towers with a height over one hundred ten
feet (110').
   2.   A one mile radius for towers with a height over eighty feet (80') but
not more than one hundred ten feet (110').
   3.   A one-half (1/2) mile radius for towers with a height over fifty feet
(50') but not more than eighty feet (80').
   4.   A one-fourth (1/4) mile radius for towers with a height over thirty
five feet (35') but not more than fifty feet (50').
B.   It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed
tower or antenna cannot be accommodated on an approved tower or building within
the required search radius due to one or more of the following reasons:
   1.   Unwillingness of another tower or facility owner to entertain shared
use.
   2.   The proposed collocation of an existing tower or facility would be in
violation of any local, state or federal law.
   3.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
   4.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
   5.   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
   6.   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, or other
professional qualified to provide necessary documentation.
C.   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both
the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2)
additional users if the tower is over one hundred ten feet (110') in height,
for at least one additional user if the tower is over fifty feet (50') in
height.
D.   Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon
the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
E.   Personal wireless facilities proposed at a location which has an approved
special use permit (approved after the effective date hereof) for an existing
facility which was required to allow collocation shall not be required to
obtain a separate special use permit as long as all the requirements of the
previously approved special use permit will be complied with. Design review,
and subsequent building permit, will be required for any such proposal. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.22.040: TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A.   All personal wireless facilities shall be required to obtain design review
approval prior to construction.
B.   Towers and antennas shall be required to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities
such as the federal aviation administration.
C.   Personal wireless facility towers shall be of a monopole design unless the
commission determines that an alternative design would better blend into the
surrounding environment.
D.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and
connection lines approved by the issuing authority, no part of any antenna or
tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with
either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right of way,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
E.   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage
climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons. The climbing pegs within the
bottom twenty feet (20') of the tower shall be removed and shall only be used
when the tower is being serviced.
F.   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant
material.
G.   Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.22.050: TOWER SETBACKS:
A.   Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with the
exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers may encroach into the
rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another
industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
B.   If the tower does not exceed the height limitations of the zone in which
it is located, the tower shall meet the setback requirement of the zone of this
section. If the tower exceeds the height limit of the zone in which it is
located, the tower shall be set back one foot (1') for every ten feet (10') in
total tower height. In either case, the tower shall be constructed to the
Telecommunications Industry Association/Electronic Industries Association (TIA/
EIA) 222 revision F standard entitled "Structural Standards For Steel Antenna
Supporting Structures" or as hereinafter may be amended. Otherwise, the tower
shall be located a minimum of one foot (1') for each foot of height from all
property lines (the fall zone). No storage or structures other than the
accessory utility buildings, are permitted in the fall zone, except as may be
specifically permitted by the commission through a special use process.
C.   Towers shall be set back from all existing public right of way lines (or
planned right of way lines if additional height is to be acquired in the
future) by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the tower including
all antennas and attachments. If this requirement conflicts with other setback
requirements of this code the setback with the greater distance shall prevail,
except as may be allowed in subsection E of this section.
D.   Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public
street.
E.   A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public
street varied, at the sole discretion of the commission, to allow the
integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church
steeple, light standard, power line support device, or similar structure. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.22.060: TOWER LIGHTING, SIGNAGE, AND ATTACHMENTS:
A.   No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way,
except during time of repair or installation, any stationary lights, strobe
lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device, except as
specifically required by the federal aviation administration, federal
communications commission, or other federal or state authority.
B.   When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached
to the tower if approved by the commission.
C.   The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning or
equipment information signs, is prohibited.
D.   No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way,
any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of
construction or repair. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.22.070: AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS:
A.   In accordance with the federal communications commission's preemptive
ruling PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting amateur
radio antennas may exceed thirty feet (30') in height provided that a
determination is made by the city that the proposed tower height is technically
necessary to successfully engage in amateur radio communications. A special use
permit is required for any amateur radio antenna in excess of thirty five feet
(35'). (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.22.080: ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS:
A.   All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower are required to
have design review approved by the city prior to construction. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.22.090: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS:
As a condition of approval of any required special use permit for personal
wireless facilities, all abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities
shall be required to be removed within sixty (60) days of cessation of use as a
personal wireless facility unless a time extension is granted by the city. A
copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the applicant
to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of the use as a
personal wireless facility, shall be submitted at the time of application. In
the event that the tower and associated facilities are not removed within the
sixty (60) days, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the city
and the costs of removal assessed against the property. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.22.095: PRIORITIES:
A.   Priority Of Location: The following establishes the order of priorities
for locating new communications facilities:
   1.   Place antennas and towers in districts zoned light industrial (M-1).
   2.   Place antennas and towers in districts zoned central business district
(CBD) which do not adjoin or adversely impact residential neighborhoods.
   3.   Place antennas on appropriate existing structures, such as buildings,
communications towers, water towers, and smokestacks in other zoned districts.
   4.   Place antennas and towers on other private nonresidential property.
   5.   Place antennas and towers in residential districts only if locations
for which a need has been demonstrated are not available on existing structures
or in nonresidential districts.
   6.   Place antennas and towers on public property.
An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a residential
zoning district shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to
locate the proposed communications facilities on a government structure, a
private institutional structure, or other appropriate existing structures
within a nonresidential zoning district, and that due to valid considerations
including physical constraints, and economic or technological feasibility, no
appropriate location is available. The telecommunications company is required
to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures within a one
mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna
on those structures, and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. The
information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be
served by the tower, its relationship to other antenna sites in the applicant's
network, and an evaluation of existing buildings taller than twenty feet (20'),
communications towers and water tanks within one mile of the proposed tower.
B.   Priority Of Users: Priority for the use of city owned land for antennas
and towers will be given to the following entities in descending order:
   1.   City of Jerome;
   2.   Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and ambulance
services, which are not part of the city and private entities with a public
safety agreement with the city;
   3.   Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public
safety; and
   4.   Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and
similar services that are marketed to the general public.
C.   Minimum Requirements: The placement of antennas or towers on city owned
property must comply with the following requirements:
   1.   The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the
city owned property is intended;
   2.   The antennas or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding
private property;
   3.   The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and
commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use
of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fees shall be
established by the council after considering comparable rates in other cities,
potential expenses, risks to the city, and other appropriate factors;
   4.   The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or
other security acceptable to the city to cover the costs of antenna or tower's
removal;
   5.   The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have a
higher priority as discussed in subsection B of this section;
   6.   Upon reasonable notice, the antennas or tower may be required to be
removed at the user's expense;
   7.   The applicant must reimburse the city for any costs which it incurs
because of the presence of the applicant's antennas or tower;
   8.   The user must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and
   9.   The applicant will cooperate with the city's objective to promote
collocations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested.
D.   Special Requirements: The use of certain city owned property, such as
water tower sites, for antennas or towers brings with it special concerns due
to the unique nature of these sites. The placement of antennas or towers on
these special city owned sites will be allowed only when the following
additional requirements are met:
   1.   Water Tower Or Reservoir Sites: The city's water towers and reservoirs
represent a large public investment in water pressure stabilization and peak
capacity reserves. Protection of the quality of the city's water supply is of
prime importance to the city. As access to the city's water storage systems
increases, so too increases the potential for contamination of the public water
supply. For these reasons, the placement of antennas or towers on water tower
or reservoir sites will be allowed only when the city is fully satisfied that
the following requirements are met:
      a.   The applicant's access to the facility will not increase the risks
of contamination to the city's water supply;
      b.   There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds to
accommodate the applicant's facility;
      c.   The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or
reservoir maintenance cost to the city; and
      d.   The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health of
workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir.
E.   Application Process: All applicants who wish to locate an antenna or tower
on city owned property must submit to the administrator a completed application
and detailed plan that complies with the submittal requirements of this
chapter, this title, and other provisions of this code, along with other
pertinent information requested by the city.
F.   Termination: The council may cancel any lease if it determines that any
one of the following conditions exist:
   1.   A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate
location and the potential use would be incompatible with the existing use;
   2.   A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users
of higher priority, regardless of whether or not this interference was
adequately predicted in the technical analysis; or
   3.   A user violates any of the standards in this chapter or the conditions
attached to the city's lease or other authorization.
Before acting, the city will provide notice to the user of the intended
termination and the reasons for it, and provide an opportunity for the user to
address the council regarding the proposed action. This procedure need not be
followed in emergencies.
G.   Reservation Of Right: Notwithstanding the above, the council reserves the
right to deny, for any reason, the use of any or all city owned property by any
one or all applicants. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.22.100: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A.   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this title,
development applications for personal wireless facilities, shall include the
following supplemental information:
   1.   Documentation from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
showing that the proposed facility will be in compliance with the FCC standards
regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
   2.   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which
describes the tower height and design (including a cross section and
elevation); documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas; describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate; documents what steps the applicant will take
to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications;
includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and includes other
information necessary to evaluate the request.
   3.   For all personal wireless facilities, a letter of intent committing the
tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower, as
required by this code, if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   4.   Documentation showing that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the federal aviation administration.
   5.   Written approval of the site location with specific reference to the
height of the antenna structure and any lighting issues, from the federal
aviation administration, the chief of the Idaho bureau of aeronautics, and the
Boise airport commission and an aviation easement approved by the Boise airport
commission.
   6.   Propagation charts showing existing and proposed transmission coverage
at the subject site and within an area large enough to provide an understanding
of why the facility needs to be in the chosen location.
   7.   A written analysis demonstrating that the proposed site is the most
appropriate site within the immediate area. For the purposes of this
subsection, the analysis shall include all properties within the search radii
stated above. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      a.   Description of the surrounding area, including topography;
      b.   Natural and manmade impediments that would obstruct adequate
cellular telephone transmissions;
      c.   Physical site constraints that would preclude construction of a
cellular telephone facility on any other site;
      d.   Technical limitations of the system that limit siting options. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.22.110: PERMITS:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reerect, or
replace, any tower without first making application to the city and securing a
building/zoning permit.
B.   A building/zoning permit shall not be required for antennas and/or towers
erected temporarily for test purposes, for emergency communication, or for
broadcast remote pick up operations. Temporary antennas shall be permitted for
a maximum of seventy two (72) hours unless specifically approved otherwise by
the commission.
C.   In addition to the findings required and conditions permitted for special
use permits, in
chapter 17.60 of this title, the commission shall make an additional finding
concerning the duration of the special use permit. Upon finding that the
special use permit is to be limited in duration, a condition limiting the
duration and the basis for such a condition shall be included within the
findings of fact and conclusions of law for the special use permit. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.22.120: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
A.   All personal wireless facilities requiring a special use permit shall
comply with the special use notice requirements within this code with the
following additional requirements:
   1.   All property owners within five hundred feet (500') of an R-1, R-2, R-
3, R-M and C-1, C-2, C-3, CBD, NS seven hundred fifty feet (750') BP, PS, MU,
AB, one thousand feet (1,000') and M-1, M-2 one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of all property lines of the site (or lease boundary lines, if
applicable) shall be notified of the public hearing by the city, by mail, a
minimum of fifteen (15) days before the scheduled public hearing. The applicant
will be required to provide the names of the property owners to the city.
   2.   Any required public notice signs, to be located on a proposed site,
shall be required to comply with the requirements for posting of a rezone/
subdivision (minimum size of sign face to be 4 feet wide by 4 feet high). (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.22.130: RESTRICTED AREAS:
A.   Telecommunications towers in excess of thirty five feet (35') in height
shall not be permitted within the "restricted area for telecommunications
towers" as shown on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.26
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
17.26.010: Interpretation Of Provisions
17.26.020: Application Of Provisions
17.26.030: Design And Maintenance
17.26.040: Location Of Parking Spaces
17.26.050: Site Lighting
17.26.060: Access
17.26.070: Striping
17.26.080: Screening And/Or Landscaping
17.26.090: Wheel Blocks
17.26.100: Off Street Parking Design And Dimension Tables
17.26.110: Handicapped Parking
17.26.120: Reduction For Planter Overhangs
17.26.130: Joint/Collective Parking Facilities
17.26.140: Parking Disabled Vehicles
17.26.150: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
17.26.160: Additional Loading Space Regulations And Requirements
17.26.010: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following shall govern:
A.   Parking spaces for other permitted or special uses not listed herein shall
be determined by the administrator. Among the factors for determining the
number of spaces to be required for a use not listed herein, the administrator
shall compare the proposed use with a use which has similar traffic generating
characteristics as outlined in the most recent version of the Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation" manual.
B.   Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.26.020: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A.   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered, or its
use changed unless permanently maintained off street parking and loading spaces
have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this title.
B.   The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use,
shall not apply to any existing building or structure. Where a new use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such spaces as
may be required by this title.
C.   Whenever a building, structure, or use, constructed or changed in use
after the effective date hereof, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number
of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise to
create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces per this
title, additional parking spaces shall be provided so that the existing
building, structure, or use, and proposed enlargement or change in use, shall
then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
D.   If more than one use is located on the site, the number of off street
parking spaces shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed for
each use unless a joint/collective parking facility is approved as provided for
in section
17.26.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.030: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
A.   Paving: The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth in
this chapter, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas,
shall be improved with material such as asphalt or concrete, to provide a
durable and dust free surface. Gravel or dirt surfaces shall not be permitted.
B.   Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage
of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent properties
or walkways. Drainage plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city
engineer.
C.   Access: Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be
located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be
clearly visible by a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access driveway
from a public or private street.
D.   Maintenance: The owner of property used for parking and/or loading shall
maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust, trash
and other debris.
E.   Compact Spaces: A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the total spaces
provided may be designed, designated and used for compact size vehicles. The
minimum standards for compact vehicle spaces and driveways are set forth in
section
17.26.100 of this chapter. Compact spaces shall be located along the perimeter
of the parking lot or in those areas most distant from the structure or use
being served. Parking areas immediately adjacent to or within close proximity
to the building entrances shall be designated for standard (full size) spaces.
Compact spaces shall be clearly marked as such on the pavement or curb. Surplus
parking spaces (those spaces that exceed the minimum number required by this
title) shall also comply with the thirty percent (30%) maximum per total number
of spaces permitted for compact spaces. The allowed percentage of compact
spaces may only be increased by special use approval from the city council.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.040: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
A.   The following regulations shall govern the location of off street parking
spaces and areas:
   1.   Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on
the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve.
   2.   Parking spaces for retail or customer parking for commercial,
industrial, or public/semipublic uses shall be located not more than seven
hundred feet (700') from the principal use measured along the sidewalk, or
walkway available for public use, from the primary entrance of the principal
use to the furthest parking space within the parking lot.
   3.   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential uses
shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the principal use
measured along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use, from the
primary entrance of the principal use to the furthest parking space within the
parking lot.
   4.   Parking spaces for employee parking on a daily basis where the vehicle
is used occasionally, regardless of the nature of employment, shall be located
not more than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') from the principal use
measured along the sidewalk, or walkway available for public use, from the
primary entrance of the principal use to the furthest parking space within the
parking lot.
   5.   When off site parking is provided, a directional sign shall be erected
on the premises and shall advise the public of the distance and direction to
the off site parking area. Any such sign shall conform to applicable
requirements of
chapter 17.32 of this title, and at a minimum shall be approved in writing by
the administrator prior to installation.
B.   No part of any parking area for more than ten (10) vehicles shall be
closer than twenty feet (20') to any dwelling unit, school, or hospital or
other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot, unless separated
by an acceptably designed screen. If on the same lot with a one-family
residence, the parking area shall be located and screened as required by the
design review board. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.050: SITE LIGHTING:
A.   All parking areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B.   Any lights used to illuminate a site shall be arranged to reflect the
light away from the adjoining property.
C.   All site lighting shall be recessed or shielded to direct all light
downward and the source of the light (including the lamp and any nonopaque
material/lens covering the lamp) shall not be directly visible by a person of
average height standing on the property line of any public right of way, or any
private street, or on the property line of any residentially zoned parcel of
land or parcel of land used for residential purposes.
D.   When historic style light pole fixtures designed such that the portion of
the fixture housing the light bulb is to be exposed as a design element of the
light fixture are approved, shielding shall only be required so the light is
not directly visible by a person of average height standing on the property
line of any residentially zoned parcel of land or parcel of land used for
residential purposes. The light used shall be one hundred fifty (150) watt high
pressure sodium and the light fixture shall be provided with optics to direct
light downward.
E.   Light pole fixtures shall have a maximum height of:
   1.   Twenty feet (20') for parking lots with less than two hundred (200)
spaces;
   2.   Twenty five feet (25') for parking lots with more than two hundred
(200) spaces but less than five hundred (500) spaces;
   3.   Thirty feet (30') for parking lots with more than five hundred (500)
spaces;
   4.   Fifteen feet (15') for any pole within fifty feet (50') of a property
line of any residentially zoned parcel of land or parcel of land used for
residential purposes.
F.   Except as may be noted within this section, low pressure sodium lights, or
two hundred fifty (250) watt maximum high pressure sodium lights, shall be the
only type of site lighting permitted.
G.   Metal halide lighting shall be permitted with the following additional
conditions:
   1.   Light wattage shall be a maximum of three hundred twenty (320) watts.
   2.   The light fixture shall be no higher than seventeen feet (17').
   3.   The design review board shall make the following findings prior to
approving metal halide lighting:
      a.   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area; and
      b.   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
   4.   Historic style light pole fixtures designed such that the portion of
the fixture housing the light bulb is exposed as a design element of the light
fixture shall not be permitted to have metal halide lighting.
H.   Existing lighting, for a site which is a part of any application, shall be
changed to comply with applicable provisions of this code and any city adopted
codes.
I.   Lighting plans shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator
prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit.
J.   Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraphs of this section, the
administrator shall have the discretion to approve a lighting plan that meets
the following criteria:
   1.   The plan proposes to use LED or other energy efficient lamps.
   2.   The lumens of the proposed lamps shall not exceed the lumens roughly
equivalent to a three hundred twenty (320) watt metal halide fixture.
   3.   All lamps used to illuminate a site shall be arranged to reflect the
light away from any adjoining property.
   4.   Light poles shall have a maximum height of seventeen feet (17') when
adjacent to a residential zone and twenty feet (20') when adjacent to a
commercial and/or industrial zone.
   5.   All lighting shall be recessed or shielded to direct all light
downward. The lighting shall be constructed in a manner so that at any point
along the property line, the lighting does not exceed 0.1 foot-candle.
   6.   The lighting shall be installed, operated, and maintained to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area.
   7.   The lighting will not be disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses. (Ord. 1128, 2014: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.060: ACCESS:
A.   Any parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any vehicle
leaving or entering the parking area from or onto a public or private street
shall be traveling in a forward motion. This requirement does not apply to
public alleyways. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.070: STRIPING:
A.   All parking areas with a capacity over twelve (12) vehicles shall be
provided with standard parking space striping between spaces to facilitate the
movement into and out of the parking spaces. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.080: SCREENING AND/OR LANDSCAPING:
A.   Whenever a parking area is located in or adjacent to a residential
district, it shall be effectively screened on all sides which adjoin or face
any property used for residential purposes by an acceptably designed wall,
fence, or planting screen. Such wall, fence, or planting screen shall not be
less than or more than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained in good
condition. The space between such fence, wall or planting screen and the lot
line of the adjoining premises in any residential district shall be landscaped
with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover, and maintained in good
condition. In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that
the erection of such wall, fence, or planting screen will not serve the
intended purpose, then no such wall, fence, or planting screen and landscaping
shall be required.
B.   The landscaping of parking lots is required pursuant to section 17.18.070.
(Ord. 1070, 2010: Ord. 1191, 2020)
17.26.090: WHEEL BLOCKS:
A.   Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel blocks or other
suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a parked vehicle
from extending beyond the property line. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.100: OFF STREET PARKING DESIGN AND DIMENSION TABLES:
A.   Standard vehicles:
 
                                              Parking Angle
                                              45°    60°    90°    Parallel
Width of parking space                        9 feet  9 feet  9 feet  9 feet
Curb length per space                         19 feet 19 feet 19 feet 23 feet
Length of parking space (measurement to be
perpendicular from the curb or front of space 19 feet 19 feet 19 feet 23 feet
if no curb is provided)
Width of driveway aisle                       13 feet 17 feet 24 feet 12 feet
 
B.   Compact vehicles:
 
                                              Parking Angle
                                              45°    60°    90°    Parallel
Width of parking space                        8 feet  8 feet  8 feet  8 feet
Curb length per space                         11 feet 9 feet  8 feet  19 feet
Length of parking space (measurement to be
perpendicular from the curb or front of space 11 feet 14 feet 15 feet 19 feet
if no curb is provided)
Width of driveway aisle                       12 feet 15 feet 22 feet  
 
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.110: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
Handicapped spaces shall be twelve feet by nineteen feet (12' x 19') or two (2)
eight feet by nineteen feet (8' x 19'), separated by a five foot (5') aisle.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.120: REDUCTION FOR PLANTER OVERHANGS:
When a parking space abuts a landscape planter, the front two feet (2') of the
required length for a parking space may overhang the planter. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.130: JOINT/COLLECTIVE PARKING FACILITIES:
A.   Off street parking spaces required by this chapter for any specific use
shall not be considered as providing parking spaces for any other use except
where a joint/collective parking facility has been approved pursuant to the
following:
   1.   The applicant shall show that:
      a.   There is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of
the building, structure or use for which the joint/collective parking facility
is proposed;
      b.   The peak hours of parking demand from the uses shall not coincide so
that the peak demand will be more than the parking required;
      c.   The shared parking spaces shall serve the uses without conflict;
      d.   The adequacy of the quantity and efficiency of parking provided will
equal or exceed the level that can be expected if a joint/collective parking
facility was not requested; and
      e.   If a public transit system serves the area, the applicant may
provide documentation showing that the parking demand will be reduced.
   2.   The proposed reduction of required spaces, applicable to each use,
shall be shown by the applicant.
   3.   The city may require the applicant to submit survey data, or additional
documentation substantiating a request for a joint/collective parking facility.
   4.   The joint/collective parking facility may be on a site other than the
site where the use is located, but shall be located no further than that
permitted by this section.
   5.   The spaces to be provided shall be available as long as the uses
requiring the spaces are in operation.
   6.   The parties concerned in the joint/collective parking facility shall
submit a written agreement in a form to be recorded for such joint/collective
use, approved by the city attorney as to form and content, and such agreement,
when approved as conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the
zoning administrator prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit, or prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. The agreement
shall include:
      a.   A guarantee that there will be no substantial alteration in the uses
that will create a greater demand for parking;
      b.   A guarantee among the landowners for access to a use of the joint/
collective parking facility;
      c.   A provision that the city may require parking facilities in addition
to those originally approved upon findings by the council that adequate parking
to serve the uses has not been provided;
      d.   A provision stating that the council, may for due cause and upon
notice and hearing, unilaterally modify, amend, or terminate the agreement at
any time; and
      e.   Any other information required to be documented on such agreement by
the city in an effort to assure compliance with this title.
   7.   The zoning administrator may permit a maximum reduction in the number
of spaces to be provided not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the sum of the
number of spaces required for each use only if the provisions of this chapter
have been met. The maximum allowable reduction in the number of spaces to be
provided shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the sum of the number
required for each use served unless a special use is approved by the council.
   8.   No use shall be continued if the parking is removed from a joint/
collective parking facility unless substitute parking facilities are provided.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.140: PARKING DISABLED VEHICLES:
The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential or commercial district
for a period of more than two (2) weeks shall be prohibited unless such vehicle
is stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.150: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Parking spaces for other permitted or special uses not listed herein shall
be determined by the administrator. Among the factors for determining the
number of spaces to be required for a use not listed herein, the administrator
shall compare the proposed use with a use which has similar traffic generating
characteristics as outlined in the most recent version of the Institute Of
Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation" and/or "Parking Generation"
manuals.
B.   For the purpose of this title, the following space requirements shall
apply:
Type Of Use Off Street Parking Spaces Required
Type Of Use                              Off Street Parking Spaces Required
Residential:                              
                                         For each unit with 2 or more bedrooms
                                         - 2, for each 1 bedroom or studio unit
                                         - 1.5 including 0.25 spaces per unit
 Apartments or multi-family dwellings   shall be provided for guest parking.
                                         Adjacent on street parking spaces on a
                                         local street may be credited toward
                                         the guest parking requirement
  Boarding houses, lodging houses,       1 for each sleeping room or 1 for each
 dormitories and fraternity houses      permanent occupant, whichever number
  which have sleeping rooms              is greater
                                         For each unit - 2 including 0.25
                                         spaces per unit shall be provided for
 Manufactured home park                 guest parking. Adjacent on street
                                         parking spaces on a local street may
                                         be credited toward the guest parking
                                         requirement
 Mobile home court (RV)                 1 for each trailer/RV space
 Single-family dwelling (lots less than 2
  15,000 square feet)
 Single-family dwelling (lots 15,000    2
  square feet or more)
 Two-family dwelling                    For each unit - 2
Commercial:                               
                                         1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
 Ambulance services                     area; and 1 per employee plus 2
                                         enclosed ambulance storage spaces
 Artist studios                         1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
                                         area and 1 per employee
 Auction facility                       As required with special use permit
 Auditoriums, sports arenas, theaters   1 for each 3 seats
  and similar uses
                                         1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
 Automobile washing facility            area of sales, office, or lounge area;
                                         plus queue for 3 cars per washing
                                         station
  Automotive gas station/service shop or 1 for each 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for
 fuel islands                           each service bay (spaces in front of
                                         bays or pumps shall not be counted)
  Automotive, mobile home, travel        1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
 trailer, and/or farm implement sales   area; plus 1 per 500 square feet
                                         outdoor display and 1 per employee
 Automotive repair shop, body shop, or  1 per 225 square feet of gross floor
  tire shop                              area and 1 per employee
                                         1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
 Automotive storage                     area of office space; plus 1 per 1,000
                                         square feet of gross storage area
                                         1 for each 200 square feet of gross
 Banks/financial institutions           floor area; and 1 per employee plus
                                         queue for 4 cars per drive-up window
                                         4 for each alley or lane, plus 1
 Bowling alleys                         additional for each 100 square feet of
                                         the area used for restaurant, cocktail
                                         lounge, arcade area or similar use
 Catering service                       1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Childcare - daycare center             3 for each classroom but not less than
                                         9 for the building
 Childcare - family                     2
 Childcare - group                      2
 Churches and other places of religious 1 for each 4 seats
  assembly
 Clinic                                 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Club or lodge                          1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Communication facilities               1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
 Convenience store                      1 per 250 square feet gross floor
                                         area; plus 1 for each 2 gasoline pumps
 Dance floors, skating rinks            1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Detention facilities                   As specified by special use permit
 Emergency healthcare                   1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
                                         1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
 Emergency services                     area; plus minimum of 2 enclosed
                                         vehicle storage spaces
                                         1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
 Equipment rental and sales yard        area; plus 1 per 500 square feet
                                         outdoor display
 Food and beverage sales                1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Health clubs, spas, and weight         1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
  reduction salons                       area
 Home and business services             1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Hospitals                              1 for each bed
 Hotels, motels                         1 for each sleeping room, plus 1 for
                                         each 2 employees
 Kennel                                 1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Laboratories                           1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Laundromat                             1 per 300 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
                                         1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
 Laundry                                area; plus queue for 3 cars per drive-
                                         up window
                                         1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
 Maintenance and repair services        area; plus 1 per 500 square feet of
                                         outdoor storage area
 Mortuaries, funeral parlors, and       1 per 4 seats
  similar type uses
                                         1 per 500 square feet of outside
 Nursery, plant materials               display/lathe house/greenhouse area,
                                         plus 1 per 250 square feet gross floor
                                         area
  Nursing/convalescent homes,
 sanatoriums, children's homes, asylums 1 for each 2 beds
  and similar uses
 Offices, business and professional     1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Offices, medical and dental            1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
                                         1 for each 4 persons' capacity, plus 1
 Outdoor swimming pools, public or      for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30
  community or club                      square feet floor area used for
                                         seating purposes, whichever is greater
 Pawnshops                              1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Personal improvement                   1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Personal services                      1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Printing and/or blueprinting           1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
                                         1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
 Restaurant with drive-through          area; plus queue space for 5 cars for
                                         drive-up service
  Restaurants, dining rooms, taverns,    1 per 150 square feet of gross floor
 nightclubs, etc.                       area; plus 1 per 35 square feet dance
                                         floor
 Retail sales not listed under another  1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
  use classification                     area
 Retail sales of large items such as    1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
  furniture and appliances               area
 Riding academies/stables               1 per 4 stalls
                                         1 per 400 square feet gross floor area
 Shop (and/or yard), contractors        of shop; plus 1 per 1,000 square feet
                                         of gross storage area (indoor and
                                         outdoor)
 Storage (enclosed building and/or      1 per 1,000 square feet of gross
  fenced area)                           storage area
 Tennis and racquetball clubs           3 per court
 Travel services                        1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
 Vet clinic (animal hospital)           1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
                                         area
Industrial:                               
                                         1 per 1,000 square feet gross storage
 Automotive wrecking yard or salvage    area; plus 1 per 300 square feet
                                         office or sales area
                                         1 per 1,000 square feet gross area
 Industry (custom)                      used for industrial purposes; plus 1
                                         per 300 square feet office or sales
                                         area
                                         1 per 750 square feet of gross floor
 Industry (limited)                     area used for industrial purposes;
                                         plus 1 per 300 square feet office or
                                         sales area
 Industry (research and development)    1 per 500 square feet
                                         1 per 500 square feet gross area used
 Manufacturing facilities and           for manufacturing/processing; plus 1
  processing plants                      per 300 square feet office or sales
                                         area
                                         1 per 1,000 square feet gross area up
 Warehousing, wholesaling, distribution to 20,000 square feet plus 1 per 2,000
  and storage                            square feet gross area over 20,000
                                         square feet
Public/semipublic:                        
 Business, technical and trade schools  1 for each 2 students
 Colleges, universities                 1 for each 4 students and 2 for each
                                         classroom
                                         1 per 300 square feet gross floor
 Cultural facilities                    area; plus 1 per 90 square feet for
                                         area for assembly purposes
                                         2 for each classroom and 1 for every 5
 Elementary and junior high schools     seats in the auditoriums or assembly
                                         halls
 Government offices                     1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
 High schools                           1 for every 10 students and 1 for each
                                         teacher and employee
 Kindergartens, childcare centers,      2 for each classroom, but not less
  nursery schools and similar uses       than 6 for the building
 Libraries, museums and art galleries   1 for each 400 square feet floor area
 
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.26.160: ADDITIONAL LOADING SPACE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Use Of Parking Space To Satisfy Requirements Prohibited: In no case shall
the required off street loading berths be part of the area used to satisfy the
off street parking requirements.
B.   Location: The off street loading facilities required for the uses
mentioned shall not project into the public right of way or setback area.
C.   Size: The size of an off street loading space shall not be less than the
following, exclusive of access platform and loading area:
   1.   Width: Twelve feet (12').
   2.   Length: Thirty five feet (35') or sixty five feet (65') (see subsection
D of this section).
D.   Access:
   1.   Convenient access to loading spaces from streets or alleys shall be
provided. They shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width.
   2.   Design and location of entrances and exits for required off street
loading areas shall be subject to review of the administrator.
E.   Loading Space Requirements And Dimensions: Off street loading spaces for
commercial uses shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
 
Gross Floor Area    Quantity And Type
(Square Feet)
   14,000 – 36,   (1) B
   36,001 – 60,   (2) B
   60,001 – 100   (2) B and (1) A
 
For each additional 75,000 or fraction thereof, an additional type A space will
be provided. Type B spaces are 35 feet in length. Type A spaces are 65 feet in
length.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.30
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
17.30.010: Intent
17.30.020: Authority To Continue Nonconforming Use
17.30.030: Extension Or Enlargement Of Nonconforming Use
17.30.040: Repairs And Maintenance
17.30.050: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
17.30.060: Buildings Under Construction
17.30.010: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to permit nonconforming uses to continue until
they are removed. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming
uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds
for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.30.020: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING USE:
If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective date hereof that would not be allowed in
the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A.   Additions Or Alterations: No existing structure devoted to a use not
permitted by this title in the district in which it is located shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district
in which it is located.
B.   Expansion: No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any additional
land area.
C.   Change Of Nonconforming Use: If no structural alterations are made, any
nonconforming use of a structure and land may, upon the issuance of a special
use permit by the council, be changed to another nonconforming use; provided,
that the council shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or
more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In
permitting such change, the council may require appropriate conditions and
safeguards in accord with other provisions of this title.
D.   Change To Conforming Use: Any structure, or structure and land in
combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
E.   Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: When a nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned
for more than one year (except when government action impedes access to the
premises), the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
F.   Elimination Of Nonconforming Structure: Where nonconforming use status
applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the
structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. This section
shall be subject to the requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6538 as it now
exists or as it may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.30.030: EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE:
Nonconforming uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted
uses in the districts in which such use is located. A nonconforming use shall
not be extended or enlarged after the effective date hereof by attachment on a
building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the
premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally
prohibited in the district in which such use is located. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.30.040: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, that
the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of
such official. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.30.050: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
A.   Single Nonconforming Lots Of Record: In any district in which single-
family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective
date hereof, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership (see subsection B of this section). This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district;
provided, that hard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to
area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
B.   Nonconforming Lots Of Record In Combination: If two (2) or more lots or a
combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the effective date hereof, and if all or part of the
lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for lot width
and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for
the purposes of this title and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold
in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements
established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which
creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this title.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.30.060: BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and
upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.32
SIGNS
SECTION:
17.32.010: Statement Of Intent
17.32.015: Applicability
17.32.020: Definitions
17.32.030: Permit Required To Erect Or Install A Sign
17.32.036: Site And Elevation Plan
17.32.037: Exempt Signs
17.32.038: Temporary Signs
17.32.040: General Sign Provisions
17.32.045: Sign Setbacks
17.32.050: Special Restrictions For Signs By Zone
17.32.060: Farm Signs
17.32.075: Off Premises And Billboard Signs
17.32.085: Street Trees
17.32.088: Sexually Oriented Business Signs
17.32.090: Violations
17.32.010: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising,
outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to
protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business
climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community and
preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further
intended to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs
overhanging or projecting over public rights of way, provide more open space,
curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance community
development. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.015: APPLICABILITY:
The terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to signs located within
the city of Jerome. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
   ABANDONED SIGN: A sign that pertains to a business, industry or service that
is no longer located on the premises where the sign is located. This includes
relocation and the termination of business activities on site.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY: Real property sharing one common boundary with another
parcel of real property. Public roads separating parcels of real property shall
be disregarded in determining whether property is "adjacent property".
   ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any floating, billowing, turning, oscillating device,
any colored, shiny, reflective material, or any light or other contrivance
except a sign used to attract attention.
   ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Any device, contrivance, object or structure other than
a sign used to attract attention.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict
action or create a special effect or scene or the illusion of movement.
   AREA OF SIGN: The back area, where defined, of a sign. Contrasting supports
are not included. Painted signs on a wall will be measured from the edge of the
background color, if used, or the area enclosed by straight lines where no
background is defined.
   AWNING: Any shelter or decorative dimensional shape extending from the
exterior surface of the building, constructed as a supporting framework,
covered with nonrigid materials.
   AWNING SIGN: Letters, numbers or logos applied to any awning.
   BANNER FLAG: A temporary sign which has a piece of cloth or other similar
material attached to a pole.
   BANNER SIGN: A temporary sign having characters, letters or illustrations
applied to plastic, cloth, canvas or other similar material, with the only
purpose of such nonrigid material being used as a background.
   BILLBOARD SIGN: A large freestanding sign on a parcel of real property other
than that owned or leased by the business or activity being advertised by said
sign and which advertises a business, organization, event, person, place or
thing other than that conducted or residing on the same parcel of real
property.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person appointed in that capacity under the current
version of the international building code adopted by the city of Jerome, or
any successor or the person with the equivalent authority under the then
existing building code adopted by the city of Jerome.
   BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached directly to a building.
   CANOPY SIGN: A sign not attached directly to a building, but attached by
means of a separate structure to a building.
   CONSTRUCTION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A temporary sign that is generally used to
advertise a new building, opening date, leasing opportunity and/or to identify
the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect,
financier engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the premises on
which the sign is located.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign intended to provide directions for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
   EAVE LINE: The bottom of the overhang, or the bottom of a mansard roof.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY: A sign or portion thereof capable of displaying
words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically
changed by remote or automatic means. This definition excludes fuel price
signs, as that term is defined herein.
   FACE CHANGE: An update to an existing sign, retaining the existing
framework, structure and color scheme. A sign which advertises a different use
than the existing signage shall not be considered a face change.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign not attached to any building, directly or by means
of a separate structure.
   FRONTAGE BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION OR PRODUCT SIGN: A sign installed within
twenty (20) linear feet of the business front property line and/or side street
property line for corner lots of parcels.
   FUEL PRICE SIGN: A sign which has the sole purpose to display the price of
fuel offered for sale at the business displaying the sign. Fuel price signs
must remain static and must not display any form of animation. Provided,
however, the sign may change at regular intervals to display the different
prices of fuel offered for sale. Fuel price signs are not subject to the
regulations governing electronic message displays.
   HEIGHT: The distance between road level and the top of a sign.
   HIGH RISE SIGN: A sign in excess of thirty five feet (35') above the ground
level installed within the interstate overlay district.
   HUMAN SIGN: A temporary sign held by or attached to a human for the purpose
of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business,
commodity, service, activity or product. A person dressed in costume for the
purpose of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual,
business, commodity, service, activity or product shall also be construed as a
human sign.
   NAMEPLATE: A sign naming the occupant and the address.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign which advertises business or other activities not
related to the business being conducted on the property upon which it is
located. A sign providing information concerning public events of general
community interest shall not be considered an off premises sign.
   ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign that is located on the same property as the
location of the business or service the sign is identifying.
   OPEN HOUSE REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign informing the public that the
property is available for examination by prospective buyers and that the owner
of the property or the owner's agent is on the premises during the time the
property is available for viewing.
   PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: A contiguous parcel of land in identical ownership
and defined by legal description, adequate for recording in the office of the
county recorder.
   POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign relating to the election of a person to a
public office, relating to a political party, relating to a matter to be voted
upon at an election called by a public body or containing primarily a political
message.
   PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building and has a surface
which extends more than one foot (1') away from the exterior of a building.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The fee simple owner of the real property upon which a sign
is located.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rent of
property upon which it is located, and the identification of the company and/or
person handling the transaction. It includes "for sale by owner" signs. This
definition includes off premises real estate signs for directional purposes.
   ROADS: A public thoroughfare. Multiple road frontages require two (2)
different streets with a frontage of at least fifty feet (50') each on each
road.
   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A temporary sign that is generally constructed in such
a manner as to form an "A" or tent like shape that is placed on, but not
permanently attached to, the ground. This definition also includes signs of a
similar nature that are constructed with a base and single upward sign face,
forming an upside down "T".
   SIGN: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section
17.03.730 of this title.
   SINGLE FACE SIGN: A sign attached parallel to a building wall, projecting no
more than eighteen inches (18") from the building wall and having writing or
images only on the one surface of the sign facing away from the building wall.
   SPECIAL EVENT: A temporary sign advertising sales, sale promotions,
community events, holidays, yard sales, bazaar sales and similar functions.
   STREET TREE: Any tree, the trunk of which is located in any portion of the
right of way of any public road or street within the city of Jerome. (Ord.
1149, 2016)
17.32.030: PERMIT REQUIRED TO ERECT OR INSTALL A SIGN:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting as owner, occupant,
contractor, or otherwise, to erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, locate or
alter any sign within the city of Jerome contrary to the provisions of this
chapter. Any person proposing to erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, locate
or alter any permanent sign must file an application with the building official
for a permit. The application shall state the size and weight of the sign, and
the distance it is to project from a building, the details of its supports
providing attachment to any building, or any other information required by this
chapter. Upon request by the city, a diagram shall be provided showing the
location of all signs on the property and/or adjacent properties. Incorrect
information shall be grounds for revocation of a permit.
A.   The building official or his designee shall issue all permits to erect,
construct, reconstruct, enlarge, locate or alter any permanent sign.
   1.   Prior to issuing such permit, the building official shall determine
whether the application meets all the requirements of this chapter and any
other applicable provision of this code and shall consult with the zoning
administrator in that regard.
   2.   The building official or his designee shall have the authority to
determine if a proposed sign meets the definition of a face change and may
approve the same. The building official may request from the applicant any
documentation necessary or helpful to determine whether a proposed sign meets
the definition of a face change.
B.   The zoning administrator or his designee shall issue all permits to erect,
construct, reconstruct, enlarge, locate or alter any banner flags and banner
signs. Prior to issuing such permit, the zoning administrator shall determine
whether the application meets all the requirements of this chapter and any
other applicable provision of this code.
C.   A sign permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall
be paid upon issuance of a sign permit. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.036: SITE AND ELEVATION PLAN:
A.   All applications for sign permits as provided by section
17.32.030 of this chapter shall be accompanied by a site plan and an elevation
drawing. Upon request by staff, the site plan shall be provided and be produced
in duplicate on paper of a minimum dimension of eight and one-half inches by
eleven inches (81/2" x 11"). The site plan shall be drawn approximately to
scale, and shall show accurate dimensions as proposed to be built, shall convey
such information to the building official to determine whether the sign which
is the subject of the application conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
The site plan shall depict the exact site of the sign and its location in
relation to the following features of the site:
   1.   Property lines and length of street frontage adjacent to the sign;
   2.   Existing and proposed buildings or other structures in the vicinity of
the sign;
   3.   Existing curb cuts in the vicinity of the sign;
   4.   The location and size of existing signs adjacent to the area of the
sign which is the subject of the application.
B.   Elevation drawings to demonstrate design compatibility between the sign
and adjacent buildings. The elevation drawings shall depict:
   1.   The type of sign as defined in section
 17.32.020 of this chapter;
   2.   Sign materials, colors, lighting and other physical aspects of the
sign;
   3.   The sign height measured from the bottom of the sign to its top and the
height of the sign as installed from the ground;
   4.   Dimensions of the sign. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.037: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following types of signs are exempt from the application and permit
requirements of this chapter:
A.   Any sign erected and maintained pursuant to and discharged of any
governmental function or as required by any statute, ordinance or lawful
regulation;
B.   Commemorative plaques of recognized historical societies or organizations;
C.   Identification emblems of religious orders or historical societies;
D.   Nameplate signs;
E.   Political signs.
   1.   Political signs shall not be erected more than four (4) weeks prior to
the election date and shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the election.
   2.   Political signs shall be located only on private real property with the
consent of the property owner and shall not be placed in the public right of
way;
F.   Religious symbols, legal holiday or special event decorations;
G.   Searchlights for temporary advertising purposes;
H.   Signs being manufactured, transported or stored within the city limits so
long as they are not used for purposes of advertising at the place or places of
manufacturer storage;
I.   Signs located within malls, arcades, porches, patios or similar areas
where such signs are not visible from any point on the boundary of the real
property in which the structure was located;
J.   Signs on licensed, commercial vehicles, including trailers, provided that
such vehicles are not utilized as stationary outdoor display signs; and
K.   Signs on motor vehicles regulated by the city that provide public
transportation, including, but not limited to, buses and taxicabs. (Ord. 1149,
2016)
17.32.038: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A.   Banner Flags:
   1.   Any person proposing to erect a banner flag sign must file an
application for a temporary sign permit with the zoning administrator. The
application shall state the size and weight of the sign, the details of its
supports providing attachment to any building, or any other information as
required by the zoning administrator and this chapter.
   2.   Each banner flag must be permitted individually. Banner flags shall be
allowed on a building or property for a maximum of sixty (60) days per calendar
year.
   3.   Banner flags shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet in area and
have a maximum height of twelve feet (12').
   4.   Each property may have one banner flag per every twenty five (25)
linear feet of street frontage, but shall not exceed three (3) banner flags per
property.
   5.   Banner flags shall be located on private property and in no event shall
be placed on the public right of way.
B.   Banner Signs:
   1.   Any person proposing to erect a banner sign must file an application
for a temporary sign permit with the zoning administrator. The application
shall state the size and weight of the sign, the details of its supports
providing attachment to any building, or any other information as required by
the zoning administrator and this chapter.
   2.   Each banner sign must be permitted individually. Banner signs shall be
allowed on a building or property for a maximum of sixty (60) days per calendar
year.
   3.   Multiple banner signs may be allowed, provided, however that the total
size of all banner signs shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the
linear foot width of the street side of the building or the width of the leased
storefront space in a larger building, on the lot on which the banner sign is
located. In no event shall the maximum area of banner signage exceed one
hundred (100) square feet.
   4.   The width of the banner sign shall not exceed seventy five percent
(75%) of the width of the building or lease space upon which the banner is
located.
   5.   All four (4) corners of a banner sign shall be securely attached at all
times. Banner signs must be in good repair, taut and vertical at all times.
C.   Construction Identification Signs:
   1.   Shall not be erected on a property until a building permit has been
issued to erect a structure or until the city authorizes the construction of
utilities or other amenities on the property.
   2.   Shall be removed upon the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
   3.   May be allowed in any zoning district, provided such sign does not
exceed fifty (50) square feet and has a maximum height of twelve feet (12').
D.   Human Signs:
   1.   Permissible during business operational hours only.
   2.   Shall be located on private property and shall not impede pedestrian
and vehicular traffic or be on the public right of way.
E.   Open House Real Estate Signs:
   1.   Shall not block the access of any public right of way so as to prevent
passage by the general public and shall not be placed in a manner that would
obstruct an ADA sidewalk ramp.
   2.   Shall be removed within one hour after the completion of the open
house.
   3.   Shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area and thirty six inches
(36") in height.
   4.   Shall not be illuminated, either externally or internally.
F.   Real Estate Signs:
   1.   Shall be permitted in any zoning district during the time in which an
owner of real property has signed a valid listing agreement with a realtor or
broker licensed to do business in the state of Idaho, or for which time the
owner is actively attempting to sell the real property himself.
   2.   Real estate signs shall not be located within any public right of way.
In general, a real estate sign shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
   3.   An off premises real estate sign shall be erected only on private real
property, and only with the consent of the property owner. No more than three
(3) off premises real estate signs may be located on any single lot or
property.
   4.   A maximum of one real estate sign per street frontage may be erected on
a lot, provided such sign does not exceed nine (9) square feet. Undeveloped,
nonresidential zones may have one real estate sign not to exceed thirty two
(32) square feet.
G.   Sandwich Board Signs:
   1.   Sandwich board signs shall be allowed on properties during business
hours only and shall be of professional quality and constructed of durable
materials.
   2.   Sandwich board signs are allowed in multi-tenant developments,
provided, however that the signs are located on the interior of the property
and not on the public right of way. A maximum of one sign may be placed per
business or tenant, provided that such sign is located ten feet (10') or less
from the door of the business utilizing the sign and at least twenty feet (20')
from other sandwich board signs.
   3.   Sandwich board signs may be placed within the public right of way only
in the central business district (CBD), provided that the distance between the
sign and the building is one foot (1') or less and such sign does not impede
pedestrian traffic.
   4.   Signs shall not be located within a landscaped area, parking space or
vehicular travelway.
   5.   The maximum size shall be eight (8) square feet with a maximum height
of four feet (4') and a maximum width of two feet (2').
H.   Special Event Signs:
   1.   Shall be placed only on private real property, with the consent of the
property owner. In no event shall such signs be placed upon a pole, tree or
other structure owned by a public utility or the city. No such sign shall be
placed in any public right of way.
   2.   Shall be erected no more than forty eight (48) hours prior to the event
and shall be removed at the conclusion of the event.
   3.   Shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
   4.   Upon the conclusion of the event, all evidence of such event shall be
removed from the view of the public streets by dusk of the final day of the
event. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.040: GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS:
A.   All permanent signs shall be constructed of high quality materials that
will withstand elements of high and low temperatures, direct sunlight, rain,
sleet, snow and other adverse weather conditions. Cloth and vinyl materials
shall only be permitted for temporary signs. If wood is used, it shall be
properly sealed to keep moisture from soaking in and causing the lettering to
deteriorate.
B.   Signs shall be maintained in a neat, clean, safe and legible condition by
their owner. Proper placement of defective parts, repainting, cleaning and
other acts of proper maintenance shall be promptly performed. Real property
within a radius of ten feet (10') from the base of any ground sign shall be
kept free and clear of weeds, rubbish and flammable material.
C.   Any building or other structure damaged as a result of the removal,
repair, replacement or installation of a sign shall be repaired by the owner of
the structure within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the damage
being incurred.
D.   No sign shall be installed near intersections of public streets within the
city so as to provide a proper line of sight and avoid unreasonable
obstructions to operators of motor vehicles approaching the intersection such
that a clear view of the intersection is unobstructed between three feet (3')
and eight feet (8') from the ground.
E.   No sign of any classification shall be installed, erected or attached in
any form, shape or manner to a fire escape or any door or window giving access
to any fire escape.
F.   All signs shall be secured in such a fashion as to prevent unsafe movement
or vibration in conformance with the most recent edition of the building code
adopted by the city.
G.   No sign shall be placed upon a pole, tree or other structure owned by a
public utility or the city. No sign shall be placed in any public right of way
except publicly owned signs, i.e., traffic control signs and directional signs.
Signs directing and guiding traffic or containing traffic markings, located on
private property but bearing no advertising matter shall be permitted.
H.   No sign shall be above the top wall line of the building on which it is
placed.
I.   The electrical features of any sign and the installation thereof shall
have been inspected by the state of Idaho electrical inspector and a copy of
the permit provided to the city of Jerome building official prior to the
operation of the sign.
J.   Any person or entity intending to request permission for erection and
placement of a public road banner at same situs located on South Lincoln Avenue
for public announcements must follow specific requirements for design, spacing,
size, webbing, and reinforcement to be determined, periodically, by the city of
Jerome public works department.
K.   Any individual or entity intending to erect and place a public road banner
must pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee to the city of Jerome prior to the
erection and placement of the public road banner to compensate the city of
Jerome for hanging and taking down the banners and providing for future
maintenance and replacement of the poles.
L.   More than one freestanding sign per road frontage may be allowed by
special use permit as long as there is a minimum distance of one hundred feet
(100') between signs. The maximum height of any freestanding sign, unless
otherwise noted herein, shall be thirty five feet (35'), except for signs
located in the interstate overlay district.
M.   Billboard signs are only permitted within the interstate sign overlay
zone. Furthermore, off premises signs may be allowed in the interstate sign
overlay zone by special use permit approved by the commission pursuant to the
provisions of
 chapter 17.60 of this title and section
17.32.075 of this chapter.
N.   Building signs are allowed on each building face with street frontage, not
to exceed three (3) square feet per linear foot of building width.
O.   A building sign shall not exceed the height of the building, measured to
the top wall line. For purposes of computing building frontage, a gas station
island canopy shall be considered building frontage.
P.   Awning signs may be placed in any zone but R-1, R-2 or R-3. Every awning
sign must be on an awning firmly attached to a building. Letters, logos or
numbers on awning signs shall not occupy more than three (3) square feet per
linear foot of the horizontal length of the awning.
Q.   Any animated sign, electronic message displays (EMD), illuminated
advertising device or advertising display shall conform to the following
requirements:
   1.   Shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement, or the
appearance or optical illusion of movement of any part of the sign structure,
design, or pictorial segment of the sign, including the movement or appearance
of movement of any illumination or the flashing/varying of light intensity.
   2.   Each message or frame must be displayed for a minimum of three (3)
seconds.
   3.   Area shall not occupy more than seventy five percent (75%) of the sign.
   4.   Shall emit a light of constant intensity, and shall be constructed of
hardware capable of programming that will limit the nits output to five
thousand (5,000) on clear days and five hundred (500) nits from dawn to dusk.
In no event shall such an illuminated sign or device be placed or directed to
permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a
public thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises to cause glare or
reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
   5.   Text only single color message displays with letters no higher than
twelve inches (12") may scroll or travel without the static message limitation.
Maximum area for such displays is sixty (60) square feet.
   6.   Each parcel of real property may have one electronic message display.
   7.   Such signs, displays, or device may not be installed on a nonconforming
sign.
   8.   Animated signs and EMD are allowed by special use permit only and in
accordance with
chapter 17.60 of this title. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.045: SIGN SETBACKS:
All signs shall be set a minimum of ten feet (10') away from public easements
and be contained completely within the bounds of the lot or parcel of real
property on which they are located, unless otherwise specified in this title.
With the exception of signs located in the central business district, no part
of any sign shall hang over a public right of way and/or public easements.
(Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.050: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS FOR SIGNS BY ZONE:
A.   Residential One And Residential Two Zones: No signs shall be permitted in
the R-1 and R-2 zones, except for one real estate sign, which sign must be
located on the property which is for sale, lease or rental and which may not
exceed a total of nine (9) square feet in area.
B.   Residential Three And Residential Multi-Family Zones: Apartments,
condominiums, townhouses, churches, nursing homes, and public buildings or
other structures permitted in these zones may have one sign facing each
adjoining street. Signs shall be limited to thirty two (32) square feet and,
unless mounted on a building, shall be limited to six feet (6') in height.
C.   Neighborhood Business District Zone (C-1): Each business may have one sign
of not more than thirty two (32) square feet and, unless mounted on the
building, shall be limited to six feet (6') in height. Signs must be at least
fifteen feet (15') from any adjacent property. Billboard signs shall not be
permitted in the neighborhood business district zone.
D.   General Business District (C-2) And High Density Business District (C-3)
Zones:
   1.   Each property may have one freestanding sign facing each adjacent road
of not over two hundred (200) square feet and not over thirty five feet (35')
in height. Freestanding signs must be at least ten feet (10') from any adjacent
property. Billboard signs shall be permitted only within the interstate sign
overlay zone and shall be governed by the terms of section
17.32.075 of this chapter.
   2.   Building signs facing each adjacent road shall not be more than two
hundred (200) square feet in size and mounted no higher than thirty five feet
(35') from the ground and no higher than the eave line of the building to which
it is attached or adjacent without a special use permit approved by the
commission pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 17.60 of this title.
E.   Central Business District Zone (CBD):
   1.   Each property may have one freestanding sign facing each adjacent road
of not over one hundred (100) square feet and not over twenty five feet (25')
in height. Freestanding signs must be at least ten feet (10') from any adjacent
property. Freestanding signs shall be constructed of materials that are similar
to or that complement the building materials on the front building facade of
the principal building in the same lot. The vertical support structure of a
freestanding sign shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") wide. Off premises
signs may be allowed by special use permit approved by the commission pursuant
to the provisions of
chapter 17.60 of this title and section
17.32.075 of this chapter.
   2.   Each property may have one single faced building sign facing each
adjacent street frontage up to three (3) square feet per linear foot of the
side of the building facing the street frontage. The maximum sign area for a
building sign shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   3.   Projecting signs are permitted only in this zoning district and no
other. Each building may have one projecting sign for each adjacent street.
Signs are limited to twenty four (24) square feet and may not project more than
six feet (6') from the building. The bottom of any projecting sign must be at
least eight feet (8') above the ground.
F.   Light Industrial (M-1) And Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zones:
   1.   Each property may have one freestanding sign facing each adjacent road
of not over two hundred (200) square feet and not over thirty five feet (35')
in height. Freestanding signs must be at least ten feet (10') from any adjacent
property. Billboard signs shall be permitted only within the interstate sign
overlay zone and shall be governed by the terms of section
17.32.075 of this chapter.
   2.   Building signs facing each adjacent road shall not be more than two
hundred (200) square feet in size and mounted no higher than thirty five feet
(35') from the ground and no higher than the eave line of the building to which
it is attached or adjacent without a special use permit approved by the
commission pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 17.60 of this title. Off premises signs are allowed by special use
permit approved by the commission pursuant to the provisions of
chapter 17.60 of this title and section
17.32.075 of this chapter.
G.   Business Park District (BP) And Mixed Use (MU) Zones: Signs in the
business park or mixed use zones shall only be allowed by special use permit,
utilizing the procedures set forth in
chapter 17.60 of this title. In no case shall a building sign exceed the
standards of subsection F2 of this section.
H.   Interstate Sign Overlay District: The purpose of this district is to allow
for different standards for signs erected in certain areas adjacent to
Interstate I-84. The following provisions for signs located within the district
shall apply:
   1.   High rise signs shall have a maximum height of eighty five feet (85')
when measured from the surface of the ground to the top of the sign. Each high
rise sign shall have a maximum signage of three hundred fifty (350) square feet
for a single business occupancy of a parcel of real property and a maximum of
seven hundred (700) square feet for two (2) or more businesses on a single
parcel of real property. Each parcel of real property within the district may
only have one high rise sign. High rise signs must meet all requirements of the
state of Idaho department of transportation pertaining to high rise signs
adjacent to interstate highways.
   2.   Frontage business identification or product signs shall have a maximum
height of thirty five feet (35') measured from the surface of the ground to the
top of the sign. Each parcel of real property may have one frontage business
identification or product sign per street frontage, regardless of how many
individual businesses are located thereon, not to exceed two hundred (200)
square feet.
   3.   Each parcel of real property may have one single faced building sign
facing each adjacent street frontage. The area of the building sign shall not
exceed three (3) square feet per linear foot of the side of the building facing
the street frontage. Buildings with less than twenty one (21) linear feet of
frontage may have a building sign not to exceed sixty five (65) square feet.
For purposes of this subsection, any signage and/or logos on attached or
detached canopies shall be considered part of a building sign.
   4.   A building permit shall be required for the erection of any sign in the
interstate sign overlay district, which permit shall be applied for and issued
in conformance with existing provisions of this title.
   5.   Off premises signs may be allowed in the interstate overlay district by
special use permit only.
   6.   This subsection is intended to take precedence over any other
provisions of this code which contradict any of its terms.
   7.   The initial boundaries of the interstate sign overlay district shall be
as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the east boundary of Section 6, T
9 S, R 17 E, and the north Right of Way of Interstate Highway 84; Thence in a
northwesterly direction along the north Right of Way of said Interstate Highway
84 through Section 6, T 9 S, R 17 E, Section 31, T 8 S, R 17 E, and Sections
36, 25, 24, 23 and 14, T8 S, R 16 E, to the west boundary of said Section 14, T
8 S, R 16 E; Thence north along the west boundary of said Section 14 to a line
which lies 1000 feet northeast of and parallel to the north Right of Way of
said Interstate Highway 84; Thence southeasterly along a line parallel to and
1000 feet northeast of the north Right of Way of said Interstate Highway 84
through Sections 14, 23, 24, and 25, T 8 S, R 16 E, and Section 30, T 8 S, R 17
E, to a point on the north boundary of Section 31, T 8 S, R 17 E; Thence east
along the north boundary of said Section 31 to a line 1000 feet east of and
parallel to the west boundary of said Section 31; Thence south along a line
1000 feet east of and parallel to the west boundary of said Section 31 to a
line which lies 1000 feet northeast of and parallel to the north Right of Way
of said Interstate Highway 84; Thence southeasterly along a line parallel to
and 1000 feet northeast of the north Right Of Way of said Interstate Highway 84
and Section 31, T 8 S, R 17 E, and Section 6, T 9 S, R 17 E, to the east
boundary of said Section 6; Thence south along the east boundary of said
Section 6 to the north Right of Way of Interstate Highway 84 and the point of
beginning.
   (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.060: FARM SIGNS:
A.   On site farm signs shall not be placed in a manner that impairs the safety
of adjacent roadways.
B.   Off site farm signs may be installed in a manner that is reasonably
necessary to direct the public to the farm. Off site signs shall not be greater
than eight (8) square feet in size per sign and shall not be placed in a manner
that impairs the safety of adjacent roadways.
C.   All farm signs shall in all respects conform to the requirements contained
in this chapter. (Ord. 1158, 2016)
17.32.075: OFF PREMISES AND BILLBOARD SIGNS:
A.   Off premises signs are allowed by special use permit only in the central
business district (CBD), neighborhood business (C-1), general business (C-2),
high density business (C-3), light industrial (M-1) and heavy industrial (M-2)
zones. Off premises signs shall conform to the special use standards in
 chapter 17.60 of this title as they now exist or may be amended in addition to
the following standards:
   1.   Each property may have a maximum of two (2) off premises signs, not to
exceed eight (8) square feet per sign.
   2.   Off premises signage combined with on premises signage shall not exceed
total allowed sign area per property.
B.   Billboard signs shall only be erected in the high density business (C-3)
or light industrial (M-1) zones within the interstate sign overlay district.
C.   Billboard and off premises signs erected in the interstate sign overlay
district shall be subject to the Idaho transportation department regulations in
addition to the following requirements:
   1.   Billboard and off premises signs shall be oriented toward traffic on
Interstate 84.
   2.   The maximum height of a billboard or off premises sign along any
interstate shall be thirty five feet (35').
   3.   The maximum surface area of a billboard or off premises sign along any
interstate shall be three hundred fifty (350) square feet.
   4.   Billboard and off premises signs shall have only one sign surface area
except that billboard signs may have two (2) sign surface areas if the surface
areas are oriented in opposite directions. No V-shaped billboards shall be
allowed.
   5.   External lighting of billboard or off premises signs, such as
floodlights, thin line and gooseneck reflectors are permitted, provided the
light source is directed upon the face of the sign and is effectively shielded
so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed toward any
residential structure or into any portion of the main traveled way of the
interstate or freeway and the lights are not of such intensity so as to
interfere with the residential use of property or to cause glare, impair the
vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, or otherwise interfere with a driver's
operation of a motor vehicle.
   6.   No billboard or off premises sign shall have wind activated elements or
any material which glistens or sparkles.
   7.   Billboards or off premises signs shall maintain a minimum setback from
another billboard, zoning district, structure or use as follows:
Zoning District, Structure Or Use Distance (In Feet)
Zoning District, Structure Or Use                        Distance (In Feet)
Any freestanding sign                                    100
Church, school or park                                   500
Designated historic district                             500
From a billboard sign along the interstate to another    4,000
billboard sign
From another billboard sign                              2,000
Interchange or at grade intersection measured from the
beginning or ending of the pavement widening at the exit 500
from or entrance to the main traveled way
R-1, R-2, or R-3                                         500
Residential structure                                    500
 
(Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.085: STREET TREES:
In order to provide for business identification while also providing the public
benefits of street trees, the design and placement of a freestanding sign shall
consider the siting of existing or approved street trees, and shall comply with
the allowed and proper pruning techniques employed by the city. Sign height may
not be limited by existing or street trees, nor shall street trees be illegally
topped or pruned in order to improve the visibility of a sign. In cases where a
property owner desires to maximize the visibility of its sign, and where a
prior approval has been issued by the city for a tree type and location, then
these trees may be removed or replaced on site provided that an equal or
greater amount of, or potential for, a street tree is provided. Such proposed
changes shall include a review and recommendation by the city. (Ord. 1149,
2016)
17.32.088: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS SIGNS:
A.   Notwithstanding and in addition to any other requirement under this code,
any "sexually oriented business" as defined in title 5,
chapter 5.30 of this code shall meet the following requirements:
   1.   Such sexually oriented business shall have in place at each entrance to
such business a legible door sign (as defined herein) stating "Persons Under
Eighteen (18) Years Of Age Not Permitted". The sign shall be no less than 0.5
square foot and no greater than one square foot in area.
   2.   Shall have no more than one business or advertising sign, which sign
shall only be permitted on the front facade. Such sign shall have a surface
area of no larger than five percent (5%) of the front building facade of the
first floor elevation (first 10 feet) of the premises occupied by the licensee,
or twenty (20) square feet, whichever is less.
   3.   Any sign or advertisement for any sexually oriented businesses shall
not be posted on any property not designated by the sexually oriented business
license issued under this code.
   4.   Signs may be illuminated, provided, however, that they emit a light of
constant intensity and are constructed of hardware capable of programming that
will limit the nits output to five thousand (5,000) on a clear day and five
hundred (500) from dawn to dusk. In no event shall such illuminated sign or
device be placed or directed to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to
be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk or adjacent
premises to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance. Illumination shall not be by way of exposed neon, exterior lighting
such as spot or floodlights, or any flashing or animated lights, whether
interior to the sign, exterior to the sign, or as a border to the sign.
   5.   Such advertisements may not contain any graphic words, phrases, or
images describing or showing any specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   6.   No sexually oriented business shall, in any manner, advertise or permit
the observation of any live entertainment, or other adult materials, depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas by display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening viewable from
any public street, alley, sidewalk or other right of way. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
17.32.090: VIOLATIONS:
Any person, no matter the capacity in which they act, who violates or refuses
to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.
A separate infraction shall be deemed to be committed each day that any
violation occurs or continues. In addition, the city may take whatever civil
action it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, the following:
A.   Giving written notice to the owner or lessee of any sign subject to a
provision of this chapter that is being violated.
B.   Giving the owner or lessee thirty (30) days from such notice to correct
the deficiency contained in the notice.
C.   Upon a failure of the owner or lessee of the sign to comply with a notice
given under this section or, alternatively, the owner or lessee of the sign
having failed to remove the sign from the property on which it is installed,
the city may seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction ordering the
removal of the sign.
D.   In any action commenced by the city under this chapter, the city shall be
entitled to recover from the owner found to have been in violation of the terms
of this chapter all attorney fees and costs incurred. (Ord. 1149, 2016)
CHAPTER 17.35
DRINKING WATER PROTECTION
SECTION:
17.35.010: Definitions
17.35.020: Legal Description Of DWPOD
17.35.030: Permitted Uses Within Overlay District IA
17.35.040: Prohibited Uses Within Overlay District IB
17.35.050: Prohibited Uses Within Overlay District II
17.35.060: Prohibited Uses Within Overlay District III
17.35.070: Nonconforming Uses
17.35.080: Enforcement
17.35.010: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
   AGRICULTURAL RUNOFF WASTEWATER: Water diverted for irrigation but not
applied to crops, or runoff of irrigation tail water from cropland as a result
of irrigation.
   AQUIFER REMEDIATION RELATED WELLS: Wells used to prevent, control, or
remediate aquifer pollution.
   CLOSED SYSTEM: A physical system on which no outside influences act.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM: The public drinking water system owned by the city
of Jerome.
   COMMUNITY WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of any well, including adapters,
ports, seals, valves and other attachments, which supplies water for the
community water system.
   DRINKING WATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT (DWPOD): A zoning district that
modifies the underlying zoning district with reference to wells supplying
drinking water to the community water system. The boundaries of the DWPOD shall
include within it the overlying districts IA, IB, II and III, as hereinafter
defined.Drinking Water Protection Overlay District IA: A district extending one
hundred feet (100') radially from any community wellhead.Drinking Water
Protection Overlay District IB: A time of travel district (TOTD) extending from
any community wellhead to any point from which a hazardous waste or material in
the groundwater may reach a community wellhead in three (3) years.Drinking
Water Protection Overlay District II: A time of travel district (TOTD)
extending from any community wellhead to a point from which a hazardous waste
or material in the groundwater may reach a community wellhead in six (6)
years.Drinking Water Protection Overlay District III: A time of travel district
(TOTD) extending from any community wellhead to a point from which a hazardous
waste or material in the groundwater may reach a community wellhead in ten (10)
years.
   FACILITY: Any structure that is built, installed, or established to serve a
particular purpose.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY: A facility which receives hazardous
material as described in part 40, chapter 260.1 of the code of federal
regulations.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL: Any waste or material which because of its
quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
   A.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
   B.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed; or
   C.   Any material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance
defined by title 40, part 261.3 of the code of federal regulations, or any
material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance by the state
of Idaho, acting through its department of environmental quality or any
successor agency.
   INJECTION: The subsurface emplacement of fluids.
   SPECIAL DRAINAGE: Drainage used for disposing of water from sources other
than direct precipitation. Examples of this include landslide control drainage,
portable water tank overflow drainage or swimming pool drainage.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: Water discharged as a result of rain, snow, or other
precipitation.
   TIME OF TRAVEL DISTRICT (TOTD): A district encompassing areas where the time
required for a contaminant to move in the ground from a specific point to a
well is specified.
   UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL: Any excavation or artificial opening into the
ground which meets the following three (3) criteria:
   A.   A bored, drilled or dug hole, or a driven mineshaft, or a driven well
point; and
   B.   It is deeper than its largest straight line surface dimension; and
   C.   It is used for or intended to be used for injection. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.020: LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF DWPOD:
The legal description of the real property within the city limits which
comprises the DWPOD, and contains all the overlay districts, previously
defined, is as follows:
A.   A Street well:
Beginning at the North 1/4 corner of said Section 19, Township 8 South, Range
17 East, Boise Meridian, Jerome County, Idaho, more particularly described as
follows:
Thence South 0°00'00" East a distance of 710.92 feet;
Thence North 89°55'28" East a distance of 543.58 feet to the True Point of
Beginning;
Thence North 80°05'48" East a distance of 122.85 feet;
Thence North 78°41'58" East a distance of 3,541.28 feet;
Thence North 79°58'20" East a distance of 751.18 feet;
Thence North 81°03'14" East a distance of 1,576.67 feet;
Thence North 82°26'55" East a distance of 4,878.96 feet;
Thence North 85°19'25" East a distance of 22,645.73 feet;
Thence North 84°58'37" East a distance of 11,292.68 feet;
Thence North 83°04'59" East a distance of 7,065.06 feet;
Thence North 81°39'32" East a distance of 3,914.96 feet;
Thence North 79°00'00" East a distance of 12,289.39 feet;
Thence North 77°34'33" East a distance of 4,455.38 feet;
Thence North 12°07'25" West a distance of 12,697.27 feet;
Thence North 22°42'24" West a distance of 12,767.13 feet;
Thence South 59°03'52" West a distance of 3,225.13 feet;
Thence South 58°23'10" West a distance of 9,779.14 feet;
Thence South 60°20'24" West a distance of 4,696.76 feet;
Thence South 61°49'19" West a distance of 3,874.85 feet;
Thence South 62°12'58" West a distance of 302.45 feet;
Thence South 62°52'55" West a distance of 2,211.39 feet;
Thence South 64°08'08" West a distance of 8,466.64 feet;
Thence South 65°28'07" West a distance of 26,085.77 feet;
Thence South 63°08'42" West a distance of 7,259.49 feet;
Thence South 60°42'53" West a distance of 3,320.15 feet;
Thence South 58°29'16" West a distance of 3,170.04 feet;
Thence South 55°49'59" West a distance of 122.55 feet;
Thence South 22°22'23" East a distance of 260.37 feet to the True Point of
Beginning.
B.   Marshall well:
Beginning at the West 1/4 corner of said Section 30, Township 08 South, Range
17 East, Boise Meridian, Jerome County, Idaho, more particularly described as
follows:
Thence South 0°00'00" East a distance of 14.47 feet to the True Point of
Beginning;
Thence South 80°32'38" West a distance of 212.68 feet;
Thence South 53°44'45" West a distance of 125.65 feet;
Thence South 33°01'26" West a distance of 88.67 feet;
Thence South 25°12'04" East a distance of 69.84 feet;
Thence South 65°33'22" East a distance of 89.83 feet;
Thence South 88°45'01" East a distance of 10,922.06 feet;
Thence North 82°37'17" East a distance of 11,381.60 feet;
Thence North 70°15'11" East a distance of 3,263.96 feet;
Thence North 73°47'43" East a distance of 13,798.17 feet;
Thence North 80°43'39" East a distance of 4,031.68 feet;
Thence North 86°11'09" East a distance of 2,441.53 feet;
Thence North 77°47'58" East a distance of 1,679.67 feet;
Thence North 77°47'58" East a distance of 1,394.31 feet;
Thence North 69°45'12" East a distance of 10,559.33 feet;
Thence North 61°41'57" East a distance of 7,193.77 feet;
Thence North 15°36'21" East a distance of 1,423.94 feet;
Thence North 07°54'26" East a distance of 1,523.93 feet;
Thence North 05°42'38" East a distance of 1,264.14 feet;
Thence North 08°00'07" West a distance of 494.69 feet;
Thence North 18°04'47" West a distance of 521.18 feet;
Thence North 34°06'52" West a distance of 784.98 feet;
Thence North 40°44'00" West a distance of 995.98 feet;
Thence North 42°46'25" West a distance of 1,504.65 feet;
Thence North 56°18'36" West a distance of 292.79 feet;
Thence South 66°13'58" West a distance of 9,671.46 feet;
Thence South 68°02'35" West a distance of 7,739.33 feet;
Thence South 58°46'54" West a distance of 550.07 feet;
Thence South 69°32'28" West a distance of 3,450.61 feet;
Thence South 80°13'03" West a distance of 9,558.64 feet;
Thence South 66°02'15" West a distance of 2,399.30 feet;
Thence South 68°52'31" West a distance of 7,501.70 feet;
Thence South 68°52'31" West a distance of 3,989.45 feet;
Thence South 67°59'19" West a distance of 8,233.30 feet;
Thence South 68°34'29" West a distance of 6,891.34 feet;
Thence South 74°03'58" West a distance of 4,357.68 feet;
Thence South 75°14'01" West a distance of 1,041.18 feet;
Thence South 80°32'26" West a distance of 775.22 feet to the True Point of
Beginning.
C.   Peters well:
Beginning at the Southwest corner of said Section 17, Township 08 South, Range
17 East, Boise Meridian, Jerome County, Idaho, more particularly described as
follows:
Thence South 89°35'11" East a distance of 4,760.79 feet to the True Point of
Beginning;
Thence South 37°58'55" East a distance of 8.59 feet;
Thence South 52°01'05" East a distance of 37.24 feet;
Thence South 63°22'55" East a distance of 28.29 feet;
Thence South 79°05'57" East a distance of 57.64 feet;
Thence North 84°23'09" East a distance of 22.37 feet;
Thence North 79°03'17" East a distance of 208.99 feet;
Thence North 79°34'43" East a distance of 1,573.69 feet;
Thence North 80°50'47" East a distance of 1,941.03 feet;
Thence North 82°24'38" East a distance of 3,158.97 feet;
Thence North 84°14'40" East a distance of 6,196.31 feet;
Thence North 85°52'40" East a distance of 19,628.94 feet;
Thence North 84°49'52" East a distance of 11,775.94 feet;
Thence North 82°12'49" East a distance of 11,067.34 feet;
Thence North 79°37'24" East a distance of 15,396.22 feet;
Thence North 11°28'56" West a distance of 12,525.80 feet;
Thence North 21°57'35" West a distance of 12,509.81 feet;
Thence South 59°53'29" West a distance of 18,246.56 feet;
Thence South 63°33'10" West a distance of 16,086.52 feet;
Thence South 65°44'29" West a distance of 10,256.65 feet;
Thence South 66°03'55" West a distance of 8,843.39 feet;
Thence South 65°05'43" West a distance of 8,308.50 feet;
Thence South 62°48'43" West a distance of 5,986.27 feet;
Thence South 60°18'10" West a distance of 1,964.62 feet;
Thence South 59°02'29" West a distance of 1,311.01 feet;
Thence South 51°24'27" West a distance of 39.67 feet;
Thence South 33°02'14" West a distance of 62.30 feet;
Thence South 11°15'00" West a distance of 59.46 feet;
Thence South 10°57'34" East a distance of 62.24 feet;
Thence South 32°57'11" East a distance of 53.48 feet to the True Point of
Beginning.
D.   10 Street well 1 and 2:
Beginning at the West 1/4 corner of said Section 18, Township 08 South, Range
17 East, Boise Meridian, Jerome County, Idaho, more particularly described as
follows:
Thence North 00°00'18" West a distance of 640.50 feet;
Thence South 89°47'44" East a distance of 1,132.18 feet to the True Point of
Beginning;
Thence South 26°11'38" East a distance of 23.49 feet;
Thence South 36°22'45" East a distance of 45.69 feet;
Thence South 49°42'54" East a distance of 27.01 feet;
Thence South 61°42'55" East a distance of 49.94 feet;
Thence South 80°15'14" East a distance of 60.01 feet;
Thence North 84°08'18" East a distance of 39.45 feet;
Thence North 76°47'47" East a distance of 370.67 feet;
Thence North 78°55'50" East a distance of 494.91 feet;
Thence North 78°56'37" East a distance of 1,371.29 feet;
Thence North 79°30'31" East a distance of 1,060.81 feet;
Thence North 80°30'33" East a distance of 2,546.85 feet;
Thence North 82°09'18" East a distance of 5,570.14 feet;
Thence North 83°56'12" East a distance of 6,834.19 feet;
Thence North 85°07'22" East a distance of 10,260.05 feet;
Thence North 85°23'22" East a distance of 6,892.91 feet;
Thence North 84°44'04" East a distance of 8,296.70 feet;
Thence North 83°15'21" East a distance of 6,602.19 feet;
Thence North 81°00'00" East a distance of 7,058.29 feet;
Thence North 76°45'26" East a distance of 14,879.54 feet;
Thence North 12°49'30" West a distance of 12,732.53 feet;
Thence North 23°07'43" West a distance of 12,732.97 feet;
Thence South 56°04'20" West a distance of 10,080.49 feet;
Thence South 59°49'51" West a distance of 11,347.04 feet;
Thence South 64°04'09" West a distance of 15,524.49 feet;
Thence South 65°19'06" West a distance of 13,270.20 feet;
Thence South 64°26'57" West a distance of 8,737.32 feet;
Thence South 63°16'44" West a distance of 2,117.01 feet;
Thence South 62°40'17" West a distance of 2,164.95 feet;
Thence South 61°52'09" West a distance of 2,242.16 feet;
Thence South 61°02'13" West a distance of 2,181.67 feet;
Thence South 59°59'36" West a distance of 2,171.68 feet;
Thence South 58°43'37" West a distance of 2,043.75 feet;
Thence South 59°50'10" West a distance of 373.97 feet;
Thence South 52°05'07" West a distance of 46.27 feet;
Thence South 33°44'51" West a distance of 60.62 feet;
Thence South 13°57'49" West a distance of 59.40 feet;
Thence South 02°07'47" West a distance of 16.57 feet;
Thence South 11°15'00" East a distance of 59.46 feet to the True Point of
Beginning.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.030: PERMITTED USES WITHIN OVERLAY DISTRICT IA:
Uses permitted within overlay district IA shall be limited to necessary public
water supply wellhead equipment including the following:
A.   Wellhead facility buildings;
B.   Water storage tanks;
C.   Disinfection chemical storage; and
D.   Approved landscaping.
All other uses shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.040: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN OVERLAY DISTRICT IB:
The following uses or activities are prohibited within the overlay district IB:
A.   Sanitary landfills.
B.   Hazardous waste disposal facilities.
C.   Injection wells, except for closed systems.
D.   Sewer lines within one hundred feet (100') of a community wellhead.
E.   Septic tanks or drainfields within two hundred feet (200') of a community
wellhead.
F.   Junk or salvage yards.
G.   Disposal of waste oil, oil filters, tires or other petroleum products.
H.   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous
solid or liquid material or waste having potential impact on groundwater, and
any land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing groundwater
quality, except upon issuance of a special use permit under
chapter 17.60 of this title. (Ord. 1074, 2010: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.050: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN OVERLAY DISTRICT II:
The following uses and conditions shall be prohibited within overlay district
II:
A.   Sanitary landfills;
B.   Hazardous waste disposal facilities;
C.   Injection wells, except for the following:
   1.   Deep well injection (below 18 feet in depth) for these purposes:
      a.   Geothermal heat;
      b.   Heat pump return;
      c.   Cooling water return;
      d.   Aquifer recharge;
      e.   Aquifer remediation.
   2.   Shallow well injection (less than 18 feet in depth) for these purposes:
      a.   Storm runoff;
      b.   Agricultural runoff wastewater;
      c.   Special drainage water;
      d.   Septic systems (general).
D.   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous
solid or liquid material or waste having potential impact on groundwater, and
any land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing groundwater
quality, except upon issuance of a special use permit under
chapter 17.60 of this title. The special use permit process may be instigated
by the zoning administrator during the application review process. (Ord. 1074,
2010: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.060: PROHIBITED USES WITHIN OVERLAY DISTRICT III:
The following uses or conditions shall be prohibited within overlay district
III:
A.   Injection wells are prohibited, except for the following:
   1.   Deep well injection (below 18 feet in depth) for the following
purposes:
      a.   Geothermal heat;
      b.   Heat pump return;
      c.   Cooling water return;
      d.   Aquifer recharge;
      e.   Aquifer remediation.
   2.   Shallow well injection only (less than 18 feet in depth) for the
following purposes:
      a.   Storm runoff;
      b.   Agricultural runoff wastewater;
      c.   Special drainage water;
      d.   Septic systems (general).
B.   All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection,
handling, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of any hazardous
solid or liquid material or waste having potential impact on groundwater, and
any land use activities posing a hazard or threat to existing groundwater
quality, except upon issuance of a special use permit under
chapter 17.60 of this title. (Ord. 1074, 2010: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.070: NONCONFORMING USES:
Any lawful use existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, which
constitutes a prohibited use herein, shall constitute a nonconforming use and
may not be expanded or improved except as otherwise provided in this title.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.35.080: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or other legal entity or
government entity to occupy or use real property within the WHP in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter. Any such violation shall be a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.40
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
17.40.010: Purpose
17.40.020: Effect Of Other Zoning Provisions
17.40.030: Ownership Requirements
17.40.040: Uses Permitted
17.40.050: Minimum Area
17.40.060: Common Open Space
17.40.070: Underground Utilities
17.40.080: Increased Residential Density
17.40.090: Increased Density For Communities For Older Persons
17.40.100: Arrangement Of Commercial Uses
17.40.110: Arrangement Of Industrial Uses
17.40.120: Procedure For Approval Of Planned Unit Development
17.40.130: Preapplication Meeting
17.40.140: Preliminary Development Plan
17.40.150: Application For Approval Of Final Development Plan
17.40.160: Recommendation By Commission Of Final Development Plan
17.40.170: Action By The Council On Final Development Plan
17.40.180: Expiration And Extension Of Approval Period For Final Development
Plan
17.40.010: PURPOSE:
It shall be the policy to guide a major development of land and construction by
encouraging planned unit development (PUD) to achieve the following:
A.   A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of housing
and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a reduction
in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements;
B.   A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if permitted
as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses, industrial uses and services;
C.   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and
geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and prevents the
disruption of natural drainage patterns;
D.   A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through
conventional development resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets; and
E.   A development pattern in harmony with land use density, transportation and
community facilities objectives of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.020: EFFECT OF OTHER ZONING PROVISIONS:
A.   Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this
chapter and those of the other chapters of this title, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this chapter shall be governed
by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this title.
B.   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, planned unit developments
shall also be subject to the requirements set forth in section
16.34.010 of this code and other provisions of title 16 of this code related to
subdivisions. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.030: OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
A.   An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner or a
person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the PUD.
The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner
or owners of property included in the development. However, the application may
be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property.
B.   Before approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire
project shall be under single ownership or control and legal title must be
presented with the final development plan. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.040: USES PERMITTED:
All uses that may be allowed within the zoning district are permitted within a
PUD. Also, up to ten percent (10%) of the gross land area may be directed to
other commercial, industrial, public and quasi-public uses that are not allowed
within the zoning district; provided, that there is a favorable finding by the
council:
A.   That the uses are appropriate with the residential uses;
B.   That the uses are intended to serve principally the residents of the PUD;
C.   That the uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD;
D.   That the uses be located and so designed as to provide direct access to a
collector or an arterial street without creating congestion or traffic hazards;
and
E.   That a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the residential development
occurs prior to the development of the related commercial or industrial land
uses. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.050: MINIMUM AREA:
A PUD for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less than:
A.   Three (3) acres for residential development; or
B.   Five (5) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or
industrial uses; or
C.   Ten (10) acres for commercial use; or
D.   Ten (10) acres for industrial use. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.060: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
A.   Required Common Open Space: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross
land area developed in any residential PUD project shall be reserved for common
open space and recreational facilities for the residents or users of the area
being developed.
B.   Dedication Of Land For Public Use: A required amount of common open space
land reserved under a PUD shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners
of the project area for the use of each owner who buys property within the
development or be dedicated to the public and retained as common open space for
parks, recreation and related uses. Public utility and similar easements and
right of way for watercourses and other similar channels are not acceptable for
common open space dedication unless such land or right of way is usable as a
trail or other similar purpose and approved by the council.
C.   Maintenance: The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces
shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final development
plan.
D.   Clustering: Every property developed under the PUD approach should be
designed to abut upon common open space or similar areas. A clustering of
dwellings is encouraged. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.070: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems, are required
within the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances to these systems which can be
effectively screened may be exempted from this requirement if the commission
finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the
proposed PUD. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.080: INCREASED RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
To provide for an incentive for quality PUD, the council may authorize an
increased residential density of up to fifteen percent (15%) of the allowable
number of dwelling units. Character, identity and architectural and siting
variation incorporated in a development shall be considered cause for density
increases, provided these factors make up a substantial contribution to the
objectives of the PUD, which are as follows:
A.   Landscaping (a maximum increase of 5 percent). Streetscape, open spaces
and plazas, use of existing landscaping, pedestrianway treatment and
recreational areas;
B.   Siting (a maximum increase of 5 percent). Visual focal points, use of
existing physical features such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation,
circulation pattern, physical environment, variation in building setbacks and
building grouping (such as clustering); and
C.   Design features (a maximum increase of 5 percent). Street sections,
architectural styles, harmonious use of materials, parking areas broken by
landscaping features and varied use of housing types.
D.   The fifteen percent (15%) density bonus shall not apply to the housing for
"older persons" portion of a PUD which qualifies for the density bonus provided
for in section
17.40.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.090: INCREASED DENSITY FOR COMMUNITIES FOR OLDER PERSONS:
A.   To provide an incentive for communities for "older persons" (55 and over,
as defined by the federal fair housing act of 1999, or any subsequent revision
thereof) to be included within lower density residential PUDs the council may
authorize an increased residential density to allow a maximum of three (3)
dwelling units per gross acre within any zoning district which limits density
to less than three (3) dwelling units per gross acre specifically and solely
for any portion of a PUD planned for a community for "older persons".
B.   Character, identity, landscaping and architectural/siting variation are to
be incorporated into any community for "older persons". The community may
consist of single-family, two-family or multi-family dwelling units, or a
mixture thereof, and should be clustered and include amenities for "older
persons". Zero lot line development with common open space areas shall be the
only type of development permitted to be considered for such an increase. The
zero lot line development shall allow for minimal front and/or rear yard areas
for each residential unit if proposed by the developer and approved by the
city. However, the exterior side walls of all residential buildings shall abut
a common area lot line. The intent of the zero lot line development is to allow
for large areas of open space as opposed to a sea of side yard and rear yard
fences dividing residential lots. For purposes of this section the minimum lot
size referenced elsewhere within this code shall be calculated by considering
the entire community for "older persons" as a whole. Also, the PUD shall be
designed so the community for "older persons" portion of the development does
not abut residential parcels adjacent to the PUD and sufficient buffering be
provided as may be required by the city.
C.   The following site criteria must be met in order to consider approval of
the density increase for the community for "older persons":
   1.   The land area for the community for "older persons" shall not encompass
a land area exceeding sixteen percent (16%) of the total land area within the
entire planned unit development;
   2.   The total land area of the entire planned unit development shall be a
minimum of eighty (80) acres;
   3.   The entire PUD shall be served by either a municipal or community water
and sewer system;
   4.   Any limitations regarding individuals occupying the community for
"older persons" must be in accordance with local, state and federal
regulations, and must specifically be in accordance with the federal fair
housing act as revised in 1999, or any subsequent revision thereof. "Older
persons" shall be as defined within the aforementioned act;
   5.   The community for "older persons" shall be prohibited within any 100-
year floodplain.
   6.   Open space requirements shall be as follows:
      a.   If the residential lots (not including the community for "older
persons" portion of the PUD) meet the minimum lot size requirement or are
reduced below the minimum lot size requirements such that no residential lot is
less than the prescribed size the entire PUD shall consist of a minimum of
twenty percent (20%) of open space.
      b.   If the residential lots (not including the community for "older
persons" portion of the PUD) are reduced below the minimum lot size requirement
such that any residential lot is less than one acre in size the entire PUD
shall consist of a minimum of twenty six percent (26%) of open space.
      c.   Pathways, buffer areas, public park sites, public school sites, and
public golf courses and/or driving ranges proposed within any such PUD shall be
included, in their entirety, with any other open space areas proposed when
calculating the minimum open space required.
      d.   A minimum of one 5,000-square foot clubhouse/indoor recreation
facility shall be provided within the community for "older persons" portion of
the PUD.
   7.   The final plat shall include a note indicating that the portion of land
permitted for the density bonus for "older persons" shall be for "older
persons" as defined by the federal fair housing act as revised in 1999, or any
subsequent revision thereof. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.100: ARRANGEMENT OF COMMERCIAL USES:
A.   When PUDs include commercial uses, commercial buildings and establishments
shall be planned as groups having common parking areas and common ingress and
egress points in order to reduce the number of potential accident locations at
intersections. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of
the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
B.   The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious
design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for
internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and
facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient
from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas.
C.   All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate
improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a
neat and orderly manner. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.110: ARRANGEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL USES:
A.   PUDs may include industrial uses if it can be shown that the development
results in a more efficient and desirable use of land.
B.   Industrial uses and parcels shall be developed in parklike surroundings
utilizing landscaping as buffers to screen lighting, parking areas, loading
areas or docks and/or outdoor storage of raw materials or products. A planned
industrial area shall provide for the harmony of buildings and a compact
grouping in order to economize in the provision of such utility services as are
required. Thoroughfares shall be kept to a minimum throughout a planned
industrial area in order to reduce through traffic.
C.   Project side yards of forty feet (40') and a rear yard of fifty feet (50')
shall be required if the project is located adjacent to any residential uses.
All intervening spaces between the right of way line and project building line
and intervening spaces between buildings, drives, parking areas and improved
areas shall be landscaped with trees and plantings and properly maintained at
all times. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.120: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
When the PUD also qualifies as a subdivision, the processing of the special use
permit and subdivision application shall occur at the same time. The granting
of a special use permit for a PUD shall require a preapplication, the
submission of a preliminary development plan and approval by the council of a
final development plan as specified within this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.130: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
The developer shall meet with the administrator prior to the submission of the
preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early
and informally the purpose and effect of this chapter and the criteria and
standards herein, and to familiarize the developer with the comprehensive plan,
zoning title, subdivision title and such other plans and ordinances as deemed
appropriate. The developer may also meet with the commission or council prior
to submitting an application. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.140: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A.   Application For Preliminary PUD: An application for preliminary PUD shall
be filed with the administrator by a property owner or person having existing
interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. At a minimum, the
application shall contain the following information filed in triplicate:
   1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   2.   Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, registered
engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan;
   3.   Legal description of property;
   4.   Description of existing use;
   5.   Zoning districts;
   6.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator, showing
property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as
the administrator may require to show the relationship of the PUD to the
comprehensive plan and to existing schools and other community facilities and
services;
   7.   A preliminary development plan, at a scale approved by the
administrator, showing:
      a.   Topography at two foot (2') intervals;
      b.   Location and type of residential, commercial and industrial land
uses;
      c.   Layout, dimensions and names of existing and proposed streets;
      d.   Rights of way;
      e.   Utility easements;
      f.   Parks and community spaces;
      g.   Layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines;
      h.   Preliminary improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage,
electricity, telephone and natural gas and such other characteristics as the
administrator deems necessary;
   8.   Proposed schedule for the development of the site; and
   9.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in
question to initiate the proposed development plan within one year.
B.   Written Statement By Developer: The application for preliminary PUD shall
be accompanied by a written statement by the developer setting forth the
reasons why, in his opinion, the PUD would be in the public interest.
C.   Public Notice: The same provision for public hearing and legal
notification as required for special use permits.
D.   Approval In Principle Of Preliminary Development Plan: Within thirty (30)
days after the public hearing, the commission shall review the preliminary
development plan to determine if it is consistent with the intent and purpose
of this title; whether the proposed development advances the general welfare of
the community and neighborhood and whether the benefits, combination of various
land uses and the interrelationship with the land uses in the surrounding area
justify the deviation from standard district regulations and its recommendation
to the council. The commission's recommendation in principle of the preliminary
development plan shall be necessary before an applicant may submit a final
development plan. Approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
E.   Consideration Before Approval: The council shall consider the general
standards applicable to special use permits and criteria for special uses
before approving in principle a preliminary development plan. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.150: APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A.   Upon approval in principle of a preliminary development plan, an
application for approval of the final development plan shall be filed with the
administrator by at least one property owner or person having a presently
existing interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. Each
application shall be signed by the owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and
exactness of all information supplied on the application for final development
plan. Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and
may be revoked if construction on the project has not begun within one year
from the date of issuance of the approval. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:
   1.   A survey of the proposed development site showing the dimensions and
bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography and existing features
of the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses;
   2.   All the information required on the preliminary development plan, the
location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling units,
nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for adjacent
properties;
   3.   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated
residential population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population;
anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for
each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposed an exception from
the standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing development;
   4.   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary, water,
sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste
disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of earthwork
required for site preparation and development;
   5.   Site plan, showing buildings, various functional use areas, circulation
and their relationship;
   6.   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
   7.   Landscaping plans; and
   8.   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or
devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the land,
and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly
owned and maintained. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.160: RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A.   Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the final development plan,
the commission shall recommend to the council that the final development plan
be approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or
disapproved. The commission shall then transmit all papers constituting the
record and the recommendations to the council.
B.   The commission shall find that the facts submitted with the application
and presented to them establish that:
   1.   The proposed development can be initiated within one year of the date
of approval;
   2.   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained and the uses proposed
will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will
have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations;
   3.   The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD;
   4.   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the locations
proposed;
   5.   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by the
design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the PUD and the adopted policy of the council;
   6.   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
   7.   The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan; and
   8.   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.170: ACTION BY THE COUNCIL ON FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A.   Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the final recommendations of
the commission, the council shall either approve, approve with supplementary
conditions or disapprove the application as presented. Upon granting or denying
the application, the council shall specify:
   1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
   2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
   3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
B.   If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the
council shall direct the administrator to issue zoning permits only in
accordance with the approved final development plan and the supplementary
conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.40.180: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL PERIOD FOR FINAL DEVELOPMENT
PLAN:
The approval of a final development plan for a PUD shall be for a period not to
exceed one year to allow for preparation and recording of the required
subdivision plan and the development of the project. If no construction has
begun within one year after approval is granted, the approved final development
plan shall be void. An extension of the time limit or modification of the
approved final development plan may be approved if the council finds that such
extension or modification is not in conflict with the public interest. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.50
ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
17.50.010: Zoning Administrator
17.50.015: Planning And Zoning Commission
17.50.020: Zoning Permit Required
17.50.030: Application For Zoning Permit
17.50.040: Approval Of Permit, Issuance
17.50.050: Expiration Of Permit
17.50.060: Certificates Of Occupancy
17.50.070: Record Of Zoning Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
17.50.080: Unlawful Acts
17.50.010: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
A.   Position Created: For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
title, an administrator is hereby created, who shall be appointed by the mayor
with the consent of the council. The administrator shall administer this title
and may be provided with the assistance from such other persons as the council
may direct.
B.   Duties: For the purpose of this title, the administrator shall have the
following duties:
   1.   To advise interested persons of the zoning ordinance provisions of this
title;
   2.   To notify the news media regarding matters of public interest;
   3.   To aid applicants in the preparation and expedition of required
applications;
   4.   To issue zoning permits, certificate of occupancy permits,
notifications and such similar administrative duties;
   5.   To investigate all violations of this title and notify in writing the
person responsible for such violation(s), ordering the action necessary to
correct such violation; and
   6.   To assist the council in carrying out the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.015: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A.   Creation: For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this title, a
planning and zoning commission is created.
B.   Membership: The commission shall consist of five (5) voting members, all
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the council. An
appointed member of this commission must have resided in the city for two (2)
years prior to his appointment and must remain a resident of the city during
his service on the commission. Appointment to the commission shall be made by
resolution adopted by the council, with a term of office of four (4) years.
Vacancies on the commission caused for any reason other than expiration of a
term shall be filled by resolution approved by a majority of the council and
shall be only for the duration of the unexpired term of the previously serving
commission.
C.   Organization: The commission shall elect a chairman and create and fill
any such office that it may deem necessary. The commission may establish
subcommittees, advisory committees, hearing examiners or neighborhood groups to
advise and assist in carrying out the responsibilities. The commission may
appoint nonvoting ex officio advisors as may be deemed necessary.
D.   Rules, Records And Meetings: Written organization papers or bylaws
consistent with this title and other laws of the state for the transaction of
business of the commission shall be adopted. A record of meetings, hearings,
resolutions, studies, findings, permits and actions taken shall be maintained.
All meetings and records shall be open to the public. At least one regular
meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine (9) months in a year. A
majority of voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
E.   Duties Of The Commission: For the purpose of this title, the commission
shall have the following duties:
   1.   Initiate proposed amendments to this title and conduct a biennial
review of the complete zoning ordinance;
   2.   Review all proposed amendments to this title and make recommendations
to the council;
   3.   Review all planned unit developments and make recommendations to the
council;
   4.   Grant special use permits as specified in the official schedule of
district regulations and under the conditions as herein specified with such
additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this title;
   5.   Hear appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
administrator;
   6.   Issue such variances from the terms of this title as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to the special conditions, a
literal enforcement of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, so that
the spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial justice done; and
   7.   Perform such other duties as are prescribed for it in this title. (Ord.
1070, 2010; Ord. 1216, 2023)
17.50.020: ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be established
or changed in use without a zoning permit therefor issued by the administrator.
Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity with the provisions of this
title. Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the international
building code or similar code as adopted by the city. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.030: APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT:
A.   The application for zoning permit shall be signed by the owner or
applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on
the application.
B.   Each application shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may
be revoked if work has not begun or is not substantially completed within one
year.
C.   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
   1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   2.   Legal description of property;
   3.   Existing use;
   4.   Proposed use;
   5.   Zoning district;
   6.   Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of
the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings on
the lot, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or
alteration;
   7.   Building heights;
   8.   Number of off street parking spaces or loading berths;
   9.   Number of dwelling units;
   10.   Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
   11.   Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with,
and provide for, the enforcement of this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.040: APPROVAL OF PERMIT, ISSUANCE:
Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of an application, the administrator
shall either approve or disapprove the application in conformance with the
provisions of this title. All zoning permits shall, however, be conditional
upon the commencement of work within one year. One copy of the plans shall be
returned to the applicant by the administrator after the administrator shall
have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by
his signature on such copy and one copy of plans, similarly marked, shall be
retained by the administrator. The administrator shall issue a placard, to be
posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question, attesting to the
fact that the use or alteration is in conformance with the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.050: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
If the work described in any zoning permit has not begun within one year from
the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. It shall be revoked by
the administrator and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons
affected. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.060: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: It shall be unlawful to use or occupy
or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof thereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued therefor by the administrator stating that the proposed
use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title and with
all conditional provisions that may have been imposed.
B.   Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: A temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued by the administrator for a period not exceeding six (6) months
during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.070: RECORD OF ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
The administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permits and
certificates of occupancy and copies shall be furnished upon request to any
persons. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.50.080: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A.   Failure To Obtain Permit Or Certificate: Failure to obtain a zoning permit
or certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this title.
B.   Use And Construction Contrary To Plans: Zoning permits or certificates of
occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the
administrator authorize only the use and arrangement set forth in such approved
plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized
shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.60
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
17.60.010: Purpose
17.60.020: Interpretation Of Special Use
17.60.030: General Standards For Special Uses
17.60.040: Public Sites And Open Spaces
17.60.050: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
17.60.060: Special Use Permit
17.60.010: PURPOSE:
It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of land uses are
evolving, and that many of these and some other more conventional uses possess
characteristics of such unique and special nature relative to location, design,
size, method of operation, circulation and public facilities that each specific
use must be considered individually. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.60.020: INTERPRETATION OF SPECIAL USE:
Any use which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of
this title shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall,
without further action, be considered a conforming one. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.60.030: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USES:
The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed special use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
A.   Will, in fact, constitute a special use as established in section
17.60.060 of this chapter for the zoning district involved;
B.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives or
with any specific objective of the comprehensive plan and/or this title;
C.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of
the same area;
D.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses;
E.   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such
as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewer and schools; or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
F.   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
G.   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare or odors;
H.   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed
as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
I.   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or
historic feature of major importance. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.60.040: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following:
A.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use shown on the future acquisition map, as authorized
in section 67-6517, Idaho Code, is located in whole or in part within a
proposed development, the commission shall notify the appropriate public agency
concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of the
date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to suspend
consideration on the permit for sixty (60) days from the date of the request;
however, if an agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days, the commission
shall resume consideration of the special use application.
B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to residential
development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such as trees,
watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall be
preserved in the design of the development.
C.   Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and large
scale developments, the council may require sufficient park or open space
facilities of acceptable size, location and site characteristics that may be
suitable for the proposed development. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.60.050: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
In granting any special use, the council may prescribe appropriate conditions,
bonds and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of such
conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
special use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.60.060: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
A.   Application For Special Use Permit: An application for special use permit
shall be filed with the administrator by at least one owner or lessee of
property for which such special use is proposed. At a minimum, the application
shall contain the following information:
   1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   2.   Legal description of property;
   3.   Description of existing use;
   4.   Zoning district;
   5.   Description of proposed special use;
   6.   A plan for the proposed site for the special use showing the location
of all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the council may require to determine
if the proposed special use meets the intent and requirements of this title;
and
   7.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on adjoining
property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other
properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan.
B.   Supplemental Information: Prior to granting a special use permit, the
council may request studies from the planning staff or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects on the proposed
special use.
C.   Procedure For Approval Of Special Use Permit: The commission shall hold a
public hearing on each special use permit application as specified in title 2,
chapter 2.40 of this code. The commission may approve, conditionally approve or
deny a special use permit under the conditions as herein specified and
considering such additional safeguards as will uphold the intent of this title.
   1.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a special use permit, the
commission shall hold a public hearing in which interested persons shall have
an opportunity to be heard. That public hearing shall be scheduled within
thirty (30) days of receipt of an application and upon notice lawfully given
pursuant to Idaho Code sections 67-6512(b) and 67-6509.
   2.   Action By Commission: Within fifteen (15) days after the public
hearing, the commission shall render its decision in writing approving or
denying the special use permit.
   3.   Commission To Specify: Upon granting or denying an application, the
commission shall specify:
      a.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      b.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      c.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   4.   Notice To Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a decision has been
rendered, the administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of
the action on the request.
D.   Conditions Of Permit: Upon the granting of a special use permit,
conditions may be attached to said permit including, but not limited to, those:
   1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
   2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
   3.   Controlling the duration of development;
   4.   Assuring that development is maintained properly;
   5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development;
   6.   Requiring the provision for on site or off site public facilities or
services; and
   7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in
this title.
E.   Transfer Of Permit: A special use permit is not transferable from one
parcel of land to another.
F.   Appeal By Affected Person: Any "affected person", defined as a person
having an interest in real property that may be adversely affected by the
issuance or denial of a special use permit may appeal such decision to the
council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk on the form
specified by the city clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing of the initial
decision.
G.   Effect Of Issuance On Other Special Uses: A special use permit shall not
be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other special use
permits. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.70
APPEALS, VARIANCES AND HEARINGS
SECTION:
17.70.010: Administrative Appeals, Variances And Appeals From Decisions Of The
Commission
17.70.020: Administrative Appeals
17.70.030: Variances
17.70.040: Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards
17.70.050: Procedure For Approval Of Appeal Or Variance
17.70.060: Request For Hearing By Affected Persons
17.70.070: Appeals From Decisions Of The Commission
17.70.080: Procedures On Appeals Of Variances And Special Use Permits
17.70.010: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS, VARIANCES AND APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE
COMMISSION:
The commission shall consider administrative appeals where it is alleged that
an error has been made by the administrator. Appeals may be made to the council
from final decisions of the commission on special use permits, variances or
administrative appeals. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.020: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
A.   Appeals to the commission concerning interpretation or administration of
this title may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the
administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after the
decision of the administrator by filing with the administrator and with the
commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is
being taken.
B.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless
the administrator certifies to the commission after the notice of appeal is
filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would,
in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order which may be granted by
the commission.
C.   The commission shall schedule a meeting with the person filing the
administrative appeal at a time and place designated by the commission. The
appeal shall be heard pursuant to the procedures outlined at title 2, chapter
2.40 of this code. The commission shall render a written decision on the
administrative appeal within fifteen (15) days of the meeting. The decision on
the administrative appeal may be appealed to the council by utilizing the same
procedures for appeals of special use permits provided in
chapter 17.60 of this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.030: VARIANCES:
A.   Authority To Grant Variances: The commission may authorize, in specific
cases, such variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship. No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same
district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or
buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a
variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship.
B.   Application And Standards For Variance: A variance from the terms of this
title shall not be granted by the commission unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted to the administrator and the commission
containing:
   1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
   2.   Legal description of property;
   3.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
   4.   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance
conforms to the following standards:
      a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
      b.   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this title;
      c.   That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant; and
      d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
C.   Conditions: A variance shall not be granted unless the commission makes
specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented
to it which support conclusions that the above mentioned standards and
conditions have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.040: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
Under no circumstances shall a variance, or an appeal of a variance be granted
so as to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this title and the
zoning district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by
the terms of this title in said district. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.050: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF APPEAL OR VARIANCE:
A.   Public Hearing, Notice: Prior to granting a variance, a public hearing, at
which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall be held.
The public hearing before the commission shall be scheduled within thirty (30)
days of receipt of an application. The commission shall follow the notice
requirements provided by
chapter 17.90 of this title, and Idaho Code section 67-6512(b). The public
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with title 2, chapter 2.40 of this
code.
B.   Action By Commission: Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing,
the commission shall enter a decision in writing and provide a copy by mail to
the applicant and any other person testifying at the hearing.
C.   Commission To Specify: Upon granting or denying an application for
variance, the commission shall specify:
   1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
   2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
   3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
variance. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.060: REQUEST FOR HEARING BY AFFECTED PERSONS:
A.   Definition: An "affected person" shall mean one having an interest in real
property which may be adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit
authorizing the development.
B.   Right To Request Hearing: Any affected person may, at any time prior to
final action on any rezone, special use, or variance permit, if no hearing has
been held on the application, petition the commission in writing to hold a
hearing as required; provided however, that if twenty (20) affected persons
petition for a hearing, the hearing shall be held.
C.   Action By Commission: After a hearing the commission may:
   1.   Grant or deny a special use permit or variance; or
   2.   Recommend a decision on a rezone; or
   3.   Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for further study
or hearing.
D.   Appeals: An affected person aggrieved by a decision may, within sixty (60)
days, after all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances, seek
judicial review under the procedures provided by Idaho Code. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.070: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION:
A.   Final decisions of the commission on applications for special use permits
or variances may be appealed to the council by an "affected person" as defined
at section
17.70.060 of this chapter. The appeal must be made by filing a written appeal
form approved by the council with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the
mailing of the decision to the applicant. Remedies before the city of Jerome on
such matters shall not be deemed to have been exhausted until a decision on
such an appeal has been made by the council. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.70.080: PROCEDURES ON APPEALS OF VARIANCES AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A.   When a notice of appeal of a decision by the commission on a variance or
special use permit has been timely filed, the transcribed recording of the
hearing before the commission and all documents, including the application
filed or entered into evidence before the commission shall constitute the
record on appeal. The record shall be prepared and provided to the council.
When the council has received the record, a notice of the time, date and place
of hearing shall be sent to the appellant, city staff and other persons who
testified at or submitted documents into the record at the hearing before the
commission. The appellant shall be required to pay a fee in addition to the fee
for filing the appeal which is set by resolution of the council. The appellant
shall pay the cost of preparing the transcription of the hearing before the
commission.
B.   No new evidence, either written or by way of verbal testimony shall be
presented or considered at the appeal hearing. The appellant shall have the
burden of proof as to why the decision appealed from is in error based upon the
record transmitted to the council.
C.   The appellant shall present its case first. Following the appellant, any
person supporting the appeal who participated in the hearing before the
commission shall be permitted to testify. The city staff shall then present its
case on behalf of the city following which any person who opposes the appeal
may testify. The appellant may then present any rebuttal argument following
which the appeal hearing shall be concluded.
D.   The council, in its discretion, may permit persons with standing to
testify at the hearing the opportunity to submit a brief in support of their
position.
E.   The council may set reasonable limits on the time for testimony or
argument provided each participant in the hearing.
F.   The council may ask questions of any participant in the hearing at any
time.
G.   A verbatim record of the hearing on the appeal shall be made and preserved
as part of the record on the appeal.
H.   The council shall render a written decision on the appeal within twenty
(20) days of the completion of the appeal and mail a copy to the appellant and
each person who participated in the appeal hearing by testifying, presenting
argument or who submitted a brief. The council may uphold, reverse, or remand
the matter appealed from to the commission for further proceedings. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
CHAPTER 17.80
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
17.80.010: Authority
17.80.020: Initiation Of Zoning Amendments
17.80.030: Application For Amendment
17.80.040: General Procedure For Amendments
17.80.050: Public Hearings, Notice
17.80.060: Zoning Text Amendment
17.80.070: Zoning Map Amendment
17.80.080: Action By Commission
17.80.090: Action By Council
17.80.100: Effect Of Amendment Approved
17.80.110: Resubmission Of Application
17.80.120: Zoning Upon Annexation
17.80.130: Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses
17.80.010: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practices require, the council may, by ordinance after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the commission and subject to procedures provided
by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and
boundaries or classification of property. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.020: INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title may be initiated in one of the following ways:
A.   By adoption of a motion by the commission;
B.   By adoption of a motion by the council; or
C.   By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who has
existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.030: APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT:
A.   Applications for amendments to the official zoning map, adopted as part of
this title by reference, shall contain at least the following information:
   1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   2.   Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the council;
   3.   Present land use;
   4.   Present zoning district;
   5.   Proposed use;
   6.   Proposed zoning district;
   7.   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator showing
property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other
items as the administrator may require;
   8.   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the comprehensive
plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding
area; and
   9.   A fee as established by the council. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.040: GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS:
Zoning districts shall be amended in the following manner:
A.   Each request for an amendment to this title shall be submitted to the
commission which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature
of the amendment requested.
B.   Each request for an amendment shall be reviewed by the commission and
shall be evaluated to determine if such action shall create a demand for public
infrastructure that is not currently available for the site including, but not
limited to, municipal sewer and water services.
C.   If the request is in accordance with the comprehensive plan, the
commission may recommend and the council may adopt or reject the amendment
under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided.
D.   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan,
the request shall be submitted to the commission, or in its absence, the
council, which shall recommend, and the council may adopt or reject an
amendment to the comprehensive plan, under the notice and hearing procedures
provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code. After the comprehensive plan has been
amended, this title may then be amended as hereinafter provided for. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
17.80.050: PUBLIC HEARINGS, NOTICE:
The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on proposed
zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or map revisions.
Notice requirements shall comply with Idaho Code section 67-6511 and
chapter 17.90 of this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.060: ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT:
The commission, prior to recommending a zoning text amendment to the council,
shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. The commission shall follow the notice
requirements provided in
chapter 17.90 of this title and Idaho Code section 67-6511. Following the
commission's hearing, if the commission makes a material change from what was
presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the
council. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.070: ZONING MAP AMENDMENT:
The commission, prior to recommending a zoning map amendment that is in
accordance with the comprehensive plan to the council, shall conduct at least
one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. The commission shall follow the notice requirements provided in
chapter 17.90 of this title and Idaho Code section 67-6511. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.080: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
A.   Within twenty (20) days from the hearing on the proposed amendment, the
commission shall transmit its recommendation to the council.
B.   The commission may recommend that the amendment be granted as requested,
or it may recommend a modification of the amendment requested, or it may
recommend that the amendment be denied. The commission shall ensure that any
recommendations for amendments are in accordance with the following findings:
   1.   The proposed zoning ordinance amendment is in accordance with the
comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives and the future land use
map;
   2.   The information provided from the agencies having jurisdiction over the
public facilities needed for this site indicate that adequate public facilities
exist, or are expected to be provided, to serve any and all uses allowed on
this property under the proposed zone;
   3.   The proposed zone is compatible with the zoning and uses in the
surrounding area;
   4.   No nonconforming uses will be created with this rezone. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.80.090: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
A.   The council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment to
this title as recommended by the commission, shall conduct at least one public
hearing using the notice and hearing procedures at
chapter 17.90 of this title and Idaho Code section 67-6511. Following the
council hearing, if the council makes a material change from what was presented
at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
council adopts the amendment. The council shall enter its decision in writing.
B.   Upon granting or denying an application to amend this title, the council
shall specify:
   1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
   2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
   3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
amendment. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.100: EFFECT OF AMENDMENT APPROVED:
In the event the council shall approve an amendment, such amendment shall
thereafter be made part of this title upon the preparation and passage of an
ordinance. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.110: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied by
the council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form or with
reference to substantially the same premises for the same purposes within a
period of one year from the date of such final action, unless there is an
amendment in the comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions
as applying to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.120: ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the council shall request and
receive a recommendation from the commission as to the compatibility of the
comprehensive plan with, and to the proposed zoning for the unincorporated
area. The commission and the council shall follow the notice and hearing
procedures for zoning ordinance map amendments set forth in
chapter 17.90 of this title and Idaho Code section 67-6511. Concurrently or
immediately following the adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the council
shall amend the zoning map and/or this title as required. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.80.130: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and a collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals,
variances, special use permits, plan approvals and other matters pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this title requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the administrator and may be altered or
amended only by the council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses
have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.90
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
17.90.010: Public Hearings
17.90.020: Public Hearing; Special Use Permit Notice Requirements
17.90.030: Public Hearing; Zoning Amendment Notice Requirements
17.90.040: Posted Notice
17.90.050: Substituted Notice For Public Hearings
17.90.010: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
On every land use action for which notice is provided below, both the
commission and the council shall hold a public hearing in which interested
persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. No notice of a council hearing
shall be given prior to receiving a recommendation from the commission where
required. Following any hearing, if a material change from what was advertised
in the notice and presented at the public hearing is proposed, further notice
and hearing shall be provided before the final decision is made. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.90.020: PUBLIC HEARING; SPECIAL USE PERMIT NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to recommending a special use permit, at least one public hearing at
which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard, shall be held.
At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place
and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper or
paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice may also be made
available to other newspapers, radio and television stations serving the
jurisdiction for use as a public service announcement. Notice shall also be
provided to property owners and residents within the land being considered
based on the following schedule:
A.   Five hundred feet (500') for all special use permits being requested/
considered within residential one (R-1), residential two (R-2), residential
three (R-3) and multi-family residential (R-M) zones;
B.   Seven hundred fifty feet (750') for all special use permits being
requested/considered within C-2, C-3 and CBD zones;
C.   One thousand feet (1,000') for all special use permits being requested/
considered within the C-1 zone;
D.   One thousand five hundred feet (1,500') for all special use permits being
requested/considered within M-1, M-2, BP, PS, MU and P zones. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.90.030: PUBLIC HEARING; ZONING AMENDMENT NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on the
proposed zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or map
revision.
A.   Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a
zoning ordinance text amendment to the council, shall conduct at least one
public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time and
place and the amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or paper
of general circulation within the jurisdiction. Following the commission's
hearing, if the commission makes a material change from what was presented at
the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the council.
B.   Zoning Ordinance Map Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a
zoning ordinance map amendment that is in accordance with the comprehensive
plan to the council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and the amendment shall
be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within
the jurisdiction. Additional notice shall be provided by mail to property
owners and residents within the land being considered based on the following
schedule:
   1.   Five hundred feet (500') for all zoning ordinance map amendments being
requested/considered within residential one (R-1), residential two (R-2),
residential three (R-3) zones, and multi-family residential (R-M) zones;
   2.   Seven hundred fifty feet (750') for all zoning ordinance map amendments
being requested/considered within C-2, C-3, and CBD zones;
   3.   One thousand feet (1,000') for all zoning ordinance map amendments
being requested/considered within the C-1 zone;
   4.   One thousand five hundred feet (1,500') for all zoning ordinance map
amendments being requested/considered within M-1, BP, M-2, PS, MU and P zones.
Following the commission's hearing, if the commission makes a material change
from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall
be provided before the commission forwards the amendment with its
recommendation to the council. (Ord. 1074, 2010: Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.90.040: POSTED NOTICE:
A.   Except as noted within this section, any time notice is required under
this section, the land being considered shall be posted by the zoning
administrator or designee not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the
commission hearing and again not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the
council hearing.
B.   For comprehensive plan land use map amendments and/or zoning ordinance map
amendments consisting of changes to more than ten (10) parcels of land, posted
notice shall not be required unless all parcels under request for amendment are
contiguous and if the parcels abut a public right of way. In such cases a
minimum of one four foot by four foot (4' x 4') plywood sign shall be placed
adjacent to the right of way. Otherwise, three (3) notices in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation, with the third notice appearing a
minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, shall be published. The
notice shall include a six inch by six inch (6" x 6") minimum size graphic
representation showing the proposed comprehensive plan land use map or zoning
ordinance map amendments. Except as noted herein, posting of the property must
be in substantial compliance with the following requirements:
   1.   Signage Requirements:
      a.   Materials; Mounting: The sign(s) shall consist of four foot by four
foot (4' x 4') plywood or other hard surface mounted on two (2) posts in such a
manner that it is perpendicular to the roadway along which the sign is posted
and the bottom of the sign is at least three feet (3') above the ground.
      b.   Information: Centered at the top of the four foot by four foot (4' x
4') sign board(s) in six inch (6") letters shall be the words "Public Notice".
In addition, each sign will inform the public of the name of the applicant, and
if applicable, the proposed development, the date, time, place, and nature of
the public hearing and a summary of the proposal to be considered. Each sign
shall be painted white and the letters shall be painted black.
      c.   Special Use: In lieu of the above conditions, for special use permit
applications made pursuant to
chapter 17.60 of this title only, the sign shall consist of one eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") sign on paper or other material and lettering
sufficient to inform the public of the name of the applicant, and, if
applicable, the proposed development, the date, time, place, and nature of the
public hearing and a summary of the proposal to be considered.
      d.   Location Of Signs: The sign(s) shall be posted on the land being
considered along each roadway that is adjacent to it. The signs shall be
located on the property outside of the public right of way, if they can be so
located and remain clearly visible from the roadway; otherwise, the consent of
the owner of the right of way must be obtained and the sign(s) located therein.
Except as noted herein, if the land being considered consists of more than one
parcel of record, a sign must be located upon each parcel. The administrator,
upon finding that adequate notice will be provided, may not require all signs
to comply with the size requirements of this section. In the event that the
land being considered includes properties with five hundred feet (500') or more
of road frontage, a sign shall be placed on each end of the property roadway
frontage. If this property includes a corner lot, three (3) signs shall be
posted, one on the corner and one on each end of the property roadway
frontages. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.90.050: SUBSTITUTED NOTICE FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS:
In any instance where notice of a public hearing before either the commission
or the council requires notice to be mailed to two hundred (200) or more
property owners or purchasers of record, in lieu of mailing notices of hearing
to such persons entitled to it, notice of the hearing may be published in any
newspaper published daily or weekly in Jerome County, Idaho, or, if no such
newspaper is published in Jerome County, Idaho, then in a newspaper in general
circulation in Jerome County, Idaho, by publishing the notice of hearing twice
in the legal advertisement section of such newspaper, the first publication of
which shall be at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, and the last of
which shall be at least three (3) days prior to the hearing. In addition,
notice of the hearing shall be posted on any external boundary(ies) of the real
property subject to the hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing
date, on any boundary abutting a public street. The posted notice required by
this section shall not apply if the public hearing addresses a matter requiring
more extensive posting under subsection
17.90.040B of this chapter. (Ord. 1074, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.100
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
17.100.010: Complaints Regarding Violations
17.100.020: Penalties
17.100.010: COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes
and basis thereof, shall be filed with the administrator. The administrator
shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate and take action
thereon as provided by this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.100.020: PENALTIES:
A.   The city attorney may, at the direction of the council, in addition to
taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin
any violation of this title. Penalties for failure to comply with or violations
of the provisions of this title shall be as follows:
   1.   Violation of any of the provisions of this title or failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   2.   Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   3.   The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any
other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense.
   4.   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the council or any other public
official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to
restrain or prevent any violation of this title or of the Idaho Code. (Ord.
1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.110
JEROME AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
17.110.010: Area Of City Impact Defined
17.110.020: Jerome Area Of City Impact Map
17.110.030: General
17.110.010: AREA OF CITY IMPACT DEFINED:
A.   The area of city impact shall be that real property designated as the area
of city impact by the city and county of Jerome from time to time in accordance
with the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6526.
B.   In case a property under single ownership is divided by the boundary line
of the Jerome area of city impact, if such line divides such property so that
one or both of the parts has a depth of three hundred feet (300') or less, such
part may be included in the jurisdiction within which the remainder and larger
portion of the property is located. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.110.020: JEROME AREA OF CITY IMPACT MAP:
The map designated as the official area of impact map for the city, within the
meaning of Idaho Code section 67-6526, is available for inspection in the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.110.030: GENERAL:
The establishment and modification of the area of city impact is authorized by
Idaho Code section 67-6526. The purpose of this section (the city/county
agreement) is to proactively plan for orderly and consistent development where
annexation is anticipated to occur for the next ten (10) years by providing
standards for development for the growth within the areas of city impact; to
promote the public health, safety, and the general welfare of the citizens of
Jerome County; to ensure protection for municipalities and landowners against
adjacent, incompatible development by establishing zoning districts; and to
organize and manage growth by establishing land use regulations for those
zones.
A.   Boundaries:
   1.   Pursuant to the above referenced statement of purpose, areas of city
impact are the areas designated on the Jerome County zoning map, and as further
described in the legal description attached thereto, hereby fully incorporated
by reference, copies of which are available for inspection at the office of the
clerk of the city of Jerome, Jerome County recorder's office and the Jerome
County planning and zoning office.
   2.   Any hearing or other action by the city which causes a change in city
limits, shall stand as the basis for Exhibits “A” and “B”; as well as the
County’s Zoning Map, being amended in conformance therewith. No other county
action, by way of hearings or otherwise, shall be required for the
incorporation of such amendments.
   3.   In circumstances where a property under single ownership is divided by
the boundary line of an area of city impact the property shall recognize the
respective zones that are designated on the official zoning map. If the
property is divided along the area of city impact boundary line, resulting in
one parcel lying in the area of city impact and the other not, then each parcel
will become an original parcel. (See JCZO chapter 14.)
B.   Establishment, Review And Amendment:
   1.   Jerome County shall work cooperatively with each of its municipalities
to develop and review the county's comprehensive plan and corresponding
ordinances for areas of city impact.
   2.   Governing boards shall undertake a review of agreements, ordinances,
and comprehensive plan policies regarding areas of city impact at least every
ten (10) years, in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(e).
   3.   Negotiation for amendments to this section shall follow procedures
outlined in state code as well as amendment provisions for each entity's
specific document or ordinance.
C.   Applicability Of JCZO:
   1.   The Jerome County zoning ordinance (JCZO) shall govern over those
matters within areas of city impact that are not specifically covered by this
section. In the event of conflict between this section and the JCZO, the
language of this section shall control. Specifically, the application, notice
and hearing procedures of the JCZO, shall control specific permits (i.e.,
special use or land division permit).
   2.   Notification of public hearings and land divisions within the area of
city impact zone shall be sent to the city for review and comment. For
consideration in the review process, the city shall reply no later than seven
(7) days prior to the hearing.
   3.   If a recommendation is received from the city, it shall be given great
weight by the county, provided it is legally and factually supported, however
such recommendation shall in no way obligate the county.
   4.   If no response is received, the county may proceed without a
recommendation from the city.
   5.   The county shall notify the city of its final decision in the matter by
forwarding a copy of all final documents reflecting the action taken by the
county.
D.   Annexation: Annexation by the city shall be limited to those lands lying
within areas of city impact and shall be contiguous to the boundaries of the
city. Properties not within areas of city impact that are contiguous to the
boundary of the city shall be allowed annexation when requested by an owner, as
provided for in Idaho Code section 50-222.
   1.   Prior to annexation of land into the city, the county and city shall
meet and jointly determine the renaming and/or readdressing of any previously
named county road. Every attempt to maintain consistency, limit potential
confusion, and assist emergency services in providing directions to first
responders shall be made by extending the altered name and/or addressing
sequence to the nearest intersection or most logical point of termination
whenever possible. The county shall continue to be the addressing authority for
all properties within its jurisdiction.
   2.   Upon annexation, the provisions of the JCZO shall no longer apply to
the annexed area. The city shall notify the board of county commissioners and
the Jerome County planning and zoning office when annexation is being
considered and when annexations are completed.
E.   Infrastructure: The city shall notify the county prior to placing any city
infrastructure outside of the city's limits and within the county's
jurisdiction.
F.   Zoning Districts Within The Area Of City Impact:
   1.   Airport Overlay Zone (ARO): An airport overlay zone (ARO) applies to
those areas surrounding public/commercial airports. The purpose of this zone is
to prevent the creation of aviation hazards, which endanger the health, safety,
and welfare of the public, as well as users of the airport. The airport overlay
zone is established to protect airport airspace and prevent the encroachment of
noise sensitive or incompatible land uses within certain areas of the airport.
All land within both the ARO and areas of city impact, shall be subject to the
provisions of this section and specifically, chapter 12 of the JCZO.
   2.   Agriculture Limited Zone (IMP-A-L): The agriculture limited zone is
intended to encourage agricultural uses and those activities that support
agriculture while limiting livestock confinement operations. This zoning
designation will also prevent premature conversion of rural land for
nonagricultural development by limiting residential density.
   3.   Residential (IMP-RES): The residential district is intended to provide
and promote residential density of one acre or less, to minimize potential
water, sewer, and access problems common to scattered rural residential
development, and to assure that the layout of any such developments will be
compatible with city standards when eventually annexed.
   4.   Commercial (IMP-COM): The commercial district is designed to
accommodate and promote business developments which may differ in size and use;
to encourage the grouping together of businesses, both public and semipublic
that are capable of being operated under such standards as they will be
unobtrusive and not detrimental to surrounding uses. Uses permitted in this
zone are those which are clean, quiet and free of hazardous or objectionable
elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare. No new residential housing
would be permitted within this zone. The property along state and federal
highways will be developed with strict sign standards, landscaping design,
lighting and parking standards to enhance highway corridors and entrances into
the community.
   5.   Industrial (IMP-IND): The industrial district is designed to provide
for convenient employment centers of light manufacturing, research and
development, warehousing, and distributing. This district is intended to
encourage the development of industrial uses that are clean, quiet, entirely or
almost entirely, within enclosed structures. Accessibility to transportation
systems is a requirement of this district. No new residential housing would be
permitted within this zone.
G.   Additional Standards Within Zones: In addition to the customary standards
found in the JCZO, the following regulations shall apply within areas of city
impact:
   1.   Roads:
      a.   The appropriate highway district will determine infrastructure
requirements for access control, public streets and roads.
      b.   The city may recommend additional requirements for private roads,
which the board may impose as a condition of the permit.
   2.   Building/Fire Codes:
      a.   The appropriate fire district shall determine fire requirements
within areas of city impact, including, but not limited to, requiring fire
hydrants.
   3.   Agricultural Limited (IMP-A-L):
      a.   Residential density shall not exceed one dwelling per parcel.
      b.   Residential housing that is to be developed shall connect to
municipal sewer and water systems if the property line is within three hundred
feet (300') of the systems and if the system is accessible for connection. If
sewer and water connection is not available or beyond three hundred feet (300')
from the property line, septic and wells shall be allowed according to state
regulations.
      c.   Parcels shall be allowed one regulated land division with proper
application and permit as outlined in chapter 14 of the JCZO. Only one of the
resulting parcels therefrom shall have a single residence or residential
building right. The other resulting parcel shall be deemed unbuildable for
residential purposes and shall have such "unbuildable" status noted on the
recorded land division survey and deed.
      d.   Animal unit density shall not exceed two (2) animal units per acre.
An animal unit is defined in chapter 2 of the JCZO.
   4.   Residential (IMP-RES):
      a.   Residential density may be greater than one dwelling per one acre if
each home will be connected to a municipal or community sewer and water system.
Land divisions of less than twenty (20) acres shall not be allowed without
connecting into a municipal or community sewer and water system. Land division
density shall be one home per twenty (20) acres.
      b.   Residential housing that is to be developed shall connect to
municipal sewer and water systems if the property line is within three hundred
feet (300') of the systems and if the system is accessible for connection. If
sewer and water connection is not available or is beyond three hundred feet
(300') from the property line, septic and wells shall be allowed according to
state regulations.
      c.   Manufactured and mobile homes are permitted within this zone as long
as they meet the adopted local and state codes. There is no age limitation on
such homes.
   5.   Commercial (IMP-COM):
      a.   All commercial developments that require city sewer and water
services shall participate in a predevelopment meeting with Jerome County,
Jerome city and affected agencies before obtaining a building permit for the
construction of the development.
      b.   The city shall provide written approval to the county for all sewer
and water hookups before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the
developer.
      c.   Commercial development situated on state or federal highways shall
be landscaped along the highway corridor. Lighting shall be shielded or
directional and shall not trespass property lines of the developing lot or
parcel. All vehicles shall be parked to the side or rear of any buildings with
no parking between the highway and any building fronting the highway, unless a
landscaped berm screens parking from the view of the highway. Proposed
commercial developments shall be required to submit landscaping plans, a
lighting diagram, parking diagram and a setback approval correspondence from
the Idaho transportation department as part of any building or development
application.
   6.   Industrial (IMP-IND):
      a.   No new residential housing would be permitted within this zone.
      b.   All industrial developments that require city sewer and water
services shall participate in a predevelopment meeting with Jerome County,
Jerome city and affected agencies before obtaining a building permit for the
construction of the development.
      c.   The city shall provide written approval to the county for all sewer
and water hookups before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the
developer.
   7.   Setbacks shall be required in the area of impacts zones as indicated on
the following table:
 
Zoning District Front Setback Rear Setback Side Setback Street Side
IMP-RES         25'           20'          10'          15'
IMP-AL          25'           20'          12'          25'
IMP-COM         25'           10'          12'          25'
IMP-IND         25'           25'          20'          20'
 
H.   Regulations For Subdivision: In addition to applicable standards of the
JCZO, the regulations of this section shall also apply to all commercial and
residential subdivisions within areas of city impact.
   1.   Streets/Roads:
      a.   All public streets/roads shall be under the jurisdiction of the
appropriate highway district. All roads and streets shall be constructed to the
minimum standards of that highway district unless the standards of the city are
more stringent, then the developer will adhere to the city's standards.
      b.   All private street/roads that will not become public streets/roads
shall meet the city's standards.
   2.   Curb, Gutter, And Stormwater:
      a.   Lots one acre and over shall not be required to provide curb,
gutter, and stormwater drainage unless there is an annexation agreement stating
otherwise, in which case, the construction would be based on the requirements
of the city at the time the property is developed.
      b.   All lots less than one acre shall provide curb, gutter and
stormwater drainage based on the construction requirements of the city at the
time the property is developed.
      c.   Stormwater retention shall be provided by developer.
   3.   Irrigation:
      a.   Irrigation systems shall meet the standards of the agency providing
surface water for irrigation.
      b.   The city shall provide input for future considerations of providing
irrigation water to the development if surface water shares will be abandoned.
   4.   Fire:
      a.   All fire requirements shall be under the jurisdiction of the
appropriate fire district.
      b.   Fire flow information shall be provided to the appropriate fire
district when public/municipal water systems are utilized for fire hydrants, as
well as when commercial or residential uses require interior sprinklers for
fire suppression.
   5.   Water:
      a.   If the city water connection is within three hundred feet (300') of
the property line and accessible, the developer shall connect to the system.
      b.   If the city water connection is beyond three hundred feet (300')
from the property line the developer shall either connect the development to
the water system for the city or provide a community water system that may be
easily connected to the water system for the city as it becomes available.
      c.   If the water system of the city is inaccessible at the time the
property is developed the developer shall provide a community water system that
may be easily connected to the water system for the city as it becomes
available.
      d.   Property with an existing domestic well that is subsequently
subdivided may be required to abandon the well and connect to the city's water
system.
      e.   All community water systems shall be approved by the city and/or
appropriate agencies before any building permits shall be issued by Jerome
County.
   6.   Sewage:
      a.   If the city sewer connection is within three hundred feet (300') of
the property line and accessible, the developer shall connect to the system.
      b.   If the city sewer connection is beyond three hundred feet (300')
from the property line the developer shall either connect the development to
the sewer system for the city or provide a community sewer system that may be
easily connected to the sewer system for the city as it becomes available.
      c.   If the sewer system of the city is inaccessible at the time the
property is developed the developer shall provide a community sewer system that
may be easily connected to the water system for the city as it becomes
available.
      d.   Property with an existing septic system that is subsequently
subdivided may be required to abandon the septic system and connect to the
city's sewer system.
      e.   All community sewer systems shall be approved by the city and/or
appropriate agencies before any building permits shall be issued by Jerome
County.
I.   Regulations Within Zones:
   1.   Applicability: Unless otherwise stated, the following regulations shall
apply only to the primary land use of a property.
   2.   Explanation Of Land Use Charts: To determine where a specific use is
permitted, it is necessary to find the specific use in the charts below. Uses
are listed in the horizontal rows, zones are shown in the vertical columns, and
the key letters indicating the degree of permission of a use are found at the
intersection of the appropriate row and column.
      a.   The letter "P" indicates that a specific use is permitted in a
specific zone.
      b.   The letter "S" indicates that a special use permit is required for
that particular use to be compatible to the standard and customary uses in that
particular zone.
      c.   An empty square indicates that such use is not expected to occur in
such zone; therefore it is prohibited at the time of the adoption of the JCZO.
      d.   The letters "NR" indicate that there is no requirement established
for a particular use in a particular zone.
When several uses are combined and made part of a larger, all encompassing land
use, the most restrictive chart designation shall control for purposes of
determining the appropriate zone and required application.
   3.   Land Uses Unidentified In The Charts: Any land use not identified in
the charts of this section shall require a negotiation and agreement between
the city and the county followed by an amendment of this section; and shall
only proceed thereafter in accordance with the amendment. The amended ordinance
shall mandate whether the proposed use in the various zones is: allowed free of
restrictions; permitted; permitted with conditions; or prohibited. The process
for amendment shall adhere to the procedures outlined in subsection B of this
section.
   4.   Zoning Standards For Permitted Land Uses: Zoning regulations may have
been established for permitted or allowable uses by performance standards in
chapter 6 of the JCZO, and other chapters thereof when appropriate.
J.   Land Use Chart:
 
P = Permitted use S = Special use permit required
Use Category         Area Of City Impact Zones
Section I - Chart 10 IMP-A-L IMP-RES IMP-COM IMP-IND
Use Category                                    Area Of City Impact Zones
Section I - Chart 10                            IMP-A-L IMP-RES IMP-COM IMP-IND
Aircraft maintenance, repair and rebuilding     S       S       S       S
Airfields (private)                             S                      
Alcohol and drug rehabilitation facility               S       S        
Alcohol distillation for production of fuel     S                     P
Amusement parks                                               S       S
Animal, confined not regulated by chapter 13    P       P       P       P
Animal hospital                                 S              S1      P
Apparel repair and alteration (retail)          P1      P1      P       P
Aquaculture                                     S                      
Asphalt plant                                   S                     S
Auditorium                                      S       S       P       P
Bed and breakfast                               S       S       S        
Botanical gardens and arboretums                S       S       P       P
Building care contracting                       S       S1      P1      P
Bulk storage flammable liquids and gases                      S       S
Bus facilities                                                P       P
Bus shelter                                     P       P       P       P
Car wash                                                      P       P
Cemetery                                        S       S              S
Chemicals and chemical product manufacturing                  S1,4    S
Civic, fraternal, labor and social              S       S       P       P
organizations
Commercial composting and fertilizer            S                     S
manufacturing
Commercial truck wash facility (agriculture)    S                      
Commercial truck wash facility                                S       S
(nonagricultural)
Concrete products (manufacturing)               S                     S
Construction trades                             S       S       P1      P
Crop production                                 P       P       P       P
Dairy product processing                                      S       P
Daycare facilities                              S       S       S       S5
Dry cleaning, laundering and laundromats                      P1      P
Dwelling, multi-family                                 S               
Dwelling, single-family                         P       P               
Dwelling, two-family                                   P               
Equipment rental                                              P       P
Event center                                    S       S       S       S
Exhibition halls                                S       S       S       S
Fairgrounds                                     S                     S
Farm and garden supplies (retail or wholesale)  S              P       P
Food product manufacturing                      S              S       S
Freight transfer point                          P              P       P
Frozen food locker                                            P       P
Funeral homes and crematoria                                  P        
Furniture and fixture manufacturing             S              S       P
Gas station and retail sales establishment             S       P6      P6
Gas station and vehicle repair or service              S       S6      P6
Gas station, unattended                                       P6      P6
Government facilities                           S       S       P       P
Governmental protective facilities              S       S       S       S
Health club, spa                                S              P       P
Helipad                                         S                     S
Historical sites, monuments                     S       S       S       S
Home occupation                                 P       P       P       P
Horticultural services                          P       S       P       P
Hospice, assisted living and skilled nursing    S       S       S        
facilities
Hospital, clinics, and related services                S       S       S
Hotel/motel                                                   S       S
Hunting preserve                                S                      
Kennels                                         S              S       P
Landfill transfer stations                      S              S       S
Large implements and heavy equipment                          P       P
Libraries, museums, art galleries               S       S       P       P
Livestock feed, grain and feed processing       S              S       P
Livestock sales                                 S              S       S
Manufacturing miscellaneous products            S              S       S
Meat product processing (except rendering)      S              S       P
Mineral products (manufacturing)                S                     S
Mobile home sales                                             P       P
Offices, business, financial and professional   S       S       P       P
services
Open parking lot or garage, automobile          S       S       S       S
Open parking lot, truck or bus                  S              S       P
Open space                                      P       P       P       P
Park, mobile home                                      S               
Park, recreational vehicle                             S       S        
Pastured animals                                P       P       P       P
Petroleum products (manufacturing)                                   S
Plant - energy producing, nonconventional       S              S       S
Plant - industrial, manufacturing/processing                  S       P
Plant, light manufacturing                                    S       P
Printing and publication                        P              P       P
Railroad buildings and equipment                S              S       P
Religious facilities                            S       S       P       P
Restaurant/bar                                                P       P
Restaurant/retail, drive-through only                         S       S
Retail sales establishment, indoor                            P       S
Retail sales establishment, outdoor             S              S       S
Rubber products (manufacturing)                                      P
Salvage yard                                                         S
Schools                                         S       S       S       S
Sewage lagoons                                  S       S       S       S
Shelter homes                                   S       S       S        
Site, recreational vehicle                      P7      P7              
Small appliance repair                          S       S       P1      P
Small engine repair                             S       S       P1      P
Sports, athletic and recreational facilities,   S       S       P       P
indoor
Sports, athletic and recreational facilities,   S       S       S       S
outdoor
Sports facilities, indoor firearms              S              S       S
Sports facilities, indoor motor vehicle                       P       P
Sports facilities, outdoor motor vehicle                      S       S
Sports, rural recreation area                   P       P       S       S
Storage rental spaces (outdoor)                               S       P
Storage rental units (indoor)                                 P       P
Studio, art, dance, music, photography, voice   S       S       P       P
Theater, indoor                                               P       P
Theater, outdoor                                S              S       S
Tire shop (retail)                                            P8      P
Transmitting towers and cell towers             S2,3           S2,3    S2,3
Trucking facilities                             S              S       P6
Upholstery repair                               P1      P1      P1      P
Utility buildings and structures                S2,3    S2,3    S2,3    S2,3
Utility lines, aboveground                      P2,3    P2,3    P2,3    P2,3
Utility lines, underground                      P       P       P       P
Vegetable products processing                   S              S       S
Vehicle rental                                                P       P
Vehicle repair and service, automobile                        S       P6
Vehicle repair and service, farm equipment      S              S       P6
Vehicle repair and service, heavy equipment,                  S       P6
RV, truck and tractor
Vehicle sales and service, automobile                         S       P6
Vehicle sales and service, farm equipment       S              S       P6
Vehicle sales and service, heavy equipment, RV,               S       P6
truck and tractor
Vehicle sales, automobile                                     P       P
Vehicle sales, farm equipment                   S              P       P
Vehicle sales, heavy equipment, RV, truck and                 P       P
tractor
Veterinarian                                    S              S1      P
Wholesale sales and warehouse, indoor           S9             P       P
Wholesale sales and warehouse, outdoor          S9             S       P
Wholesale warehouse and distribution facility   S9             S       P
Zoos                                            S       S       S        
 
Notes:
   1.    Providing all materials and equipment are kept inside of an enclosed
building and all work is performed inside an enclosed building.
   2.    Complies with Idaho safety code.
   3.    Complies with chapter 12, "Airport Zone", of the JCZO.
   4.    Controlled operation that does not generate smoke, noise, vibration,
dust, odor, glare, gas, air or water pollutants.
   5.    In association with an existing business.
   6.    DEQ approval required for hazardous material disposal plan to obtain a
certificate of occupancy.
   7.    A special use permit required after 60 days of residence per year per
parcel.
   8.    Excepting product display, outside storage of products or discards
must be screened from view.
   9.    Sales of products supporting agricultural uses.
LAND USES OR ACTIONS REQUIRING SPECIFIC PERMITS
The uses or activities indicated in the chart below are permitted under a
regulated process when designated by an X. An empty square indicates that such
use or activity is not permitted in that zone.
 
Section I - Chart 10A                           Zones
                                                IMP-A-L IMP-RES IMP-COM IMP-IND
Specialized permits:                                                  
 Boundary line adjustment: Application         X       X       X       X
  procedure located in JCZO chapter 14
 Land division: Application procedure located  X       X       X       X
  in JCZO chapter 14
  Warehoused livestock confinement operations
 (WLCO): Application procedure located in JCZO                      X
  chapter 13A
 Subdivision: Application procedure located in        X       X       X
  JCZO chapter 8, chapter 10
 
(Ord. 1147, 2015: Ord. 1185, 2020)
CHAPTER 17.120
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
17.120.010: Purpose
17.120.020: Initiation Of Development Agreement
17.120.030: Form Of Development Agreement
17.120.040: Approval Of The Development Agreement
17.120.050: Recordation Of Development Agreement
17.120.060: Duty To Comply With Development Agreement
17.120.070: Modification Of Development Agreement
17.120.080: Termination Of Development Agreement
17.120.090: Enforcement Of Development Agreements
17.120.010: PURPOSE:
Development agreements are a discretionary tool to be used by the council as a
condition of rezoning. Development agreements allow a specific project with a
specific use to be developed on property in an area that is not appropriate for
all uses allowed or conditional in the requested zone. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.020: INITIATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A.   A development agreement may be initiated for the rezoning of a particular
parcel of land or collection of parcels of land through the following methods:
   1.   On application by the property owner.
   2.   On recommendation of the administrator.
   3.   On recommendation of the commission.
   4.   Required by the council.
B.   In the event that the commission determines that a development agreement
should be entered into, the commission shall retain jurisdiction of the matter,
defer consideration of the rezone applied for and set a time limit for
submittal of the development agreement. The commission shall then proceed as
specified in this chapter.
C.   In the event of a determination by the council that a development
agreement should be entered into, the council shall remand the matter back to
the commission for submittal of the development agreement. The council may
direct the commission on remand of the matter to the commission. The commission
shall then proceed as specified in this chapter.
In the event of either of the above, all time limits required by this code may
be stayed upon affirmative vote of the commission or council. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.030: FORM OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A.   Development agreement shall be in the form required by the administrator
and approved by the city attorney. No agreement shall be accepted by the
administrator which does not include the following:
   1.   An affidavit by the owner of the parcel agreeing to submit the parcel
to a development agreement.
   2.   The specific use or uses of the parcel for which the development
agreement is sought.
   3.   The allowed or special use in the conditional zone for which
application has been made.
   4.   A concept plan of the project to be developed on the parcel. The
concept plan shall include:
      a.   A description of the density allowed or sought; and
      b.   Maximum height, size, and location of any structures on the
property.
      c.   The time required to begin the use on the property.
      d.   A statement by the owner of the parcel that failure to comply with
the commitments in the development agreement shall be deemed consent to rezone
the use to the preexisting zone or, in the case of an initial zone at
annexation, a zone deemed appropriate by the council.
      e.   Any other matter mutually agreeable to the parties. (Ord. 1070,
2010)
17.120.040: APPROVAL OF THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A.   The council may require a development agreement be executed to allow a
rezone if, in the opinion of the council, approval of the requested rezone does
not satisfy the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance for rezone
approval, but the particular project or use contemplated has a value to the
community that would justify the use of a development agreement. A development
agreement may not allow a use on the parcel that is not an allowed or special
use in the requested rezone.
B.   Development agreements may be recommended by the commission and approved
by the council only after public hearings before each body. Each public hearing
shall follow the notice provisions of
chapter 17.90 of this title for hearings on zoning map amendments.
C.   The council may add conditions, terms, duties or obligations to the
development agreement. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.050: RECORDATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
Following approval of a development agreement by the council, the development
agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder at the expense
of the property owner. The development agreement, and all conditions, terms,
duties or obligations included therein, shall run with the land and shall be
considered continuing obligations of the owner or subsequent owner and each
other person acquiring an interest in the property. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.060: DUTY TO COMPLY WITH DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
An owner, subsequent owner, and each other person acquiring an interest in
property that is restricted by a development agreement adopted pursuant to this
chapter, shall comply with the terms, conditions, obligations and duties
contained in the development agreement. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.070: MODIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A development agreement may be modified by the council only after complying
with the notice and public hearing provisions of section 67-6509 of the Idaho
Code and
chapter 17.90 of this title. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.080: TERMINATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A development agreement may be terminated by the council for failure to comply
with the commitments expressed in the development agreement. Such termination
shall take place after a public hearing on the termination at which time
testimony shall be taken to establish noncompliance with the conditions, terms,
obligations or duties contained within the development agreement. The public
hearing shall follow the notice and hearing provisions of section 67-6509 of
the Idaho Code and
 chapter 17.90 of this title.
Upon termination of the development agreement, the property shall revert to the
zone applicable prior to the adoption of the development agreement or
application for rezoning designation change. All uses of the property which are
not consistent with the subsequently applied zone following termination of the
development agreement shall cease. The owner of the parcel may apply for a
special use of the parcel if such use is a special use within the subsequently
applied zone. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.120.090: ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
Development agreements may be enforced by the city through specific
enforcement, injunctive relief, damages or criminal penalty for violation of
this chapter. The foregoing enforcement options available to the city shall not
be deemed exclusive. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.130
MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
17.130.010: Purpose
17.130.020: Definitions
17.130.030: Minimal Property Maintenance Standard
17.130.040: Restoration Of A Damaged Or Dilapidated Building Or Completion Of
An Unfinished Building
17.130.050: Enforcement Procedures
17.130.060: Restoration And Demolition Fund
17.130.070: Recovery Of Cost Of Restoration Or Demolition
17.130.010: PURPOSE:
The city, exercising its police powers to preserve the general welfare of the
city, promote economic viability and prevent urban blight, hereby establishes
minimal property maintenance standards. Beyond being secured so that a building
is not a danger or an attractive nuisance, all property within the city shall
be maintained to the minimal property maintenance standards as listed below.
(Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.130.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   DAMAGED OR DILAPIDATED BUILDING: Any structure that has suffered significant
damage or deterioration either from age, lack of care, or abandonment or
natural or manmade calamity to the degree that the exterior of the building
walls, roof, doors and windows are burnt out, falling down, or are
significantly patched or boarded or are structurally unsound.
   UNFINISHED BUILDING: Any structure where construction has commenced but has
been discontinued for a period of six (6) months and/or has not been finished
in accordance with the approved building permit and cannot be certified for
occupancy or final building inspection. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.130.030: MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARD:
All damaged, dilapidated or unfinished buildings shall be restored or finished
to eliminate the detrimental visual damage or visual impact of the building(s).
A property owner shall take steps to restore or finish the building(s) per
plans approved by the administrator. No building or premises shall
detrimentally impact the surrounding neighborhood due to dilapidation,
deterioration, decay, abandonment or unfinished construction and render the
enjoyment of the property essentially uncomfortable or inconvenient to the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.130.040: RESTORATION OF A DAMAGED OR DILAPIDATED BUILDING OR COMPLETION OF
AN UNFINISHED BUILDING:
Restoration of a damaged or dilapidated building or completion of work on an
unfinished building shall begin within six (6) months of the building becoming
damaged or dilapidated or being deemed unfinished by the city. The city may
require that such buildings that are also unoccupied be secured (fenced or
boarded up) during the six (6) month period. This deadline may be extended by
the administrator upon submission of documentation of insurance settlement
delays or similar complications beyond the owner's control. Restoration of a
damaged or dilapidated building, or completion of an unfinished building shall
be completed within one year from the date that the restoration work or
unfinished construction work is initiated. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.130.050: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A.   If a building is not maintained at a minimal property maintenance standard
for six (6) months or no efforts to restore or finish a building have begun
within six (6) months or completed within one year after restoration or
construction work has begun, the city shall order the owner of the property to
attend a prescribed council meeting to address the reason(s) as to why the
building has not been restored or completed. If the address of the owner of
said building can be obtained through reasonable efforts, then the owner shall
receive notice of said meeting via certified mail. Otherwise notice shall be
sent to the owner of property as it appears on the last equalized assessment
roll of Jerome County, or as otherwise known to the administrator. Removal of
the damaged, dilapidated or unfinished building shall be ordered only if the
following findings are made:
   1.   The building meets the definition of a "damaged or dilapidated
building", or "unfinished building"; and
   2.   The building has existed in a damaged or dilapidated or unfinished
state for a period of at least six (6) months; or
   3.   The building has not been maintained at the minimal property standards
for a period of six (6) months; and
   4.   The property owner has previously received written notice that the
building is in violation of this code and must be restored or finished; or
notice has been sent to the owner of property as it appears on the last
equalized assessment roll of Jerome County, or as known to the administrator.
B.   The council, upon finding that the building is damaged, dilapidated or
unfinished, and that the property owner has not commenced or completed
restoration or finished the building within the time frames as set forth in
this chapter, may proceed to obtain bids to restore the building or clear the
site of the offending building. The fact that the building is not a danger or
attractive visual nuisance shall not be a defense for failing to restore or
finish a building. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.130.060: RESTORATION AND DEMOLITION FUND:
The city shall establish a revolving fund to be designated for building
restoration and demolition pursuant to this chapter. Payments shall be made out
of this fund upon the direction of the council to defray the costs and expenses
associated with restoration or demolition of said building. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
17.130.070: RECOVERY OF COST OF RESTORATION OR DEMOLITION:
The city clerk/treasurer's department, in coordination with the administrator,
shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred with restoration or
demolition of a building. A certified mailed copy of said assessment shall be
sent to the property owner. If the property owner does not respond within sixty
(60) days, then the city may recover costs of the abatement in a civil action
or by filing a certified copy of the assessment with the Jerome County recorder
on or before August 1 of the year and/or other legal proceeding initiated by
the city. The description of the parcel(s) reported shall be those used for the
same parcel(s) on the Jerome County assessor's map for the current year. All
such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of
recording on the assessment roll shall become delinquent and shall bear
interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum or the current interest
rate if higher, from and after said date. All money recovered by payment of the
charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at a foreclosure sale
shall be paid to the city of Jerome, who shall credit the same to the
restoration and demolition fund. (Ord. 1070, 2010)
 
